CITY CODE
of
ORTING, WASHINGTON
1996
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-1152, passed September 24, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Orting, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 2025-1152, passed September 24, 2025. Ordinances
of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
CITY OF ORTING
WASHINGTON
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-1156
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ORTING, WASHINGTON, RENEWING THE DECLARATION OF
INTERIM CONTROLS ESTABLISHED IN ORDINANCE NO. 2025-1146 AND IN ORDINANCE NO.
2024-1137, AMENDING ORTING MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 13-5-3 REGARDING OFF-STREET
PARKING REQUIREMENTS, FOR AN ADDITIONAL SIX MONTHS; ENTERING LEGISLATIVE
FINDINGS; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND SETTING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the City Council has established a goal for Downtown Revitalization
and Economic Development outlining the general intention to create a cohesive
business environment in Orting’s downtown core, and specifically including an
aim to evaluate Orting’s parking regulations; and
WHEREAS, the City is expected to grow its economic base by nearly 200 jobs in
the next 20 years, and the most substantial growth in jobs is expected to occur
in retail, finance, insurance, and real estate services, all of which are land
use types that are permitted to occur in Orting’s Mixed Use Town Center (MUTC)
zone which occupies the majority of the City’s downtown core; and
WHEREAS, through coordination with Orting residents and application of Orting’s
parking regulations on business concepts by desirous or prospective
entrepreneurs, the City has determined that Orting’s current parking
regulations hinder and effectively prohibit new business establishment and
existing business expansion when applied in the downtown core; and
WHEREAS, the effective prohibition of new business establishment and of
existing business expansion directly conflicts with the Downtown Revitalization
and Economic Development goals established by the City Council; and
WHEREAS, in the interest of immediately removing the barrier that downtown
parking regulations have on new and expanded economic development opportunities
in the City, and in the interest of studying and contemplating alternative
permanent solutions through a public process before adopting an appropriate
permanent solution for the City, the City desires to renew interim controls
related to off-street parking; and
WHEREAS, on February 12, 2024, the City Council passed Ordinance 2024-1137
based on findings of fact adopted after a public hearing, which adopted
official interim controls (“Interim Controls”) that are the subject matter of
this Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Interim Controls, attached hereto as Exhibit 1, are eligible for,
and not exempt from, the establishment of interim controls pursuant to RCW
36.70A.390 and RCW 35A.63.220; and
WHEREAS, under the Washington Growth Management Act (GMA), ch. 36.70A RCW, the
City held a public hearing on July 30, 2025, and adopted Ordinance 2025-1146
based on findings of fact from said public hearing, and which affirmed that
Ordinance No 2024-1137 should be renewed for an additional six month period;
and
WHEREAS, Ordinance 2025-1146 was published on August 6, 2025, after adoption
and passage, thereby making its effective date to be August 11, 2025, and its
expiration date February 11, 2026; and
WHEREAS, while the Interim Controls have been in place, the City has been and
is working to develop permanent regulations that support the City’s goal for
Downtown Revitalization and Economic Development without placing an undue
burden on public infrastructure or the general public at large; and
WHEREAS, development of permanent code amendments remain necessary to implement
provisions contained in the Interim Controls and is anticipated to occur in the
first half of 2026; and
WHEREAS, an extension of the Interim Controls is necessary to provide the
additional needed time for the City to fully observe the efficacy of the
Interim Controls, to consider implementation of additional measures to support
the intention of the Interim Controls, and to draft, consider, and hold all
requisite hearings on permanent regulations; and
WHEREAS, the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) Responsible Official for the
City of Orting has determined that permanent code amendments would be
categorically exempt from the threshold determination requirements of SEPA
pursuant to the terms of WAC 197 11-800(19); and
WHEREAS, the City Council duly held the public hearing required pursuant to RCW
36.70A.390 and RCW 35A.63.220 on January 28, 2026, to hear and consider public
comment and testimony regarding renewal of the Interim Controls for an
additional six-month period; and
WHEREAS, the City Council intends the recitals in this Ordinance to be
considered findings of fact in support of the six-month extension of Ordinance
No. 2025-1146 consistent with the Effective Date set forth in this Ordinance;
and
WHEREAS, the City Council intends that any additional or amended findings made
during the January 28, 2026, public hearing at which the extension of the
Interim Controls was heard be incorporated as further findings of fact in
support of this Ordinance’s adoption; and
WHEREAS, at a future date, the City Council may extend these Interim Controls
for one or more additional six-month periods provided a subsequent public
hearing is held and findings of fact are made prior to each renewal; and
WHEREAS, at the time of the enactment of the Interim Controls, there are no
known pending or contemplated applications or activities that would prohibit
the City Council from taking this action.
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Orting, Washington, do ordain
as follows:
Section 1. Extension of Interim Controls. The interim controls established
through adoption of Ordinance No. 2024-1137 on February 12, 2025, and extended
through the adoption of Ordinance No. 2025-1146 on July 30, 2025, as set forth
in Exhibit 1 to this Ordinance (“Interim Controls”), are hereby extended for an
additional six-months after the effective date of this Ordinance, unless
repealed, extended, or modified by the City Council after subsequent public
hearing and entry of additional findings of fact pursuant to RCW 36.70A.390 and
RCW 35A.63.220.
Section 2. Findings. The City Council adopts the recitals set forth above and
incorporates those recitals as if fully set forth herein. The City Council also
adopts those recitals as findings of fact justifying enactment of this
Ordinance. The City Council may adopt additional findings when a public hearing
is held or when presented with evidence.
Section 3. Duration of Interim Controls .  The Interim Controls extended herein
will automatically expire six months after the Effective Date of this Ordinance
unless repealed, modified, or extended after subsequent public hearing and
entry of appropriate findings of fact as provided in RCW 36.70A.390 and RCW
35A.63.220.
Section 4. Corrections by City Clerk or Code Reviser. Upon approval of the City
Attorney, the City Clerk and the code reviser are authorized to make necessary
corrections to this Ordinance, including the correction of clerical errors;
references to other local, state, or federal laws, codes, rules, or
regulations; or ordinance numbering and section/subsection numbering.
Section 5. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, be
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any
portion of this Ordinance be pre-empted by state or federal law or regulation,
such decision or pre-emption shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance or its application to other persons or
circumstances.
Section 6. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City and shall take effect and be in full force five (5) days
after the date of publication.
 
ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL AT A REGULAR MEETING THEREOF ON THE 28 day of
JANUARY, 2026.
 
 
CITY OF ORTING
 
 
Scott Drennen,  Mayor
 
ATTEST/AUTHENTICATED:
 
__________________________
Kimberly Agfalvi, CMC
Assistant City Administrator/City Clerk
 
Approved as to form:
 
 
Daniel G. Lloyd
Lighthouse Law Group
City Attorney
 
Filed with the City Clerk: Passed by the City Council: Ordinance No.
Date of Publication: Effective Date:
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITY OF ORTING
WASHINGTON
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-1157
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ORTING, WASHINGTON, RELATING TO COUNCIL MEETINGS;
AMENDING ORTING MUNICIPAL CODE 1-6-1 PERTAINING TO LOCATION OF MEETINGS AND
VIRTUAL MEETINGS; AND ESTABLISHING AN EFFECTIVE DATE
______________________________________________________________________________
 
   WHEREAS, the City of Orting is a non-charter optional municipal code city as
provided in Title 35A RCW, incorporated under the laws of the state of
Washington; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that the proposed amendments to the Orting
Municipal Code adopted herein benefit public health, safety and welfare, and
promote the best long term interests of the Orting community;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ORTING, WASHINGTON, DOES ORDAIN
AS FOLLOWS:
 
Section 1. Incorporation of Recitals . The above stated recitals are
incorporated as though fully set forth herein.  
 
Section 2. Amendment to Orting Municipal Code Section 1-6-1. Section 1-6-1 of
the Orting Municipal Code, as last amended by Ordinance 2025-1144, is amended
as follows with additions marked in underscore and deleted text in
strikethrough:
 
1-6-1: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
 
A. Regular City Council Meetings: The City Council shall hold regular meetings
at the Orting City Hall or such other place as may be determined by the
Council, on the second and last Wednesdays of each month at six seven o'clock
(67:00) P.M., unless otherwise noticed, provided, however, that when the day
fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law
as a legal or national holiday, such meetings shall be held at the same hour on
the next succeeding day not a holiday.
 
B. Council Study Sessions: The City Council shall hold, as regular meetings,
study sessions at the Orting City Hall on the thirdsecond and last Wednesday of
each month, at sixfive o'clock (56:00) P.M., unless otherwise noticed,
provided, however, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the
Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such
meetings shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a
holiday.
 
   C. Committee of Whole. The City Council shall hold, as regular meetings,
Committee of Whole meetings at the Orting City Hall on the third Wednesday of
each month, at two o’clock (2:00) P.M, unless otherwise noticed, provided,
however, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls
upon a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such meetings
shall be held on the next succeeding day not a holiday. The purposes of the
Committee of Whole meetings are to consider and debate community and government
affairs, finance, public safety, and public works. No final action will be
taken at any Committee of Whole meeting.
 
   CD. Special Meetings: Special meetings of the City Council shall be
conducted in accordance with chapter 42.30 Revised Code of Washington, the Open
Public Meetings Act.
 
     DE. Members of the City Council may attend regular meetings by telephone
or a video platform. A quorum of the City Council can occur either at the
location of the regular meeting, by telephone, or by video platform for the
duration of the meetings. 
 
Section 3. Severability . Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, be
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any
portion of this Ordinance be pre-empted by state or federal law or regulation,
such decision or pre-emption shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance or its application to other persons or
circumstances.
 
Section 4. Corrections and Codification .    The City Council authorizes the
City Clerk to correct any non-substantive errors herein, codify the above, and
publish the amended code.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
Section 5. Effective Date . This Ordinance shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City and shall take effect and be in full force five (5) days
after the date of publication.
 
ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL AT A REGULAR MEETING THEREOF ON THE 11th DAY OF
February, 2026
CITY OF ORTING
 
            
Scott Drennen, Mayor
ATTEST/AUTHENTICATED:
 
 
            
Kim Agfalvi, CMC
Assistant City Administrator/City Clerk
 
Approved as to form:
 
 
            
Daniel G. Lloyd
Lighthouse Law Group, PLLC
City Attorney
Filed with the City Clerk:
Passed by the City Council:
Ordinance No.
Date of Publication:
Effective Date:
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Code Adoption
1-1-2: Title; Citation; Reference
1-1-3: Codification Authority
1-1-4: Reference Applies To All Amendments
1-1-5: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1-1-6: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1-1-7: Effective Date
1-1-8: Noncharter Code City
1-1-1: CODE ADOPTION:
Pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570 and 35A.21.130,
there is adopted the "Orting Municipal Code". (1973 Code § 1.01.010; 1996 Code;
Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-2: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This Code shall be known as the ORTING MUNICIPAL CODE and it shall be
sufficient to refer to said Code as the "Orting Municipal Code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Orting Municipal Code".
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections
of the "Orting Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered
title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Code. (1973 Code §
1.01.020; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-3: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the City of Orting, Washington, codified
pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570 and RCW
35A.21.130. (1973 Code § 1.01.030; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-4: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Orting Municipal Code" or to
any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Orting, Washington, the
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore,
now or hereafter made. (1973 Code § 1.01.040; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-5: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (1973 Code § 1.01.050;
amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-6: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this Code. (1973 Code § 1.01.060; amd. Ord. 2025-
1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code
as the "Orting Municipal Code" shall become effective. (1973 Code § 1.01.080;
amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-1-8: NONCHARTER CODE CITY:
   A.   Adoption Of Classification: The City hereby adopts the classification
of noncharter code city, without reorganization, to be governed by the
provisions of RCW chapter 35A.12 under mayor-council plan of government, and
endowed with all of the applicable rights, powers, privileges, duties, and
obligations of a noncharter code city as the same now exists, or may be
provided hereafter, including any and all supplements, amendments, or other
modifications of said title 35A hereafter at any time enacted. (1973 Code §
1.02.010)
   B.   Election Of Councilmembers And Mayor:
      1.   The City Council shall consist of seven (7) members, including a
Mayor elected at large. Councilmembers and the Mayor shall sever staggered four
(4) year terms.
      2.   Council positions shall be designated by position numbers 1 through
7. Elections shall be held on a biennial basis in even-numbered years, in
accordance with RCW Title 35A.12.
      3.   Successors to Council positions shall be elected at the general
municipal election immediately preceding the expiration of each term and shall
assume office in accordance with state law. The Mayor shall be elected every
four (4) years during a regular municipal election, with the term beginning in
January of the year following the election.
      4.   The City may stagger terms such that approximately half of the
Council positions are up for election every two (2) years to maintain
continuity of governance. (1973 Code § 1.02.020)
   C.   Copy Of Ordinance To Secretary Of State: The City Clerk is directed to
forward to the Secretary of the State of Washington a certified copy of
Ordinance 467 as provided in RCW 35A.02.040. (1973 Code § 1.02.030; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1-2-2: Severability Clause
1-2-3: Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting And Related Acts
1-2-4: Construction; Ordinances
1-2-5: Repeal Not To Revive Any Ordinances
1-2-1: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner
affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of
any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or
the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted,
filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations
thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (1973 Code §
1.01.070; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-2-2: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council declares that
it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or
unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full
force and effect. (1973 Code § 1.01.090; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-2-3: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, PERMITTING AND RELATED ACTS:
Whenever in the ordinances of the City, any act or omission is made unlawful,
it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. (1973 Code § 1.04.030; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-2-4: CONSTRUCTION; ORDINANCES:
The City’s ordinances, and any actions under them, should be given a liberal
construction to fulfill their intended purposes and promote justice. (1973 Code
§ 1.04.040; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-2-5: REPEAL NOT TO REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES:
The repeals of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (1973 Code §
1.04.050; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Grammatical Interpretation
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Common And Approved Usage
1-3-4: Acts Performed By Agent
1-3-1: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City:
   A.   Gender: Any gender includes the other genders.
   B.   Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   C.   Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
   D.   Use Of Words And Phrases: Words and phrases not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(1973 Code § 1.04.020; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the City
shall be construed as defined in this Section unless from the context a
different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically
defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
   ABATE OR CORRECT OR REMEDY (Or Any Derivation Thereof): To act to stop an
activity, and/or to repair, replace, remove, restore, rehabilitate or otherwise
remedy a condition, where such activity or condition constitutes a violation;
provided that, the actions taken must not endanger the general health, safety,
and welfare of the community and must resolve the violation by bringing the
activity or condition into compliance with the regulations, provision of this
code or uncodified provision of a city ordinance, which was alleged to have
been violated.
   ACT: Doing or performing something.
   CITY: The City of Orting, Washington, or the area within the territorial
limits of the City of Orting, Washington, and such territory outside of the
City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
constitutional or statutory provision.
   CIVIL INFRACTION: A violation of this code, permit or permit conditions, or
hearing examiner decision for which a monetary penalty may be imposed under
this chapter. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation occurs or
exists shall be deemed a separate civil infraction.
   CIVIL REGULATORY ORDER: An order issued by a code enforcement officer or
other city official under authority of a regulation, the development code or
the health and safety code (title 5 of this code), directing a person or
persons responsible for compliance to take or to cease certain action
identified in the order. Civil regulatory orders include, by way of example
only and not limitation, an order to take corrective action, an order to abate,
a stop work order, a stop use order, and an order to vacate, repair or demolish
a noncompliant structure.
   CODE: Any provision of municipal code. The term Code does not include civil
traffic and vehicle infractions, or for traffic and vehicle infractions
violations of the Revised Code of Washington or Washington Administrative Code
issued by Officers of a General Authority Law Enforcement Agency.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done. It shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last
day be Sunday or a legal holiday, the day shall be excluded.
   CORPORATION: Any firm, business, association, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation or other legal entity, public or private, however
organized.
   CORRECTION NOTICE: A written statement, issued by a code enforcement
officer, notifying the person or persons responsible for compliance that a
violation has occurred or may occur, informing such person or persons of the
legal and factual basis for the determination that a violation has occurred or
may occur, and informing such person or persons that the violations must be
abated or mitigated or that certain action must be taken to prevent a violation
from occurring. A correction notice is intended to be a warning and is not the
equivalent of a civil regulatory order.
   COSTS OF ABATEMENT OR COSTS OF REMEDIATION OR COSTS OF MITIGATION: The costs
of any abatement, remediation or mitigation action taken by the City to abate,
remediate or mitigate the violation using lawful means in the event that the
person responsible for compliance fails so to do. The term includes incidental
expenses including but not limited to, personnel costs, both direct and
indirect and including attorney fees; costs incurred in documenting the
violation; hauling, storage and disposal expenses; and actual costs and
expenses of the City in preparing notices, specifications and contracts, and in
accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work; the costs of any
required printing and mailing; and costs of enforcement.
   COSTS OR COSTS OF ENFORCEMENT: Costs incurred related to enforcement under
this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs of service of notice, costs
of the hearing, administrative costs established by resolution for enforcement
of garbage and refuse and nuisance vegetation violations, as well as other
administrative costs.
   COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Orting, Washington. "All its
members" or "all Councilpersons" means the total number of Councilmembers
provided by the general laws of the State of Washington.
   COUNTY: The County of Pierce.
   COURT: The Orting municipal court.
   DATE OF ISSUE: The date of service as determined in accordance with section
1-13-3 of this chapter.
   DAY OR DAYS: As used in this chapter, shall mean calendar days unless
expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. Any portion of a
twenty-four (24) hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.
   DEVELOPMENT: The erection, alteration, enlargement, demolition, maintenance,
or use of any structure or the alteration or use of land above, at, or below
ground or water level, and all acts authorized by a City permit, approval,
provision of the development code, or other regulation.
   DEVELOPMENT CODE: Means and includes any of the following titles of this
Code and City of Orting ordinances, as now enacted or hereafter enacted,
amended, reenacted or recodified:
      A.   Title 8, chapters 1, "Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways", 2,
"Sidewalk Construction", 3, "Curb And Street Construction", 4, "Parking
Strips", and 5, "Excavations", of this Code;
      B.   Title 9, chapter 5, "Stormwater Regulations", of this Code;
      C.   Title 10, "Building And Construction", of this Code;
      D.   Title 11, "Critical Areas And Shoreline Management", of this Code;
      E.   Title 12, "Subdivision Regulations", of this Code;
      F.   Title 13, "Development Regulations", of this Code;
      G.   Title 14, "Flood Control", of this Code; and
      H.   Title 15, "Development Code Administration", of this Code.
   EMERGENCY: A situation that requires immediate action to prevent or
eliminate an imminent threat to the health or safety of persons or property.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any general authority Washington peace officer granted
enforcement authority by the Chief of Police under RCW Chapter 10.93 – the
Washington State Mutual Police Powers Act, or, any person authorized by the
City to enforce the provisions of this Code, permit and permit conditions,
hearing examiner decisions, or ordinance in which the civil infraction is
established, but shall not include private citizens. The term ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER shall include any person authorized by the City pursuant to an
interlocal agreement or contract for the purposes of enforcing this Code. For
purposes of this chapter, Revised Code Of Washington 7.80, and the infraction
rules for courts of limited jurisdiction, the following public officials are
designated as enforcement officers as set forth below:
      A.   Law Enforcement Officers: Unless otherwise provided in this Code,
the Orting chief of police, and all duly appointed City of Orting police
officers, shall be and are designated as enforcement officers with authority to
enforce all regulations and all provisions of this Code, or any noncodified
ordinances of the City, a violation of which constitutes a civil violation,
civil infraction, misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor.
      B.   City Administrator: Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the City
Administrator or the City Administrator's designee shall be and is designated
as an enforcement officer with authority to enforce all regulations and all
provisions of the development codes, titles 3, "Revenue And Finances", and 4,
"Business And License Regulations", of this Code, a violation of which
constitutes a civil violation or civil infraction. The City Administrator is
further authorized to designate any City employee or contractor as an
enforcement officer with authority to enforce those regulations and/or
provisions of a regulation, the development code, or the health and safety code
(title 5 of this code) which are specifically set forth in such designation and
a violation of which constitutes a civil violation or civil infraction.
      C.   Code Enforcement Officer: Unless otherwise provided in this Code,
any person or persons designated herein or by the City Administrator as a code
enforcement officer shall be and is designated and specially commissioned as an
enforcement officer with authority to enforce all regulations, title 6, chapter
3, "Animal Control", title 5, "Public Health And Safety", of this code and all
provisions of the development code; but shall have no arrest authority. The
authority conferred upon code enforcement officers herein shall not vest any
such code enforcement officer with any police civil service or police pension
rights.
   HEARING EXAMINER: The Orting hearing examiner, and the office thereof
established pursuant to chapter 12 of this title to hear appeals of civil
violations.
   HEARING EXAMINER DECISION: Any report and decision, interim order or
decision, or decision on reconsideration issued by the hearing examiner
pursuant to this Code.
   LAW: Denotes applicable Federal law, the constitution and statutes of the
State of Washington, the ordinances of the City of Orting, and when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated
thereunder.
   MAY: Optional and permissive and does not impose a requirement.
   MITIGATE: To take measures, subject to City approval, to minimize the
harmful effects of the violation where abatement is either impossible or
unreasonably burdensome.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   MUST: Mandatory.
   NOTICE OF INFRACTION OR NOTICE OF CIVIL INFRACTION: A written statement,
issued pursuant to chapter 7.80 Revised Code of Washington and the infraction
rules for courts of limited jurisdiction (IRLJ), for a violation of this Code,
or any uncodified ordinance of the City, that constitutes a civil infraction.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION OR NOTICE OF CIVIL VIOLATION: A written statement,
issued by a code enforcement officer, which contains the information required
under subsection 1-13-6B of this Chapter, and which notifies a person that he
or she is responsible for one (1) or more civil violations of this Code.
   OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law,
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
"swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
   OMISSION: A failure to act.
   ORDINANCE: A law of the City.
   ORTING MUNICIPAL CODE OR CODE: The codified ordinances of the City of Orting
as may now or hereinafter be amended.
   OWNER: Applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a
part of such building or land.
   PERMIT OR PERMIT CONDITIONS: An official authorization, license, document,
certificate, or other written permission or conditions attached thereto given
to a person by the City or by the hearing examiner authorizing any person to
perform a specified activity not otherwise prohibited by State Law.
   PERSON: A natural person, individual, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them, or other legal entity. Because “person” shall include both human
and nonhuman entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a
person: he, she, or it.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE VIOLATION: Any of the following: a person who has
titled ownership or legal control of the building, premises, structure or land
that is subject to the regulation, provision of this Code or uncodified
provision of a City ordinance, alleged to have been violated; an occupant or
other person in control of the building, premises, structure or land that is
subject to the regulation, provision of this Code, or uncodified provision of a
City ordinance, alleged to have been violated; a developer, builder, business
operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the
building, premises, structure or land that is subject to the regulation,
provision of this Code or uncodified provision of a City ordinance, alleged to
have been violated; any person who created, caused, or has allowed the
violation to occur; or any person causing, allowing, or knowingly participating
in the violation.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidences of debt.
   PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property:
   PROJECT PERMIT OR PROJECT PERMIT APPLICATION: Any land use or environmental
permit or license required from the City for a project action including, but
not limited to, building permits, street cut permits, clearing and grading
permits, street excavation permits, sign permits, subdivisions, short plats,
binding site plans, planned unit developments, development permits, conditional
uses, shoreline substantial development permits, site plan review, permits or
approvals required by critical area ordinances or flood control ordinances,
site specific rezones authorized by a comprehensive plan or subarea plan, but
excluding the adoption or amendment of a comprehensive plan, subarea plan, or
development regulations except as otherwise specifically included in this
definition.
   PROSECUTING ATTORNEY: The Orting prosecuting attorney or deputy prosecuting
attorney.
   REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULATION: Means and includes any of the following, as now enacted or
hereafter amended:
      A.   All standards, regulations, rules, requirements and procedures
adopted by the City pursuant to the applicable provisions set forth in this
code or state law;
      B.   Any title, chapter, section, subsection or other provision of this
Code making reference to or prescribing penalties under this chapter;
      C.   The terms and conditions of any project permit or approval issued or
granted by the City pursuant to or under authority of the development code; and
      D.   The terms and conditions of any concomitant or development agreement
with the City which has been issued, granted or authorized by the City,
pursuant to provisions of this Code or a noncodified ordinance of the City and
which makes reference to enforcement under this chapter.
   REMEDIATE: To restore to a condition that complies with the development code
or, for sites that have been degraded upon prior ownerships, to restore to a
condition that does not pose a probable threat to the environment or to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   REPEAT VIOLATION: As evidenced by the prior issuance of a correction notice,
civil regulatory order, a notice of violation or a notice of civil infraction,
that a violation has occurred on the same property, premises or structure
within a two (2) year period, or a person responsible for a violation has
committed a violation elsewhere within the City of Orting within a two (2) year
period. To constitute a repeat violation, the violation need not be the same
type of violation as the prior violation.
   RESOLUTION: A formal expression of opinion, will, or intent as approved by
the City Council to address a matter of special or temporary nature.
   SHALL: See definition of "must" in this section.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE: The State of Washington.
   STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or
may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this State.
   TENANT AND OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   TITLE OF OFFICE: Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or
commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the
City.
   VIOLATION: An act or omission contrary to a provision of a regulation, the
development code, a provision of the public health and safety code (title 5 of
this Code), or a provision of any title, chapter, section or subsection, a
violation of which is made subject to enforcement under the provisions of this
chapter. A violation continues to exist until abated.
   WILFUL OR WILFULLY: To act with the objective or purpose to accomplish a
result which constitutes a violation or offense.
   WRITTEN: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed.
   YEAR: A calendar year. (1973 Code § 1.04.010; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-
2025)
1-3-3: COMMON AND APPROVED USAGE:
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common
and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall
be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
To define the common and approved usage of all words and phrases where
undefined in the Orting Municipal Code, the City may rely on the definition of
the word or phrase as it is defined in the then-current edition of the Merriam-
Webster Dictionary. (1973 Code § 1.04.010; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-3-4: ACTS PERFORMED BY AGENT:
When an act is required by an ordinance the same being such that it may be done
as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as
to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (1973 Code §
1.04.010; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTIES
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Civil Infractions
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
The following penalties shall be applicable to violations of this code unless
otherwise defined:
   A.   Misdemeanors: Whenever in this code or any noncodified ordinances of
the city, any act or omission is made unlawful, such act or omission shall,
unless otherwise specified therein, constitute a misdemeanor. Any act or
omission constituting a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for up to ninety (90) days in
jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   B.   Gross Misdemeanors: Whenever in this code or any noncodified ordinances
of the city, any act or omission is made unlawful and such act or omission is
classified therein as a gross misdemeanor, such act or omission shall, unless
otherwise specified therein, be punishable by a fine not to exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or imprisonment up to one year in jail, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Consistency With State Law: Notwithstanding any other provisions in
this code or the noncodified ordinances of the city, the maximum penalty for
any act or omission constituting a criminal offense under this code or the
noncodified ordinances of the city, shall be the same as the maximum penalty
provided in Washington state law for the same or similar offense, and where the
maximum penalty provided under this code or the noncodified ordinances of the
city is inconsistent with the maximum penalty as provided pursuant to state
law, such maximum penalty as provided under state law shall prevail. The
purpose and intent of this provision is to comply with Revised Code Of
Washington 35.21.163 and 35A.11.020 as now or may be hereinafter amended. (Ord.
2016-988, 8-17-2016, eff. 9-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-4-2: CIVIL INFRACTIONS:
   A.   Repealed.
   B.   Authorization: This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 7.80 Revised Code Of Washington as now enacted or hereafter amended.
Nothing contained herein is in any way intended to diminish or limit the powers
granted to city public officials through application of Revised Code Of
Washington chapter 7.80 and the infraction rules for courts of limited
jurisdiction.
   C.   Issuance: An enforcement officer, the prosecuting attorney, and the
court shall have authority to issue a notice of infraction for each civil
infraction committed in accordance with the provisions, and under authority of
Revised Code Of Washington chapter 7.80 and pursuant to the infraction rules
for courts of limited jurisdiction. Notwithstanding any other provision of law
governing service of process in civil cases, a court of limited jurisdiction
having jurisdiction over an alleged civil infraction may issue process anywhere
within Washington state.
   D.   Procedures; Municipal Court; Exclusions: It is the intent of this
chapter that civil infractions may be heard and determined by the Orting
municipal court in accordance with the provisions, and under authority, of
Revised Code Of Washington chapter 7.80 and pursuant to the infraction rules
for courts of limited jurisdiction; provided that, traffic and vehicle
infractions provided for pursuant to title 7 of this code are specifically
excluded from this chapter.
      1.   Notice Of Infraction; Issuance, Service, Filing:
         a.   A civil infraction proceeding is initiated by the issuance,
service, and filing of a notice of civil infraction.
         b.   A notice of civil infraction may be served and issued by an
enforcement officer when the civil infraction occurs in the enforcement
officer's presence.
         c.   A court may issue a notice of civil infraction if an enforcement
officer files a notice of civil infraction with the court stating that the
civil infraction was committed in the enforcement officer's presence or that
the enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that a civil infraction
was committed.
         d.   Service of a notice of civil infraction issued under subsection
D1b or D1c of this section shall be as provided by court rule.
         e.   A notice of civil infraction, if issued under subsection D1b of
this section, shall be filed with the court within five (5) days of issuance of
the notice, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. A notice of civil
infraction not filed within the time limits prescribed in this section may be
dismissed without prejudice.
   E.   Person Receiving Notice; Identification: A person who is issued a
notice of civil infraction under this section is required to identify himself
or herself to the enforcement officer by giving his or her name, address, and
date of birth. Upon request of the enforcement officer, the person shall
produce reasonable identification, such as a driver's license or identicard.
   F.   Notice; Determination Final Unless Contested; Form:
      1.   The filing of a notice of civil infraction with the court represents
a determination that a civil infraction has been committed. The determination
is final unless contested as provided for in this chapter and under the
applicable court rules.
      2.   The form for the notice of civil infraction may be as prescribed by
rule of the Washington supreme court and, in addition, shall include the
following:
         a.   A statement that the notice of civil infraction represents a
determination that a civil infraction has been committed by the person named in
the notice and that the determination is final unless contested as provided for
in this chapter;
         b.   A statement that a civil infraction is a noncriminal offense for
which imprisonment may not be imposed as a sanction;
         c.   A statement or description of the specific civil infraction for
which the notice was issued and a reference to the code provision(s), permit or
permit conditions, or hearing examiner decision that has been violated;
         d.   A statement of the monetary penalty established for the civil
infraction committed;
         e.   A statement of the options provided for in this chapter for
responding to the notice of civil infraction and the procedures necessary to
exercise these options;
         f.   A statement that at any hearing to contest the determination of
the city, the city has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the civil infraction was committed and that the person may
subpoena witnesses including the enforcement officer who issued the notice of
civil infraction;
         g.   A statement that at any hearing requested for the purpose of
explaining mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the civil
infraction, the person shall be deemed to have committed the civil infraction
and may not subpoena witnesses;
         h.   A statement that the person must respond to the notice as
provided for in this chapter within thirty (30) days;
         i.   A statement that failure to respond to the notice of civil
infraction or failure to appear at a hearing requested for the purpose of
contesting the determination or for the purpose of explaining mitigating
circumstances will result in a default judgment against the person in the
amount of the penalty, with statutory assessment, and that this failure may be
referred to the prosecuting attorney for criminal prosecution for failure to
respond or appear;
         j. A statement that failure to respond to a notice of civil infraction
or to appear at a requested hearing is a misdemeanor and may be punished by a
fine or imprisonment in jail or both;
         k.   A statement that all information upon which the notice of civil
infraction is based shall be provided upon written request to the court with
jurisdiction over the civil infraction issued.
   G.   Monetary Penalties: All persons deemed or found to have committed a
civil infraction shall be subject to assessment and payment of monetary
penalties as follows, unless otherwise provided by law:
      1.   The penalty and default amount for a civil infraction shall be two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), not including statutory assessments, or as
otherwise amended by RCW 7.80.120. This penalty shall be assessed for any civil
infraction designated as any class throughout this code.
   H.   Restitution: The court may also order a person found to have committed
a civil infraction to make community restitution.
   I.   When Payment Due:
      1.   Whenever a monetary penalty is assessed by a court for a violation
or violations constituting a civil infraction under this chapter it is
immediately payable. If the person is unable to pay at that time the court may
grant an extension of the period in which the penalty may be paid. If the
penalty is not paid on or before the time established for payment, the court
may proceed to collect the penalty in the same manner as other civil judgments
and may notify the city attorney of the failure to pay.
      2.   The court may consider dismissing with costs only upon a showing
that the violation was corrected within thirty (30) days.
      3.   Payment of a monetary penalty or performance of the required
community service shall not relieve a person of the duty to correct the
violation.
   J.   Failure To Respond; Misdemeanor:
      1.   Any person who receives a notice of civil infraction shall respond
to such notice as provided for in this section within thirty (30) days of the
date of the notice.
      2.   If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does
not contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the
appropriate portion of the notice of civil infraction and submitting it, either
by mail or in person, or via court approved internet payment service to the
court specified on the notice. A check or money order in the amount of the
civil penalty prescribed for the civil infraction must be submitted with the
response. The clerk of a court may accept cash as payment for a civil
infraction. When a response which does not contest the determination is
received, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court's records.
      3.   If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does
contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing that portion
of the notice of civil infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it,
either by mail or in person, to the court specified on the notice. The court
shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing,
and that date shall not be earlier than fourteen (14) days nor more than ninety
(90) days from the date of the notice of hearing.
      4.   If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does
not contest the determination but wishes to explain mitigating circumstances
surrounding the infraction, the person shall respond by completing that portion
of the notice of civil infraction requesting a hearing for that purpose and
submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court specified on the
notice. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and
date of the hearing, and that date shall not be earlier than fourteen (14) days
nor more than ninety (90) days from the date of the notice of hearing.
      5.   The court may notify the prosecuting attorney of the failure to
respond to the notice of civil infraction, or to appear at a requested hearing,
or to comply with a court order and shall enter a default judgment as provided
for in this section assessing the monetary penalty prescribed for the civil
infraction, with statutory assessment, if any person issued a notice of civil
infraction fails to:
         a.   Respond to the notice of civil infraction as provided in
subsection J2 of this section; or
         b.   Appear at a hearing requested pursuant to subsection J3 or J4 of
this section; or
         c.   Comply with a court order.
      6.   If any person issued a notice of civil infraction fails to timely
exercise the options for responding to the notice of civil infraction as
provided in chapter 7.80 RCW or this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of the disposition of the notice of civil infraction. A notice of
civil infraction may be complied with by an appearance by counsel.
   K.   Hearings; Rules Of Procedure; Counsel:
      1.   Procedures for the conduct of all hearings provided in this chapter
may be as established by rule of the Washington supreme court.
      2.   Any person subject to proceedings under this chapter may be
represented by legal counsel.
      3.   The attorney representing the city may appear in any proceedings
under this chapter but need not appear, notwithstanding any statute or rule of
court to the contrary.
   L.   Hearings; Contesting Determination That Infraction Committed; Appeal:
      1.   A hearing held for the purpose of contesting the determination that
a civil infraction has been committed shall be without a jury and shall be
recorded in the manner provided for in courts of limited jurisdiction.
      2.   In lieu of the enforcement officer's personal appearance at the
hearing, the court may consider the notice of civil infraction and any other
written report as long as the report is made under oath, submitted by the
enforcement officer who issued the notice or who filed the notice of civil
infraction was the basis for the issuance of the notice. The person named in
the notice of civil infraction may request the court for issuance of subpoena
of witnesses, including the enforcement officer who issued the notice, and has
the right to present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.
      3.   The burden of proof is upon the city to establish the commission of
the civil infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.
      4.   After consideration of the evidence and argument, the court shall
determine whether the civil infraction was committed. Where it has not been
established by a preponderance of the evidence that the civil infraction was
committed, an order dismissing the notice of civil infraction shall be entered
in the court's records. Where it has been established by a preponderance of the
evidence that the civil infraction was committed, an appropriate order shall be
entered in the court's records.
      5.   An appeal from the court's determination or order shall be to the
superior court in the manner provided by the rules for appeal of decisions of
courts of limited jurisdiction. The decision of the superior court is subject
only to discretionary review pursuant to the rules of appellate procedure.
   M.   Hearings; Explanation Of Mitigating Circumstances:
      1.   A hearing held for the purpose of allowing a person to explain
mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of a civil infraction shall
be an informal proceeding. The person shall not be allowed to subpoena
witnesses. At a hearing held for the purpose of explaining mitigating
circumstances, the court shall not allow the determination that a civil
infraction has been committed to be contested.
      2.   After the court has heard the explanation of the circumstances
surrounding the commission of the civil infraction, an appropriate order shall
be entered in the court's records.
      3.   There is no appeal from the court's determination or order under
this section.
   N.   Prohibited Acts Include Causing And Permitting: Whenever in this code
or the noncodified ordinances of the city, any act or omission constitutes a
civil infraction, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
   O.   Separate Offense: Every act or omission which constitutes a civil
infraction under this code, shall constitute a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which the act or omission constituting the
violation is committed, continued or permitted.
   P.   Order Of Court; Civil Nature; Modification Of Penalty; Community
Restitution:
      1.   An order entered after the receipt of a response which does not
contest the determination, or after it has been established at a hearing that
the civil infraction was committed, or after a hearing for the purpose of
explaining mitigating circumstances is civil in nature.
      2.   The court may waive, reduce, or suspend the monetary penalty
prescribed for the civil infraction. If the court determines that a person has
insufficient funds to pay the monetary penalty, the court may order performance
of a number of hours of community service in lieu of a monetary penalty, at the
rate of the current Washington state minimum wage per hour.
   Q.   Costs And Attorney Fees: Each party to a civil infraction case is
responsible for costs incurred by that party, but the court may assess witness
fees, including expert witness fees, against a nonprevailing respondent.
   R.   Repealed. (Ord. 2016-988, 8-17-2016, eff. 9-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-
1005, 2-8-2017; Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official Newspaper
1-5-2: Donations To The City
1-5-3: City Hours Of Business
1-5-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The official newspaper of the city shall be designated by resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 635, 11-10-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-5-2: DONATIONS TO THE CITY:
   A.   Acceptance: All donations with a current value of up to five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) may be approved and accepted, for and on behalf of the
city, by the mayor; provided that a separate record shall be maintained for
each donation received and accepted. The mayor may decline to accept a donation
if such donation is not consistent with the policies, plans, goals or
ordinances of the city or if acceptance of same is contrary to law. All
donations with a value greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) must be
approved by the city council before acceptance. The mayor, or the mayor’s
designee, shall estimate the value of any nonmonetary donation not supported by
a bona fide appraisal, for the purposes of compliance with this section.
   B.   Administration: The city finance director shall have the responsibility
for the financial administration of all donations to the city and shall create
appropriate
      BARS codes and/or funds as required by the donation and initiate any
additional procedures or policies as required.
   C.   Use: In the event a donor has imposed terms or conditions upon the
acceptance and use of such donation or otherwise indicated a desire for a
particular use by the city of a donation, such donation shall, to the extent
reasonably feasible, be used consistent with the donor's stated conditions or
desired use. The mayor is authorized to carry out any conditions or desired use
thereof, if the same is within the powers granted by law to the city. If the
donor does not impose terms for use, the mayor shall have authority to
determine the use for donations with value up to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). For donations without use terms above five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), the city council shall have authority to determine the use.
   D.   Annual Report: The mayor, or the mayor’s designee, shall provide the
city council with an annual report listing the nature and value of any and all
donations which were approved and accepted by the mayor in accordance with this
section during the calendar year preceding the report.
   E.   Definition: As used in this chapter, the term "donation" refers to any
money or property, real or personal, donated, devised or bequeathed, with or
without restriction, to the city. (Ord. 960, 8-13-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-
30-2025)
1-5-3:   CITY HOURS OF BUSINESS:
   All City facilities at which the public is served shall be open for the
transaction of business from the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 5:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and except as
otherwise provided by City Policy or upon the proclamation of an emergency by
the Mayor. (Ord. 2020-1059, 3-11-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-1113, 9-27-2023; Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025))
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Council Meetings
1-6-2: Declaration Of Candidacy
1-6-3: Salaries
1-6-1: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular City Council Meetings: The City Council shall hold regular
meetings at the Orting City Hall, or such other place as may be determined by
the Council, on the second and last Wednesdays of each month at seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M., unless otherwise noticed, provided, however, that when the day
fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law
as a legal or national holiday, City Council shall follow its annually adopted
meeting schedule.
   B.   Council Study Sessions: The City Council shall hold, as regular
meetings, study sessions at the Orting City Hall on the third Wednesday of each
month, at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., unless otherwise noticed, provided, however,
that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day
designated by law as a legal or national holiday, City Council shall follow its
annually adopted meeting schedule.
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the City Council shall be
conducted in accordance with chapter 42.30 Revised Code of Washington, the Open
Public Meetings Act.
   D.   Members of the City Council may attend regular meetings by telephone or
a video platform. A quorum of the City Council can occur either at the location
of the regular meeting, by telephone, or by video platform for the duration of
the meetings. (Ord. 2018-1029, 4-25-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-1077, 6-30-2021; Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-6-2: DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY:
   A.   Filing: Candidates for the Offices of Mayor and Council members of the
City shall file declarations of candidacy not more than sixty (60) days nor
less than forty six (46) days prior to the election at which such officers
shall be elected. (1973 Code § 2.16.010)
   B.   Form: Declaration of candidacy shall substantially conform to the
following form:
      DECLARATION AND AFFIDAVIT OF CANDIDACY
State of Washington      )
                  ) ss.
County of                    )
      DECLARATION
I,                     , declare upon honor that I am a registered voter
residing at No.           street,                   (City of),
                    (County of), State of Washington, and am legally qualified
to assume office if elected; that I hereby declare myself a candidate for
nomination to the office of                    or position No.          for the
office of                        (fill in whichever blank is applicable) to be
made at the election to be held on the         day of                    and
hereby request that my name be printed upon the official ballots, as provided
by law.
   AFFIDAVIT
   FURTHER, I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the
Constitution and laws of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the
State of Washington; that I do not advocate the overthrow, destruction, or
alteration of the constitutional form of government of the United States or of
the State of Washington or any political subdivision of either of them, by
revolution, force or violence, and that I do not knowingly belong to any
organization, foreign or otherwise, which engages in or advocates, the
overthrow, destruction or alteration of the constitutional form of government
of the United States or of the State of Washington or any political subdivision
of either of them, by revolution, force or violence.
                                                                               
(Please print name to    (Signature of candidate
assure correct spelling)   as name is to appear
   upon ballot)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this        day of             , 20     .
                                         
   (Signature of official)
 
                                         
   (Official title)
(1973 Code § 2.16.020; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-6-3: SALARIES:
   A.   Mayor: Commencing January 1, 2021, the mayor of the city of Orting
shall receive a monthly salary of one thousand eight hundred thirty-three
dollars and thirty-three cents ($1,833.33) per month. Commencing January 1,
2022, the mayor of the City of Orting shall receive a monthly salary of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per month during his or her term of
office. Should the mayor be unable to attend to his or her duties for a
continuous thirty (30) day period, then the monthly salary shall be suspended
until such time as the mayor again resumes his or her duties.
   B.   Council Members: Each council member shall be paid the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. Commencing January 1, 2016, the salary for
each council member position shall be increased to three hundred dollars
($300.00) per month. (Ord. 947, 11-13-2013; amd. Ord. 2020-1070, 12-9-2020;
Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: City Officers Enumerated
1-7-2: Oath Of Office; Bonds
1-7-3: Appointive Officers; Duties; Qualifications
1-7-4: Social Security System Participation
1-7-5: Retirement System
1-7-6: Compensatory Time Off
1-7-7: Police Officers, Residency
1-7-8: Care Of City Property
1-7-9: Right Of Entry For Inspection; Notice
1-7-1: CITY OFFICERS ENUMERATED:
   A.   The government of the city shall be vested in a mayor and a council
consisting of seven (7) members all elective with such powers as provided by
chapter 35A.12 RCW.
   B.   The mayor shall appoint a city administrator, who shall be confirmed by
majority of the city council. The mayor or city administrator shall appoint
other subordinate officers, as authorized by city ordinance. If the city
administrator appoints a clerk, finance director, police chief, city attorney,
or public works director, those positions shall be confirmed by majority of the
city council.
   C.   The mayor retains the right to hire employees and officers authorized
by ordinance. The mayor also retains the right to terminate the employment of
any city employee.
   D.   The duties and qualifications of employees shall be approved by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 961, 9-24-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-1065, 8-
26-2020; Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-2: OATH OF OFFICE; BONDS:
Repealed. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-1065, 8-26-2020; Ord. 2025-1144,
7-30-2025)
1-7-3: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; DUTIES; QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   The authority, duties and qualifications for appointive officers
established in Section
1-7-1 may be set by resolution of the city council.
   B.   City Clerk: There is hereby created the nonclassified, at will,
management position and office of city clerk to perform the duties and
functions as set forth by the city council via resolution for such office under
the direction and supervision of the city administrator, or in the absence of
the city administrator, the mayor or other designee.
   C.   Finance Director: There is hereby created the nonclassified, at will,
management position and office of finance director to perform the duties and
functions as set forth by the city council via resolution for such office under
the direction and supervision of the city administrator, or in the absence of
the city administrator, the mayor or other designee.
   D.   City Administrator:
      1.   City Administrator: There is hereby created the nonclassified, at
will, management position and office of city administrator to perform the
duties and functions as set forth by the city council via resolution under the
direction and supervision of the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the
deputy mayor.
      The city administrator assists in supervising the city's department heads
and all subordinate personnel and assists in managing the city government on
behalf of the mayor to implement city council policies and goals and the duly
enacted ordinances of the city. The individual serving in this position
provides advice and counsel to the mayor and department heads concerning fiscal
and administrative alternatives and options.
      Nothing herein is intended to abrogate or diminish the authority granted
to the mayor pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 35A.12.100 as chief
executive and administrative officer of the city.
      Appointive officers' duties and qualifications shall be approved by
resolution of the city council.
   E.   Police Chief: There is hereby created the nonclassified, at will,
management position and office of police chief to perform the duties and
functions as set forth by the city council via resolution for such office under
the direction and supervision of the city administrator, or in the absence of
the city administrator, the mayor or other designee. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd.
Ord. 2020-1065, 8-26-2020; Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-4: SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM PARTICIPATION:
   A.   Membership: This municipality shall become a participant in the social
security system and the benefits of old age and survivors' insurance shall be
extended to its employees and officers. The city adopts the provisions of
Chapter 41.48 RCW, as amended.
   B.   Execution And Delivery Of Plan; Extension Of Coverage: The mayor and
the city treasurer are authorized to execute and deliver to the Washington
department of employment security for its approval the plan or plans required
under the provisions of section 5 of said enabling act and of the social
security act to extend coverage to the employees and officers of this
municipality and to do all other things necessary to that end.
   C.   Payments To Contribution Fund; Payroll Deductions: The proper fiscal
officers are authorized to make all required payments into the contribution
fund established by the enabling act and to establish such system of payroll
deductions from the salaries of employees and officers as may be necessary to
their coverage under the old age and survivors' insurance system.
   D.   Officials To Carry Out System Requirements: The proper officials of the
municipality shall do all things necessary to the continued implementation of
the system.
   E.   Effective Date Of Participation: This municipality shall become a
participant in the social security system effective as of January 1, 1951.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-5: RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
   A.   Membership: The city authorizes and approves the membership and
participation of its eligible employees in the Washington public employees'
retirement system pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 41.40.062, and
authorizes the expenditure of the necessary funds to cover its proportionate
share for participation in the system. The city adopts the provisions of
Chapter 41.48 RWC, as amended.
   B.   Transmission Of Ordinance To Retirement Board: The city clerk is
directed to transmit a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter
to the retirement board of said system as evidence of such authorization and
approval.
   C.   Effective Date Of Participation: Participation membership in the
Washington public employees' retirement system shall commence January 1, 1969.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-6: COMPENSATORY TIME OFF:
Repealed. (1973 Code § 2.32.120; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-7: POLICE OFFICERS, RESIDENCY:
Repealed. (1973 Code § 2.32.140; amd. 1996 Code; Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-8: CARE OF CITY PROPERTY:
Repealed. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-7-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION; NOTICE:
Repealed. (1973 Code § 1.08.010; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 8
EMERGENCY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Creation; Purpose
1-8-2: Preparation For Emergencies
1-8-3: Disaster And Emergency Powers
1-8-4: Adoption Of The National Incident Management System (NIMS)
1-8-5: Proclamation Of Emergency
1-8-6: Emergency Contracts
1-8-7: Violation; Penalty
1-8-8: Immunity
1-8-1: CREATION; PURPOSE:
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for
persons and property within the city of Orting in the event of an emergency or
disaster, and to provide for the coordination of emergency functions and
services of the city of Orting with the county and other affected public
agencies and private persons, corporations and organizations. (Ord. 2023-1109,
7-26-2023; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-8-2: PREPARATION FOR EMERGENCIES:
It is the policy of the city of Orting to make effective preparation and use of
manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster
that may occur. Disasters and emergencies, by their very nature, may disrupt or
destroy existing systems and the capability of the city of Orting to respond to
protect life, public health and public property. Therefore, citizens are
advised to be prepared to be on their own for up to ninety-six (96) hours
should an emergency or disaster occur. (Ord. 2023-1109, 7-26-2023; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-8-3: DISASTER AND EMERGENCY POWERS:
   A.   The Mayor: In the event of a disaster or emergency, and after
consulting with the director, the mayor is authorized to proclaim a disaster or
state of emergency, request that the county executive or Governor proclaim a
state of emergency when in the opinion of the mayor the resources of the area
or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster, and call and conduct any
emergency meetings of the city council as deemed appropriate. In the absence of
the mayor, the deputy mayor may declare an emergency and issues orders, and in
the absence of the mayor pro tem, the city administrator may declare an
emergency and issue orders. The authority granted to the mayor in this chapter
is in addition to and not in limitation of other policies allowing the mayor to
declare an emergency and take action necessary to deal with such emergency,
including but not limited to those powers set forth in Chapter 38.52 RCW.
   B.   The City Administrator: In the event of a proclamation of a disaster or
state of emergency by the mayor, county executive, or governor, the city
administrator is hereby empowered:
      1.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster;
      2.   To request the county executive or governor to proclaim a state of
emergency when, in the opinion of the city administrator, the resources of the
area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;
      3.   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people
and to bind the city of Orting for the fair value thereof, and, if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
      4.   To control and direct the efforts of the emergency management
organization of the city of Orting for the accomplishment of the purposes of
this chapter;
      5.   To require emergency services of any city of Orting officer or
employee and to command the aid of as many citizens of the city of Orting as
may be deemed necessary in the execution of the purposes of this chapter; and
such persons to be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are
provided by state law for registered emergency workers;
      6.   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city of Orting
department or agency;
      7.   To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the mayor by
this chapter, by any other statute, agreement or lawful authority, as
necessary;
      8.   To take any action necessary to accomplish the purpose or policy of
this chapter, the provisions of the comprehensive emergency management plan, or
the provisions of Chapter 38.52 RCW.
   C.   Unavailability Of Mayor Or City Administrator:
      1.   In the event that the mayor is unavailable to proclaim a disaster or
state of emergency or carry out the functions required by this chapter, the
deputy mayor shall act in his or her place, and, in the event that the deputy
mayor is not available, then the next available councilmember with the longest
period of consecutive service shall perform the functions required by this
chapter.
      2.   In the event that the city administrator is unavailable to perform
the functions of this chapter, the person designated by city policy to act as
city administrator in the absence of the city administrator shall perform the
functions required of this chapter.
   D.   The Emergency Management Director: The emergency management director is
hereby empowered:
      1.   To request the mayor to proclaim a disaster or state of emergency
and the termination thereof;
      2.   To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services
and staff of the departments and services of the city of Orting in carrying out
the provisions of the comprehensive emergency management plan, and to resolve
questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;
      3.   To recommend for adoption by the city council emergency management
plans and mutual aid agreements;
      4.   To represent the emergency management organization of the city of
Orting in dealing with issues pertaining to emergency management;
      5.   To prepare and maintain the comprehensive emergency management plan
of the city of Orting and manage the day-to-day responsibilities of the
emergency management program activities of the city of Orting;
      6.   To take any action necessary to accomplish the purpose or policy of
this chapter, the provisions of the comprehensive emergency management plan, or
the provisions of Chapter 38.52 RCW. (Ord. 2023-1109, 7-26-2023; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-8-4: ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS):
NIMS has been identified by the Federal Government as being the requisite
emergency management system for all political subdivisions and NIMS training is
required under Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD-5) to receive
federal funding, contracts, grants, training and reimbursement of disaster
recovery costs.
Staff who are responsible for emergency management will be trained in NIMS and
will train and exercise the Incident Command System (ICS) and use it in their
response operations. (Ord. 2023-1109, 7-26-2023; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-
2025)
1-8-5: PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   Proclamation By Mayor: Whenever an emergency as defined herein, or the
imminent threat thereof, occurs in the City and results in, or threatens to
result in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of or damage to
property to such extent as to require, in the judgment of the mayor,
extraordinary measures to protect the public peace, safety and welfare, the
mayor may proclaim in writing the existence of a civil emergency.
      For the purposes of this chapter an EMERGENCY shall mean:
      1.   A riot, unlawful assembly, insurrection, enemy attack, sabotage, or
other hostile action; or
      2.   A natural or human-caused disaster, including fire, flood, storm,
explosion, earthquake, volcanic disturbance or other natural cause, or
pandemic; or
      3.   An event or set of circumstances that demands immediate action to
preserve public health, protect life, protect public property, or to provide
relief to any stricken neighborhood overtaken by such occurrences;
      4.   Any emergency or disaster as defined by RCW 38.52.010.
      Proclamations of civil emergencies issued by the mayor shall as soon as
practicable be filed with the city clerk, and posted in the same manner the
city publishes other notifications to the public. Reasonable effort will be
taken to post the proclamation in places such as City Hall, reader boards, the
city website, social media, and other available means of electronic
communication. The Proclamation shall be presented to the City Council for
ratification and confirmation, modification or rejection as soon as reasonably
possible, or no later than the next regular council meeting. Proclamations
which are rejected shall, after vote, be void. Proclamations shall be
considered in full force and effect until the City Council shall act to ratify.
   B.   In addition to or as an alternative to those emergency powers
prescribed by this chapter upon the declaration of a civil emergency upon
proclamation of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or county
executive pursuant to chapter 43.06 RCW and chapter 38.52 RCW, the Mayor shall
have the authority to exercise authority all emergency powers and take action
necessary to deal with such emergency, including but not limited to those
powers set forth in Chapter 38.52 RCW.
   C.   In addition to those emergency powers prescribed by this chapter, the
Mayor may impose a prohibition on the use of open fires within the City of
Orting to limit potential adverse impacts to human life and property in
response to an emergency condition due to unusual fire danger within the City.
This authority is concurrent with the authority vested in the City’s Fire
Marshal and operates concurrently with the authorities of the clean air
agencies and fire authorities applicable to the state, county and City. A
declaration and associated prohibition issued pursuant hereto shall comply with
the requirements of Section 1-8-8(B). (Ord. 2023-1109, 7-26-2023; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-8-6: EMERGENCY CONTRACTS:
The city council, city administrator, or director is authorized to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to carry out the purposes or policies
of this chapter or the provisions of the comprehensive emergency management
plan in light of the exigencies of the emergency without regard to time-
consuming procedures and formalities proscribed by law (excepting mandatory
constitutional requirements), including but not limited to budget law
limitations, requirements of competitive bidding and publication of notices,
provisions pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into
contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers,
the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials, the levying of
taxes, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. (Ord. 2023-1109,
7-26-2023; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-8-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
      1.   Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon
such member by virtue of this chapter;
      2.   Perform any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to imperil the
lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay
the defense of protection thereof; or
      3.   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency management agency of the city.
   B.   Violations of a declaration of civil emergency issued pursuant to this
chapter or of a subsequent emergency order issued pursuant this chapter, or any
other order or directive given by a law enforcement officer or designated
emergency services personnel pursuant to authority of such declaration or
orders, shall be punishable pursuant to under section 1-4-1 of this code as
follows:
      1.   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any
person committing such violation shall be punished by a term of ninety (90)
days in jail or a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both such jail and
fine.
      2.   Any person who commits a second violation of this chapter within a
one-year period shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor punishable by one (1)
year in jail or a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) fine or both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 2023-1109, 7-26-2023; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-8-8: IMMUNITY:
There shall be no liability on the part of any person, partnership,
corporation, the state of Washington or any political subdivision thereof who
owns or maintains any buildings or premises that have been designated by the
Director as a disaster shelter for any injuries sustained by any person while
in or upon said building or premises as a result of the condition of said
building or premises or as a result of any act or omission, or in any way
arising from the designation of such premises as a shelter, provided such
person has entered, gone upon or into said building or premises for the purpose
of seeking refuge therein during a disaster; provided further, however, that
this section shall not apply to the willful acts of such owner or occupant or
his or her servants, agents, or employees. This section shall also apply to any
practice drill authorized pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2023-1109, 7-26-2023;
amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 9
FIRE DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Court Established
1-10-2: Municipal Judge
1-10-3: Court Sessions; Location
1-10-1: COURT ESTABLISHED:
The City hereby establishes a Municipal Court, to have jurisdiction and all
powers conferred by chapter 258, laws 1984 of the State of Washington as
codified by Revised Code of Washington 3.50 et seq., as now enacted or amended,
and to have such jurisdiction and exercise such powers as are by law declared
to be vested in the Municipal Court. (1973 Code § 2.24.010; amd. Ord. 2025-
1144, 7-30-2025)
1-10-2: MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
   A.   Appointment: A Municipal Judge for the City shall be appointed by the
Mayor of the City with the confirmation of the Council of the City. Such
appointment shall be made by December 1 of the year next preceding the year in
which the appointment is to take effect, and the term shall commence on January
1 of the year in which the appointment shall take effect.
   B.   Term: The Municipal Court Judge shall serve for a term of four (4)
years.
   C.   Qualifications: At the time of the appointment, the person appointed
shall be qualified for the position of Municipal Judge under City rules as the
City Council may adopt by resolution or ordinance, and State Statutes, such as
Revised Code of Washington 3.50.040 and 3.50.050.
   D.   Judges Pro Tem: The Municipal Court Judge shall, in writing, appoint
Judges Pro Tem who shall serve in absence, disability, or disqualification of
the regular Judge of the Municipal Court, subsequent to the filing of an
affidavit of prejudice, or when the administration of justice and the
accomplishment of the work of the court make it necessary. A Pro Tem Judge's
term of appointment shall also be specified in writing. The Judges Pro Tem
shall receive such compensation as is received, on an hourly basis, by the
Municipal Judge, or as otherwise fixed by resolution or by the ordinances of
the City. The Judges Pro Tem shall meet the qualifications required for the
position of Judge of the Municipal Court as provided herein. Before entering
upon judicial duties, each Judge Pro Tem shall take, subscribe, and file an
oath in the same form as that of the duly appointed Municipal Judge, and
thereafter shall have all of the powers of the appointed Municipal Judge. When
deemed necessary, the Municipal Court Judge may make a temporary appointment of
a Judge Pro Tem, to preserve an individual's rights according to law, or to
respond to emergency circumstances, effective for up to one week.
   E.   Vacancy: Any vacancy in the Municipal Court due to death, disability,
or resignation of a Judge shall be filled by the Mayor, for the remainder of
the unexpired term. The appointment shall be subject to the confirmation of the
City Council. The appointed Judge shall be qualified to hold the position of
Judge of the Municipal Court as provided in this section.
   F.   Removal:
      1. Removal For Misconduct/ Malfeasance: Pursuant to Revised Code of
Washington 3.50.095, a Judge may be removed from office during the term of his
or her appointment upon "conviction of misconduct or malfeasance in office, or
because of physical or mental disability rendering the Judge incapable of
performing the duties of the office".
      2.   Removal By Judicial Conduct Commission: A Municipal Court Judge may
also be removed from office by the Washington State Judicial Conduct Commission
and/or the Washington State Supreme Court, as described in chapter 2.64 Revised
Code of Washington or other applicable law. No separate action by the City
Council is required to effect such removal.
   G.   Oath: Every Judge of the Municipal Court, before entering upon the
duties of the office, shall take and subscribe the following oath or
affirmation:
      I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Washington, and that I
will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of judge of the Municipal
Court of the City of Orting, according to the best of my ability.
      The oath shall be filed in the Office of the King County Auditor and with
the Orting City Clerk.
   H.   Compensation: Pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 3.50.080, the
compensation for the Municipal Court Judge shall be set by the City Council by
ordinance. Other terms of compensation shall be set by a professional services
agreement which will be entered into between the City and the appointed Judge,
subject to confirmation by the City Council. (Ord. 2017-1018, 11-29-2017; amd.
Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-10-3: COURT SESSIONS; LOCATION:
The court shall hold sessions on dates determined by the Judge after consulting
with the Mayor at a location in Orting, Washington, and as to bail, arrest
warrant and other matters may hold hearings at the law office of the Judge,
even though that location may be outside the City limits of Orting, or at such
other place of incarceration as the City may designate for the handling of its
prisoners. (Ord. 752, 7-12-2001; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 11
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 1
(amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15, chapter 13 of this code.
CHAPTER 12
HEARING EXAMINER
SECTION:
1-12-1: Purpose
1-12-2: Established
1-12-3: Hearing Before The Hearing Examiner
1-12-4: Additional Enforcement Procedures
1-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an opportunity for a prompt hearing
and decision on all matters for which an appeal to the hearing examiner is
provided pursuant to chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-12-2: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established for the purposes set forth in this chapter the
office of hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall be named by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the council and shall serve an indeterminate
term at the pleasure of the mayor. Compensation shall be fixed by the city
council. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-12-3: HEARING BEFORE THE HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Appeal; Request For Hearing:
      1.   Civil Violation: A person to whom a notice of civil violation is
issued pursuant to section 1-13-6 of this title (the "appellant") may appeal
such notice or order to the hearing examiner within ten (10) calendar days
after the date the notice of civil violation is served as determined in
accordance with section 1-13-3 of this title; provided that, a notice of civil
violation issued for a violation of title 11, chapter 6, "Shoreline Master
Program", of this code, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to title 11,
chapter 6, "Shoreline Master Program", of this code, or any project permit or
approval issued or granted pursuant to title 11, chapter 6, "Shoreline Master
Program", of this code, may be appealed in accordance with the time period set
forth in chapter 90.58 Revised Code Of Washington, as now or may hereafter be
amended.
      2.   Civil Regulatory Order: A person to whom a civil regulatory order is
issued pursuant to section 1-13-7 of this title (the "appellant") may appeal
such notice or order to the hearing examiner within ten (10) calendar days
after the date the notice of civil regulatory order is served as determined in
accordance with section 1-13-3 of this code.
      3.   Final Determination Of Noncompliance: A person to whom a final
determination of noncompliance has been issued pursuant to subsection 1-13-5D
of this title (the "appellant") may appeal such determination within ten (10)
calendar days after the date the notice of final determination of noncompliance
is served as determined in accordance with section 1-13-3 of this title.
      4.   Other Notice, Order Of Decision: A person who has been served with a
notice or order not listed above and for which monetary penalties may be
imposed or for which the right to an appeal to the city hearing examiner is
otherwise provided pursuant to this code (the "appellant"), and any person
affected by an enforcement decision of a code enforcement officer for which the
right to file an appeal to the city hearing examiner is otherwise provided
pursuant to this code (the "appellant"), may appeal such notice or order within
ten (10) business days after the date the notice or order is served or the
decision being appealed becomes a final decision, unless another time period or
procedure for appeal is set forth in this code, in which case such time period
and procedures shall apply. As it is used in this section, “business days”
shall exclude weekends and public holidays recognized by the City of Orting.
      5.   Failure To Timely File Complete Notice: The hearing examiner shall
not have jurisdiction to hear an appeal that is not filed within the time
periods set forth above or that is not signed as required in subsection B of
this section. If the final day to file an appeal is on a weekend or holiday,
the appeal will be timely if filed before the close of business on the next
business day following the holiday or weekend. For purposes of this section,
"holiday" shall mean those weekdays during which the city offices are closed
for established holidays. The hearing examiner shall have jurisdiction to hear
an appeal that does not otherwise meet the requirements of subsection B of this
section, provided that, the appellant corrects the deficiencies in the notice
of appeal and request for hearing prior to the conclusion of the hearing, or at
such earlier time as ordered to do so by the hearing examiner. The city may
seek an order from the hearing examiner compelling the appellant to correct the
deficiencies in the notice of appeal prior to commencement of the hearing.
   B.   Content Of Notice; Filing:
      1.   Notice Of Civil Violation: A notice of appeal of a notice of civil
violation and request for hearing shall be filed in writing with the city
clerk, or designee, or the office of the city administrator, during of the
appellant, b) the mailing address at which the appellant may receive notices
related to the hearing, c) the notice of civil violation sought to be appealed,
d) the violation or violations being appealed, and e) a statement identifying
the relief the appellant is seeking from the hearing examiner. If the notice of
civil violation is combined with a civil regulatory order, the notice of appeal
and request for hearing must also comply with subsection B2 of this section.
The notice of appeal must be signed by the person to whom the notice was
issued. If the notice was issued to an entity, the notice must be signed by an
officer or other person authorized to act for and on behalf of the entity. The
appellant shall also pay the appeal fee as a condition of filing a complete
appeal, and the fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.
      2.   Civil Regulatory Order: A notice of appeal of a civil regulatory
order and request for hearing shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, or
designee, or the office of the city administrator, during regular business
hours by the appellant, or, in the case of a corporation, a duly authorized
agent of the appellant. The written notice of appeal and request for hearing
shall identify with specificity: a) the name of the appellant, b) the mailing
address at which the appellant may receive notices related to the hearing, c)
the civil regulatory order sought to be appealed, d) the portion of the order
that the appellant alleges are in error, e) the error(s) of law and/or error(s)
of fact that form the basis for the appeal, f) a separate and concise statement
of each error alleged to have been committed, g) a concise statement of facts
upon which the appellant relies to sustain the statement of error, and h) a
statement identifying the relief the appellant is seeking from the hearing
examiner. If the civil regulatory order is combined with notice of civil
violation, the notice of appeal and request for hearing must also comply with
subsection B1 of this section. The notice of appeal must be signed by the
person to whom the notice was issued. If the notice was issued to an entity,
the notice must be signed by an officer or other person authorized to act for
and on behalf of the entity. The filing of such an appeal shall not alter the
time for compliance unless modified by the hearing examiner following a
hearing. The appellant shall also pay the appeal fee as a condition of filing a
complete appeal, and the fee shall be established by resolution of the city
council.
      3.   Final Determination Of Noncompliance: A notice of appeal of a final
determination of noncompliance and request for hearing shall be filed in
writing with the city clerk, or designee, or the office of the city
administrator, during regular business hours by the appellant, or, in the case
of a corporation, a duly authorized agent of the appellant. The written notice
of appeal and request for hearing shall identify with specificity: a) the name
of the appellant, b) the mailing address at which the appellant may receive
notices related to the hearing, c) the final determination of noncompliance
sought to be appealed, d) the error(s) of law and/or error(s) of fact that form
the basis for the appeal, and e) a statement identifying the relief the
appellant is seeking from the hearing examiner. The notice of appeal must be
signed by the person to whom the notice was issued. If the notice was issued to
an entity, the notice must be signed by an officer or other person authorized
to act for and on behalf of the entity. The appellant shall also pay the appeal
fee as a condition of filing a complete appeal, and the fee shall be
established by resolution of the city council.
      4.   Other Orders Or Notices: The following applies to appeal of a
notice, order or enforcement decision that is not a notice of violation or
civil regulatory order but for which an appeal is provided for under this
chapter. A notice of appeal of issuance of a notice of violation shall include
the information required for appeal of a notice of civil violation. A notice of
appeal of issuance of an order or other enforcement decision for which there is
a right to an appeal shall include the information required for appeal of a
civil regulatory order. The notice of appeal must be signed by the person to
whom the notice was issued. If the notice was issued to an entity, the notice
must be signed by an officer or other person authorized to act for and on
behalf of the entity.
   C.   Hearing To Be Scheduled: The city clerk, or designee, or the office of
the city administrator, will schedule a hearing before the hearing examiner not
less than ten (10) days but no more than forty five (45) days after the notice
of appeal and request for hearing is filed with the city in accordance with
subsection B of this section. Extensions may be granted by the hearing examiner
for good cause shown or when there is mutual agreement of the parties. The
failure to schedule or commence a hearing within the above stated time period
shall not be grounds for granting the relief requested by the appellant.
   D.   Type Of Hearing: An appeal of a notice of violation shall be considered
a type A adjudicative contested hearing. An appeal of a civil regulatory order
or a final determination of noncompliance or an enforcement decision of a code
enforcement officer shall be considered a type B hearing. The fact that a civil
regulatory order and a notice of violation have been combined shall not alter
the type of hearing or procedures that apply; provided however that, the
hearing examiner shall have broad discretion to establish additional procedures
that will enable the fair, efficient and orderly conduct of the two (2) hearing
types.
      1.   Type A Hearing; Procedure: A type A hearing is a hearing to contest
the existence and/or responsibility for the violation or violations that are
subject to the appeal.
      The hearing examiner shall conduct an adjudicative hearing on the appeal
pursuant to the rules of procedure of the hearing examiner. The city and the
appellant shall be the parties in the hearing and each party may call witnesses
and may be represented by legal counsel. The city shall have the burden of
proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that violation or
violations that are the subject of the appeal has or have occurred and that the
appellant is the person responsible for compliance.
      2.   Type B Hearing; Procedure: A type B hearing is a hearing to
determine whether or not the civil regulatory order or a final determination of
noncompliance or enforcement decision was issued in error based upon one or
more of the following:
         a.   Issued in excess of the authority or jurisdiction of the city or
code enforcement officer; or
         b.   Made upon unlawful procedure; or
         c    Affected by material error of law or fact; or
         d.   Clearly erroneous in view of the entire record as submitted; or
         e.   Order or determination was arbitrary or capricious.
      The city and the appellant shall be the parties in the hearing and each
party may call witnesses and may be represented by legal counsel. The appellant
shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the
evidence the claimed errors of law and/or errors of fact. The hearing examiner
shall give substantial weight to any discretionary decision, or any
construction of this code, rendered by the code enforcement officer or
department director pursuant to this chapter/title.
   E.   Stay Of Action Pending Appeal: An appellant may request the hearing
examiner to stay or suspend an action by the city to implement the decision
under review pending the outcome of the administrative appeal. The request must
set forth a statement of grounds for the stay and the factual basis for the
request. The hearing examiner may grant a stay only if the hearing examiner
finds that:
      1.   The party requesting the stay is likely to prevail on the merits;
      2.   Without the stay the party requesting it will suffer irreparable
harm;
      3.   The grant of a stay will not substantially harm other parties to the
proceedings; and
      4.   The request for the stay is timely in light of the circumstances of
the case.
      The hearing examiner may grant the request for a stay upon such terms and
conditions, including the filing of security, as are necessary to prevent harm
to other parties by the stay.
   F.   Decision Of The Hearing Examiner:
      1.   Determination; Type A: The hearing examiner shall determine whether
the city has established by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation
or violations subject to the appeal has or have occurred and shall affirm or
vacate the city's decision regarding such violation or violations. If the
hearing examiner affirms the decision of the city, the hearing examiner shall
impose the penalties as set forth in the notice of violation, or such other
penalties as the hearing examiner determines are reasonable and just and in
conformance with this chapter.
      2.   Determination; Type B: The hearing examiner shall determine whether
the appellant has established by a preponderance of the evidence that the city
committed one or more errors under subsections D2a through D2e of this section.
The examiner may: a) affirm the decision of the code enforcement officer, b)
remand the matter back to the code enforcement officer for further action
consistent with the decision of the hearing examiner, c) reverse the order or
determination if the substantial rights of the appellant may have been
prejudiced because the order or determination was in violation of one or more
factors set forth in subsections D2a through D2e of this section, or d) modify
the order or decision to the extent necessary to correct the error.
      3.   Need For Corrective Action: The determination of the applicable code
enforcement officer and/or department director as to the need for the required
corrective action shall be accorded substantial weight by the hearing examiner
in determining the reasonableness of the required corrective action.
      4.   Issue Order: The hearing examiner shall issue an order to the
parties which contains the following information:
         a.   The decision regarding the matter being appealed including
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in support of the decision; and/
or
         b.   The required corrective action; and/or
         c.   The date and time by which the correction must be completed; and/
or
         d.   The monetary penalties assessed.
      5.   Notice Of Decision: The hearing examiner shall mail a copy of the
decision to the appellant and the applicable city official within ten (10)
working days of the hearing.
   G.   Failure To Appear: If the appellant fails to appear at the scheduled
hearing, the examiner shall enter an order of dismissal of the appeal.
   H.   Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with a final
nonappealable decision of the hearing examiner. For purposes of this section,
nonappealable means that all administrative and judicial appeals have been
exhausted.
   I.   Appeal:
      1.   Final Decision: Except as provided below, the decision of the
hearing examiner shall be a final decision. A party aggrieved by a decision of
the hearing examiner may appeal or seek review of the decision in accordance
with applicable law.
      2.   City Council Review: The decision of the hearing examiner upon an
appeal of a notice of civil violation issued for a violation of title 11,
chapter 6 of this code, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to title 11,
chapter 6 of this code, or any project permit or approval issued or granted
pursuant to title 11, chapter 6 of this code, may be appealed to the city
council. The notice of appeal and hearing on appeal shall be governed by the
procedures set forth herein for a type B appeal. The city council shall be the
hearing body and shall determine whether or not the appellant has established
by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision of the hearing examiner
was issued in error based upon one or more factors under subsections D2a
through D2e of this section. The city council may: a) affirm the decision of
the hearing examiner, b) remand the matter back to the hearing examiner or code
enforcement officer for further action consistent with the decision of the city
council, c) reverse the order or determination of the hearing examiner if the
substantial rights of the appellant may have been prejudiced because the order
or determination was in violation of one or more factors set forth in
subsections D2a through D2e of this section, or d) modify the order or decision
of the hearing examiner to the extent necessary to correct the error.
   J.   Subsequent Repeat Violation; Failure To Abate; Misdemeanor: The
commission of a subsequent violation or the failure or refusal to abate a
violation pursuant to an order of the hearing examiner after receipt of written
notice of such order shall constitute a misdemeanor. The city attorney, or city
attorney’s designee, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file a
subsequent violation as either a civil violation pursuant to this chapter, or a
civil infraction or a misdemeanor. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144,
7-30-2025)
1-12-4: ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to
other enforcement provisions authorized by this code or by law. (Ord. 912, 9-
14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 13
CODE ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-13-1: General
1-13-2: Definitions
1-13-3: Methods Of Service
1-13-4: Voluntary Correction
1-13-5: Voluntary Correction Agreement
1-13-6: Civil Violations
1-13-7: Civil Regulatory Order
1-13-8: Additional Violations
1-13-9: Corporate And Personal Liability
1-13-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Purpose; Application: The purpose of this chapter is to establish an
efficient and consistent civil administrative system of enforcing city
regulations, violations of the development code, and violations of the public
health and safety code (title 5 of this code) that will enable violations to be
promptly resolved wherever possible, while providing both appropriate penalties
and a full opportunity for alleged violators to have a hearing to contest the
violations. The procedures and remedies provided herein shall apply to all
violations of the development code, the public health and safety code (title 5
of this code) and city regulations and to any title, chapter, section or
provision of the code to which zoning enforcement provisions of this code are
made applicable.
   B.   Liability; Duty: While this chapter does authorize the city of Orting
and city officials, officers, employees or agents to take action to enforce
city ordinances and regulations, it shall not be construed as placing
responsibility for code compliance or as creating any duty on the part of the
city or any city official, officer, employee or agent to any particular case,
or as creating any duty on the part of the city or any city official, officer,
employee or agent to any particular person or class of persons. This chapter
shall be enforced for the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and
not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons. Nothing
contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create or form
the basis of any liability on the part of the city, its officials, officers,
employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any act or
omission on the part of the city, its officials, officers, employees or agents.
   C.   Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to place the obligation of
complying with its requirements upon the owner, occupier or other person
responsible for the condition of the land and/or structures or responsible for
actions regulated pursuant to this chapter.
   D.   Authorization: Code enforcement officers are authorized to use the
provisions and procedures of this chapter to take action to enforce those
regulations and provisions of this code, and uncodified provisions of a city
ordinance, over which such enforcement officer has been granted enforcement
authority, including issuance of correction notices, voluntary correction
agreements, civil regulatory orders, notices of violation and notices of
infraction, to enforce compliance therewith.
   E.   Statement Of Policy: It is the policy of the city of Orting to
emphasize code compliance by education and prevention as a first step. This
policy is designed to ensure code compliance and timely action that is
available to all persons and uniform in its implementation. While warnings
through a notice of correction and voluntary compliance are desirable as a
first step, enforcement and monetary penalties, and restitution should be used
for remedial purposes as needed to assure and effect code compliance.
Abatement, correction, remediation or mitigation should be pursued when
appropriate and feasible, but is not a precondition to issuance of a notice of
civil violation or notice of infraction or taking action to seek imposition of
criminal penalties. Uniform and efficient procedures, with consistent
application tailored by regulation, should be used to accomplish this policy.
   F.   Joint And Several Responsibility And Liability: Responsibility for
violations subject to enforcement under this chapter is joint and several, and
the city is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other
persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the city
required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for
compliance.
   G.   Presumption: Proof that a violation of a regulation, the development
code or the health and safety code (title 5 of this code) exists on privately
owned (nongovernmental) property shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
owner of the property is a person responsible for compliance. However, this
shall not relieve or prevent enforcement against any other person who may also
be responsible for compliance. Proof that a violation of a regulation occurred
on property subject to a project permit shall constitute prima facie evidence
that the applicant for the project permit is a person responsible for
compliance. However, this shall not relieve or prevent enforcement against any
other person who may also be a person responsible for compliance.
   H.   Prohibited Acts Include Causing And Permitting: Whenever in this code
or the noncodified ordinances of the city, or any rule or regulation issued
pursuant thereto, any act or omission constitutes a civil violation, such act
or omission includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering
or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
   I.   Separate Offense: Every act or omission which constitutes a civil
violation under this code or the noncodified ordinances of the city, or any
rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto, shall constitute a separate civil
violation for each and every day during any portion of which the act or
omission constituting the violation is committed, continued or permitted.
   J.   Nonexclusive: The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive and may
be used in addition to other enforcement provisions authorized by this code,
state or federal law, including, but not limited to, civil infraction
proceedings and penalties, criminal proceedings or sanctions, nuisance and
injunction actions, unfit dwelling proceedings, or other civil or equitable
actions to abate, discontinue, correct, or discourage unlawful acts in
violation of this chapter. The choice of enforcement action to be taken and the
severity of any penalty to be imposed shall be guided by the nature of the
violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, and/or the
existence or degree of bad faith of the person or persons subject to the
enforcement action.
   K.   Conflicts: Except as provided in section
1-13-2, "Definitions", of this chapter, in the event of a conflict between this
chapter and any other provision of this code or other city ordinance providing
for a civil violation or civil infraction, this chapter shall control to the
extent of the conflict. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any
mandatory provision of state or federal law, the provision of the state or
federal law shall control to the extent of the conflict. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011;
amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
Repealed. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-3: METHODS OF SERVICE:
   A.   Methods Of Service Defined: For purposes of this chapter, the methods
of service of any documents related to enforcement, such as correction notices,
notices of civil violation, civil regulatory orders, etc. (hereinafter
"document"), are defined as follows:
      1.   Personal Service: Personal service shall mean handing the document
to the person subject to the document or leaving it at his or her dwelling or
usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then
residing therein. Personal service shall also be deemed complete when the
hearing examiner or designee, or the hearing body or its designee, hands any
order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or
after a hearing.
      2.   Mailing: Service by mail shall mean sending the document by regular,
first class mail, postage prepaid and properly addressed, to the last known
address of the person subject to the document. The last known address shall be
an address provided to the city by the person to whom the document is directed;
if an address has not been provided to the city, the last known address shall
be any of the following as they appear at the time the document is mailed: the
address of the property where the violation is occurring, as reflected on the
most recent equalized tax assessment roll of the county assessor or the
taxpayer address appearing for the property on the official property tax
information website for Pierce County; the address appearing in any database
used for the payment of utilities for the property at which the violations are
occurring; the address appearing on the project permit application, or the
address of the person to whom the documents are being sent that appears in the
Washington state department of licensing database. Where service of the notice
of violation is by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon the third day
following the day upon which they are placed in the mail, unless the third day
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or federal legal holiday, in which event service
shall be deemed complete on the first day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday following the third day.
      3.   Posting: Posting shall mean affixing a copy of the document in a
conspicuous place on the property, with at least one copy of such document
placed at an entryway to the property or structure if an entryway exists.
Service by posting shall be accomplished on the date of the posting in
compliance with this section.
      4.   Publication: Publication of the document shall mean publication as
set forth in Revised Code Of Washington 4.28.100 and 4.28.110, as currently
enacted or hereafter amended.
   B.   When First Class Mail Deemed Service: Any correction notice, notice of
civil violation, notice of hearing, civil regulatory order, or other code
enforcement document shall be deemed legally served upon a party by use of
regular, first class mail, as described in subsection A2 of this section,
unless another method of service is expressly required in a particular
subsection of this chapter, state law, or court rule; provided, at the
discretion of the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer may
personally serve documents or cause documents to be personally served upon a
party.
   C.   Proof Of Service; Due Diligence: Proof of service may be made by
written affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the
person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the
manner by which service was made, and if service was made solely by posting or
publication, facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to locate
a mailing address for the person at whom the notice of violation is directed.
Proof of service may also be made by testimony given under oath in a proceeding
relating to the violation.
   D.   Additional Proof Of Service Not Necessary: The hearing examiner shall
not require additional proof of service beyond the requirements in this
section. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-4: VOLUNTARY CORRECTION:
   A.   General: A code enforcement officer may attempt to secure the voluntary
correction of a violation by attempting to contact the person responsible for
the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting correction. This may be
done verbally by the code enforcement officer or in writing.
   B.   Written Correction Notice; Policy; Exceptions: It is the policy of the
city to attempt voluntary correction pursuant to the provisions of this section
prior to issuance of a notice of civil violation or notice of civil infraction,
except under the following circumstances: 1) when the violation constitutes a
"repeat violation" as defined in this chapter, 2) when the code enforcement
officer determines, in his or her reasonable discretion, that a written
correction notice would be ineffective or futile, or 3) when a civil regulatory
order has been issued. The failure of the code enforcement officer to seek
voluntary correction shall not invalidate any action taken by the code
enforcement officer or the city pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Service Of Correction Notice: Service of a written correction notice
may be accomplished by regular, first class mail or by personal service, at the
discretion of the code enforcement officer, or by posting or publishing the
correction notice pursuant to subsections
1-13-3A3 and A4 of this chapter if an address for the person responsible for
compliance cannot be ascertained.
   D.   Contents Of Written Correction Notice: The written correction notice
shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following information:
      1.   The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and
      2.   The street address or description sufficient for identification of
the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation
has occurred or is occurring; and
      3.   A description of the nature, extent, and time of the violation and a
reference to the regulation or provision of this code or uncodified city
ordinance that has been violated; and
      4.   A statement identifying what corrective actions are required and a
correction deadline stating the date and time by which the corrective actions
must be completed in order for the violator to avoid the issuance of a notice
of violation; and
      5.   A statement indicating that a notice of civil violation or civil
infraction may be issued for each day a violation continues, with each
violation constituting a separate violation subject to civil and/or criminal
penalties.
   E.   Time Period In Which To Correct Or Abate The Violation: Whenever a
person responsible for compliance is served with a written correction notice,
he or she shall be given at least ten (10) days from the date of issuance of
the notice to correct the violation(s); provided, where, the code enforcement
officer determines that a violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public
health or safety, or is a "repeat violation" as defined in this chapter, the
code enforcement officer can require less than ten (10) days for correction to
be completed. In the event the violation is not corrected within the required
time period, the code enforcement officer may exercise whatever other remedies
are available pursuant to this chapter.
   F.   Extension Of Voluntary Correction Period Or Modification Of Required
Actions: An extension of the deadline for voluntary correction, or a
modification of any required corrective action noted in the written correction
notice, may be granted by the code enforcement officer if the person
responsible for compliance has, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer,
shown due diligence or made substantial progress in correcting the violations
but unforeseen circumstances, or other circumstances over which the person
responsible for compliance has no control, render correction unattainable
within the original deadline.
   G.   Revocation Of Deadline For Compliance: The original deadline for
compliance, or any extension for compliance previously granted by the code
enforcement officer, may be revoked and immediate compliance required where, in
the opinion of the code enforcement officer, circumstances make immediate
correction necessary to avoid an imminent risk of injury to persons or
property. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-5: VOLUNTARY CORRECTION AGREEMENT:
   A.   Voluntary Correction Agreement; General: At the sole discretion of the
code enforcement officer, a voluntary correction agreement (hereinafter
"agreement") may be entered into between the person responsible for compliance
and the city. The agreement must be in writing. The agreement may be
implemented following an oral or written notice of correction, service of a
civil regulatory order, issuance of a notice of civil violation or notice of
infraction, or filing of a criminal complaint.
   B.   Effect Of Agreement: Execution of the agreement represents
acknowledgment and agreement by the person entering into the agreement
(hereinafter the "signatory") that he or she is the person responsible for
compliance or violations as set forth in the agreement, that the agreement
represents a determination that the violation or violations as set forth in the
agreement have been committed, and that this determination is final and
conclusive.
   C.   Contents Of Voluntary Correction Agreement: The voluntary correction
agreement is a contract between the city and the person responsible for
compliance under which that person agrees to abate the violations within a
specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction
agreement shall include the following:
      1.   A statement identifying the necessary corrective action to be taken,
the date or time by which correction must be completed, and an acknowledgment
by the person responsible for compliance that he or she will correct the
violation within the time specified in the voluntary correction agreement; and
      2.   An acknowledgment by the person responsible for compliance that if
the violation is not corrected in compliance with the terms and conditions of
the voluntary correction agreement, the city may issue a notice of civil
violation and impose monetary penalties for the time period for the violation
or violations described in the voluntary correction agreement; and
      3.   The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;
and
      4.   The street address or a description sufficient for identification of
the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation
has occurred or is occurring; and
      5.   A description of the nature, extent, and time of the violation and a
reference to the regulation or provision of this code or uncodified city
ordinance that has been violated; and
      6.   An acknowledgment by the person responsible for compliance that the
violation described in the voluntary correction agreement exists; that he or
she is the person responsible for compliance or the violations set forth in the
voluntary correction agreement, that the agreement represents a determination
that the violation or violations as set forth in the voluntary correction
agreement have been committed, and that this determination is final and
conclusive; and
      7.   A statement identifying the necessary corrective action to be taken,
the date or time by which correction must be completed, and an acknowledgment
by the person responsible for compliance that he or she will correct the
violation within the time specified in the voluntary correction agreement; and
      8.   An acknowledgment by the person responsible for compliance that if
the violation is not corrected in compliance with the terms and conditions of
the voluntary correction agreement, the city may issue a notice of civil
violation and impose monetary penalties for the time period for the violation
or violations described in the voluntary correction agreement; and
      9.   Acknowledgment by the person responsible for compliance that the
city may enter the building, structure, premises, or land and inspect the
building, structure, premises, or land as may be necessary to determine
compliance with the voluntary correction agreement; and
      10.   Acknowledgment by the person responsible for compliance that the
code enforcement officer shall have the decision making authority to determine
if corrective action has been taken in compliance with the terms and conditions
of the voluntary correction agreement; and
      11.   Acknowledgment by the person responsible for compliance that if the
code enforcement officer determines that the terms of the voluntary correction
agreement are not met, the city may enter the building, structure, premises, or
land to complete the corrective action set forth in the voluntary correction
agreement and may also recover its costs and expenses and/or a monetary penalty
pursuant to this chapter from the signatory; and
      12.   The signature or official mark of the person responsible for
compliance and the signature or official mark of the code enforcement officer.
   D.   Failure To Comply With Voluntary Correction Agreement:
      1.   Determination: The code enforcement officer shall have the authority
to determine, in his or her discretion, whether or not the signatory is in
compliance with the voluntary correction agreement. A final determination of
compliance or noncompliance shall be made in writing and shall identify that it
is a final determination.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: In the event that the code enforcement officer
has made a final determination that the signatory has failed to comply with the
terms and conditions of a voluntary correction agreement, and no appeal has
been timely filed pursuant to subsection E of this section, the city may issue
a notice of civil violation and impose monetary penalties for the underlying
violation or violations which are the subject of the voluntary correction
agreement or may, as permitted in this code, file criminal charges for the
underlying violation or violations which are subject of the voluntary
correction agreement.. The filing of an appeal of the determination of
noncompliance shall not preclude the city from pursuing any other remedies
available under this chapter or at law or in equity, including issuing a notice
of violation or infraction for each continuing violation. The city maintains
the ability to record documents associated with civil violations with the
Pierce County Auditor, and may record a voluntary correction agreement using
the property address associated with the underlying violations.
      3.   Abatement By The City: In addition to any other remedy provided for
in this chapter, the city may abate the violation in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this code and state law if the code enforcement
officer issues a determination of noncompliance.
   E.   Appeal: A person responsible for a violation who has entered into a
voluntary correction agreement may appeal the code enforcement officer's final
determination of noncompliance with the voluntary correction agreement pursuant
to the provisions of chapter 12 of this title for appeal of a final
determination of noncompliance. The filing of an appeal, as provided herein,
shall not preclude the city from taking further enforcement action. Nothing
herein shall preclude an appeal of issuance of notice of civil violation and
imposition of monetary penalties pursuant to subsection
1-13-6K of this chapter. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-6: CIVIL VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Civil Violation: A code enforcement officer may issue a notice of civil
violation when there is reasonable cause to believe that there is or has been a
violation.
   B.   Contents Of Notice Of Violation: The notice of violation shall set
forth and contain:
      1.   The name and address of the person responsible for compliance; and
      2.   The street address or a description sufficient for identification of
the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation
has occurred or is occurring; and
      3.   A description of the nature, extent, and time of the violation and a
reference to the regulation or provision of this code or uncodified city
ordinance that has been violated; and
      4.   A statement setting forth the monetary penalty imposed and each
violation or violations that are subject to such monetary penalty; and
      5.   A statement that the person to whom the notice is issued may appeal
the notice of civil violation as provided in subsection K of this section; and
      6.   A statement that a notice of civil violation issued pursuant to this
section represents a determination that the violation/violations identified in
the notice has/have been committed and that this determination is final and
conclusive unless appealed as provided in subsection K of this section.
   C.   Service: Except as provided herein, service of a notice of civil
violation shall be by personal service or by mailing. If personal service is
not accomplished after reasonable effort and if an address for mailed service
cannot be ascertained, service shall be accomplished by posting a copy of the
order conspicuously on the affected building, structure, premises, or land. If
service by posting is ineffective or cannot be lawfully accomplished, service
shall be accomplished by publication.
   D.   Effect Of Notice Of Civil Violation: A notice of civil violation issued
pursuant to this section represents a determination that the violation/
violations identified in the notice of civil violation has/have been committed.
This determination is final and conclusive as to the violation or violations
set forth in the notice of violation, unless a timely appeal is filed as
provided in subsection K of this section. If a timely appeal is not filed, such
determination shall be also be final and conclusive for any subsequent notice
of violation issued for the same continuing violation or violations; provided
that, such determination shall not preclude an appeal of the determination that
the violation or violations is/are continuing. Nothing herein is otherwise
intended to preclude timely appeal of a separate or subsequent civil regulatory
order, notice of civil violation, notice of infraction or imposition of
criminal penalties related to the same or continuing violation or violations,
to the extent an appeal may be available.
   E.   Continued Duty To Correct: Payment of a monetary penalty imposed
pursuant to this chapter does not relieve a person of the duty to correct the
violation as ordered by the code enforcement officer.
   F.   Monetary Penalty: Unless a different monetary penalty is specified in
this code or state law for a particular violation, the monetary penalty for
each violation per day or portion thereof, and each continuing day or portion
thereof, shall be as follows:
      1.   First day of each violation, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      2.   Second day of each violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00);
      3.   Third day of each violation, three hundred dollars ($300.00);
      4.   Fourth day of each violation, four hundred dollars ($400.00);
      5.   Each additional day of each violation continuing beyond four (4)
days, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day;
      6.   For each repeat violation, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day.
   G.   Mitigation Of Monetary Penalty: In the event that the person who is the
subject of the notice of violation enters into a voluntary compliance
agreement, upon approval by the city administrator, the code enforcement
officer may suspend, reduce or waive the monetary penalties imposed pursuant to
the notice of civil violation upon a showing of hardship, substantial
completion of the necessary correction, unforeseeable circumstances beyond the
control of the person responsible for compliance which render completion
impossible by the date established as a good cause, or other factors or
considerations establishing a basis for mitigation of the monetary penalty.
   H.   Other Action: In addition to the issuance of the notice of civil
violation, the city may take other enforcement action available at law or in
equity including, by way of example and not limitation, issuance of a notice of
civil infraction, seeking injunctive or declaratory relief, taking action to
seek imposition of criminal penalties, and rescission as set forth in Revised
Code Of Washington 90.58.140. The city may also combine a notice of civil
violation with a civil regulatory order. The city maintains the ability to
record documents associated with civil violations with the Pierce County
Auditor, and may record a notice of civil violation using the property address
associated with the underlying violations.
   I.   Collection Of Monetary Penalty: The monetary penalty constitutes a
personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is
directed. Any monetary penalty assessed shall be immediately due and payable
and must be paid to the city within ten (10) calendar days from the date of
service of the notice of violation. The city attorney is authorized to take
appropriate action to collect the monetary penalty. The city administrator may
issue a civil regulatory order stopping work until such penalty is paid.
   J.   Application For Remission Or Mitigation: Any person incurring a
monetary penalty for a civil violation may, within ten (10) days of service of
the notice of violation, apply in writing to the city administrator for
remission or mitigation of the monetary penalty. The city administrator shall
issue a decision on the application within fifteen (15) business days. Upon
receipt of a complete application for remission or mitigation, the city
administrator, or his/her designee, shall consider the application, together
with any information the city administrator, or his/her designee, determines is
relevant, and may remit or mitigate the penalty only upon a finding by a
preponderance of the evidence that applicant has demonstrated extraordinary
circumstances, such as the presence of information or factors not considered in
setting the original penalty. When a monetary penalty is imposed jointly by the
department of ecology and the city, the penalty may be remitted or mitigated
only upon such terms as both the department of ecology and the city agree.
   K.   Appeal: A notice of civil violation may be appealed to the hearing
examiner pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 12 of this title for
appeal of a notice of civil violation. In the event that a notice of civil
violation is combined with the civil regulatory order, payment of the monetary
penalty imposed shall be stayed during the pendency of any administrative
appeal. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-7: CIVIL REGULATORY ORDER:
   A.   In General: A code enforcement officer may issue a civil regulatory
order when there is reasonable cause to believe that there is or has been a
violation or that failure to take action or to refrain from taking action will
result in a violation. It is the policy of the city that a civil regulatory
order may be issued, in lieu of initially seeking voluntary correction or
issuing a notice of correction, when the code enforcement officer determines,
in his or her discretion, that: 1) the nature of the violation creates a risk
of imminent harm to public health or safety, or 2) the act or omission that has
caused the violation or from which the violation arose or will arise, is
continuing or ongoing, or 3) issuance of a civil regulatory order is necessary
to prevent future or continuing violations, or 4) issuance of a civil
regulatory order is necessary to prevent imminent harm to persons or property,
or 5) issuance of a written correction notice would be ineffective or futile.
The failure of the code enforcement officer to seek voluntary correction prior
to issuance of a civil regulatory order shall not invalidate any action taken
by the code enforcement officer or the city pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Content Of Civil Regulatory Order: The order shall set forth and
contain:
      1.   The name and address of the person responsible for compliance with
the order; and
      2.   The street address or a description sufficient for identification of
the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation
will occur, has occurred or is occurring; and
      3.   A description of the nature, extent, and time of the violation and a
reference to the regulation or provision of this code or uncodified city
ordinance that has been or may be violated; and
      4.   An order that the act or omission or use causing or leading to a
violation or a potential violation shall immediately cease and desist and/or,
in appropriate cases, an order to take specific corrective action within a
specific and reasonable time, which corrective action may include, but is not
limited to, abatement, remediation, correction, and/or mitigation of the site
and other property damaged; and
      5.   A statement that the person to whom the civil regulatory order is
issued may appeal the civil regulatory order as provided in subsection L of
this section; and
      6.   A statement that a civil regulatory order represents a determination
that the violation/violations identified in the civil regulatory order has/have
been committed, and that this determination is final and conclusive unless
appealed; and
      7.   In the event that the civil regulatory order is combined with a
notice of civil violation, the order shall include a statement of the monetary
penalty imposed and each violation or violations that are subject to such
monetary penalty.
   C.   Service: Except as provided herein, service of a civil regulatory order
shall be by personal service or by mailing. If personal service is not
accomplished after reasonable efforts and if an address for mailed service
cannot be ascertained, service shall be accomplished by posting a copy of the
order conspicuously on the affected building, structure, premises, or land. If
service by posting is ineffective or cannot be lawfully accomplished, service
shall be accomplished by publication.
   D.   Effective Date: An order issued under this section shall become
effective immediately upon service of the order upon the person to whom it is
directed.
   E.   Effect Of Civil Regulatory Order: A civil regulatory order represents a
determination that the violation/violations identified in the civil regulatory
order has/have been committed. This determination is final and conclusive
unless appealed as provided herein; provided that, nothing herein is intended
to preclude timely appeal of a separate or subsequent order, notice of civil
violation, notice of infraction or imposition of criminal penalties related to
the same or continuing violation or violations, to the extent an appeal may be
available.
   F.   Extension: Upon written request received prior to the correction date
or time, the code enforcement officer may extend the date set for correction
for good cause or in order to accommodate a voluntary correction agreement. The
code enforcement officer may consider substantial completion of the necessary
correction or unforeseeable circumstances which render completion impossible by
the date established as a good cause.
   G.   Violation; Unlawful: When a civil regulatory order has been issued,
posted and/or served pursuant to this section, it is unlawful for any person to
whom the order is directed or any person with actual or constructive knowledge
of the order to conduct any activity or perform any work prohibited by the
terms of the order, even if the order has been appealed, until the enforcement
officer has removed the copy of the order, if posted, and issued written
authorization for the activity or work to be resumed.
   H.   Removal Of Civil Regulatory Order; Violation: It shall be unlawful to
remove a civil regulatory order posted in conformity with the requirements of
this chapter without the prior authorization of a code enforcement officer or
public official of the city, the city hearing examiner, or an order of a court
with jurisdiction.
   I.   Compliance; Violation: It is unlawful to fail to comply with the terms
and conditions of the civil regulatory order. Failure to comply with a civil
regulatory order can result in enforcement actions including, but not limited
to, the issuance of a notice of civil violation, issuance of a civil
infraction, and imposition of criminal penalties.
   J.   Other Action: In addition to the issuance of the civil regulatory
order, the city may take other enforcement action available at law or in equity
including, by way of example and not limitation, issuance of a notice of civil
violation and penalties, issuance of a civil infraction, seeking injunctive or
declaratory relief, imposition of criminal penalties, modification or
revocation of the project permit or approval, and rescission as set forth in
Revised Code Of Washington 90.58.140. The city may also combine a notice of
civil violation with a civil regulatory order. The city maintains the ability
to record documents associated with civil violations with the Pierce County
Auditor, and may record a notice of civil regulatory order under a property
with underlying violations.
   K.   Revocation Of Project Permit Or Approval:
      1.   Order Of Revocation/ Rescission: The code enforcement officer may
issue a civil regulatory order revoking or rescinding a project permit or
approval if the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that:
a) the project permit or approval was obtained in violation of subsection 1-13-
8B of this chapter (fraud; deception), or b) no reasonable conditions can be
imposed that would abate or mitigate a violation, or c) the person responsible
for compliance has failed to comply with the conditions of the project permit
or approval. The person responsible for compliance shall cease all activity
allowed by the project permit or approval upon service of the civil regulatory
order revoking the project permit and exhaustion of all administrative appeals
of such order.
      2.   Notice; Hearing: A decision to rescind a project permit or approval
issued pursuant to title 11, chapter 6, "Shoreline Master Program", of this
code shall be subject to the requirements of Revised Code Of Washington
90.58.140.
      3.   Reapplication: If a project permit or approval is revoked for fraud
or deception, no similar application shall be accepted for a period of one year
from the later of the date of service of the order of revocation, or finding
and nonappealable decision upon appeal, if any. If a permit or approval is
revoked for any other reason, another application may be submitted subject to
all of the applicable requirements of the development code.
   L.   Appeal: A civil regulatory order may be appealed to the hearing
examiner pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 12 of this title for
appeal of a civil regulatory order. In the event that a notice of civil
violation is combined with the civil regulatory order, payment of the monetary
penalty imposed shall be stayed during the pendency of any administrative
appeal. In the event of a notice of appeal of an order revoking or rescinding a
project permit or approval, the order shall be stayed during the pendency of
any administrative appeal. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-
2025)
1-13-8: ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Interference With Code Enforcement Unlawful; Misdemeanor: Any person
who intentionally obstructs, impedes or interferes with any lawful attempt to
serve a notice of civil violation, notice of civil infraction or civil
regulatory order, or intentionally obstructs, impedes or interferes with lawful
attempts to correct a violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Fraud; Deception; Knowingly Falsify; Gross Misdemeanor: Any person who
shall knowingly and falsely make, complete, or alter a written instrument
required by a regulation or a provision of the development code shall be guilty
of a gross misdemeanor. Proof of intent to defraud or injure is not required.
      For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning given herein:
      COMPLETE WRITTEN INSTRUMENT: One which is fully drawn with respect to
every essential feature thereof; "incomplete written instrument" means one
which contains some matter by way of content or authentication but which
requires additional matter in order to render it a complete written instrument.
      FALSELY COMPLETE A WRITTEN INSTRUMENT: To transform an incomplete written
instrument into a complete one by adding or inserting matter, without the
authority of anyone entitled to grant it; and, to "falsely alter" a written
instrument means to change, without authorization by anyone entitled to grant
it, a written instrument, whether complete or incomplete, by means of erasure,
obliteration, deletion, insertion of new matter, transposition of matter, or in
any other manner.
      FALSELY MAKE A WRITTEN INSTRUMENT: To make or draw a complete or
incomplete written instrument which purports to be authentic, but which is not
authentic either because the ostensible maker is fictitious or because, if
real, the maker did not authorize the making or drawing thereof.
      WRITTEN INSTRUMENT: Any paper, document, or other instrument containing
written or printed matter or its equivalent, or any stamp, seal, certification,
trademark, or other evidence or symbol of value, right, privilege, or
identification.
   C.   Transfer Of Ownership; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful for the owner
of any building, structure, premises or land who has received a civil
regulatory order or upon whom a notice of violation or correction notice has
been served pursuant to this chapter to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such building, structure, premises or land to another
until the provisions of the civil regulatory order, correction notice or notice
of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish
the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any civil
regulatory order, correction notice or notice of violation issued by the code
enforcement officer and shall furnish to the code enforcement officer a signed
and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such civil regulatory order, correction notice or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition
for making the corrections or repairs required by such civil regulatory order,
correction notice or notice of violation. A violation of the provisions of this
subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-13-9: CORPORATE AND PERSONAL LIABILITY:
   A.   As used in this section:
      AGENT: Any director, officer or employee of a corporation, or any other
person who is authorized to act on behalf of the corporation.
      CORPORATION: Includes a firm, business, association, partnership, limited
liability company, joint stock association, corporation or other legal entity,
public or private, however organized.
      HIGH MANAGERIAL AGENT: An officer or director of a corporation or any
other agent in a position of authority with respect to the formulation of
corporate policy or the supervision in a managerial capacity of subordinate
employees.
   B.   A corporation is strictly liable for the acts or omissions of its
agents that constitute a civil violation.
   C.   A corporation is guilty of a criminal offense when:
      1.   The act or omission constituting the offense consists of an omission
to discharge a specific duty of performance imposed on corporations by law; or
      2.   The act or omission constituting the offense is engaged in,
authorized, solicited, requested, commanded, or tolerated by the board of
directors or by a high managerial agent acting within the scope of his
employment and on behalf of the corporation; or
      3.   The act or omission constituting the offense is engaged in by an
agent of the corporation, other than a high managerial agent, while acting
within the scope of his employment and in behalf of the corporation and: a) the
offense is a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor, or b) the offense is one defined
by this code which clearly indicates an intent to impose such criminal
liability on a corporation.
   D.   A person is civilly liable for an act or omission constituting a
violation which he or she performs or causes to be performed in the name of or
on behalf of a corporation to the same extent as if such conduct were performed
in his or her own name or behalf.
   E.   A person is criminally liable for an act or omission constituting a
criminal offense which he or she performs or causes to be performed in the name
of or on behalf of a corporation to the same extent as if such conduct were
performed in his or her own name or behalf.
   F.   Whenever a duty to act is imposed by law upon a corporation, any agent
of the corporation who knows he or she has or shares primary responsibility for
the discharge of the duty is criminally liable for a reckless or, if a high
managerial agent, criminally negligent omission to perform the required act to
the same extent as if the duty were by law imposed directly upon such agent.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
CHAPTER 14
INDEMNIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES AND OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-14-1: Definitions
1-14-2: Legal Representation
1-14-3: Exclusions
1-14-4: Determination Of Exclusion
1-14-5: Representation And Payment Of Claims; Conditions
1-14-6: Effect Of Compliance With Conditions
1-14-7: Failure To Comply With Conditions
1-14-8: Reimbursement Of Incurred Expenses
1-14-9: Conflict With Provisions Of Insurance Policy
1-14-10: Pending Claims
1-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the following meanings:
   EMPLOYEE: Any person who is or has been employed by the city.
   OFFICIAL: Any person who is serving or has served as an elected city
official, and any person who is serving or has served as an appointed member of
any city board, commission, committee or other appointed position with the
city.
   VOLUNTEER: A volunteer as defined in Revised Code Of Washington 51.12.035,
as amended. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-2: LEGAL REPRESENTATION:
   A.   As a condition of service or employment the city shall provide to an
official, employee, or volunteer subject to the conditions and requirements of
this chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that such official, employee, or
volunteer may have concluded service or employment with the city, such legal
representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend a claim or lawsuit
filed against such official, employee, or volunteer resulting from any conduct,
act or omission of such official, employee, or volunteer performed or omitted
on behalf of the city in his capacity as a city official, employee, or
volunteer which act or omission is within the scope of his service or
employment with the city. Legal representation shall also be provided to the
spouse of such official, employee or volunteer when a lawsuit is also filed
against the spouse and community property of the official, employee or
volunteer. This chapter is subject to repeal or modification at the sole
discretion of the city council.
   B.   The legal services shall be provided by the office of the city attorney
unless:
      1.   Any provision of an applicable policy of insurance provides
otherwise; or
      2.   A conflict of interest or ethical bar exists with respect to said
representation as identified by the office of the city attorney.
      3.   A councilmember brings a motion to council requesting the services
of a special outside city attorney for a specific matter and such motion is
supported by a majority of council.
   C.   In the event that outside counsel is retained under subsection B2 of
this section, the city shall indemnify the employee or official from the
reasonable costs of defense provided that the retained counsel enters into
contract with the city to provide such representation prior to the start of the
representation. In no event shall the officer or employee be indemnified for
attorney fees incurred for counsel retained outside of a contract with the
city. The officer or employee shall be liable for all representation charges
for outside counsel that is not retained under a contract with the city or that
is not approved by a majority of council. Should a councilmember retain outside
counsel without a city contract, the city will not share privileged information
with the outside counsel. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-3: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   In no event shall legal defense or indemnification be offered under
this chapter by the city to:
      1.   Any dishonest, fraudulent, criminal, wilful, intentional or
malicious act or course of conduct of an official or employee;
      2.   Any act or course of conduct of an official or employee, which is
not performed on behalf of the city;
      3.   Any act or course of conduct which is outside the scope of an
official's or employee's service or employment with the city; and/or
      4.   Any lawsuit brought against an official or employee by or on behalf
of the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive or impair the right of
the city council to institute suit or counterclaim against any official or
employee nor to limit its ability to discipline or terminate an employee.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall have no force or effect with
respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance for which the city or the
official or employee is insured against loss or damages under the terms of any
valid insurance policy or a similar loss coverage policy, provided that this
chapter shall provide protection, subject to its terms and limitations, above
any loss limit of such policy. The provisions of this chapter are intended to
be secondary to any contract or policy of insurance owned or applicable to any
official or employee. An employee or official shall utilize any such policy
protection prior to requesting the protection afforded by this chapter. (Ord.
2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-4: DETERMINATION OF EXCLUSION:
The determination of whether an official or employee shall be afforded a
defense by the city under the terms of this chapter shall be determined by the
city council on the recommendation of the mayor. The decision of the city
council shall be final as a legislative determination of the council. Nothing
herein shall preclude the city from undertaking an officer's or employee's
defense under a reservation of rights. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-
1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-5: REPRESENTATION AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS; CONDITIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only when the following conditions
are met:
   A.   In the event of any incident or course of conduct potentially giving
rise to a claim for damage, or the commencement of a suit, the official or
employee involved shall, as soon as practicable, give the city attorney written
notice thereof, identifying the official or employee involved, all information
known to the official or employee involved with respect to the date, time,
place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct giving rise to the
claim or lawsuit, as well as the names and addresses of all persons allegedly
injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all
witnesses;
   B.   Upon receipt thereof, the official or employee shall deliver any claim,
demand, notice or summons or other process relating to any such incident or
conduct to the city attorney, and shall cooperate with the city attorney or an
attorney designated by the city attorney, and, upon request, assist in making
settlement of any suit and enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation
against any persons or organizations that may be liable to the city because of
any damage or claim of loss arising from said incident or course of conduct,
including, but not limited to, rights of recovery for costs and attorney fees
arising out of any state or federal statute upon a determination that the suit
brought is frivolous in nature;
   C.   Such official or employee shall attend interviews, depositions,
hearings and trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and
obtaining attendance of witnesses all without any additional compensation to
the official or employee, and in the event that an employee has left the employ
of the city, no fee or compensation shall be provided; and
   D.   Such official or employee shall not accept nor voluntarily make any
payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense relating to said claim or
suit, other than for first aid to others at the time of any incident or course
of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss, or damage. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-
2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-6: EFFECT OF COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS:
If legal representation of an official or employee is undertaken by the city
attorney, all of the conditions of representation are met, and a judgment is
entered against the official or employee, or a settlement made, the city shall
pay such judgment or settlement, provided, that the city may, at its
discretion, appeal as necessary such judgment. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-7: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH CONDITIONS:
In the event that any official or employee fails or refuses to comply with any
of the conditions of this chapter, or elects to provide his/her own
representation with respect to any such claim or litigation, then all of the
provisions of this chapter shall be inapplicable, and have no force or effect
with respect to any such claim or litigation. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd.
2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-8: REIMBURSEMENT OF INCURRED EXPENSES:
   A.   If the city determines that an official or employee does not come
within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction
later determines that such claim does come within the provisions of this
chapter, then the city shall pay any judgment rendered against the official or
employee and reasonable attorney fees incurred in defending against the claim.
The city shall pay any attorney fees incurred in obtaining the determination
that such claim is covered by the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   If the city determines that a claim against a city official or employee
does come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent
jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions of
this chapter, then the official or employee involved shall reimburse the city
for any judgment, costs or expenses, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the city in defending the official or employee against the claim.
(Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-9: CONFLICT WITH PROVISIONS OF INSURANCE POLICY:
   A.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend
any provision of any policy of insurance where any city official or employee
thereof is the named insured. In the event of any conflict between this chapter
and the provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall
be controlling; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall
be deemed to limit or restrict any employee's or official's right to full
coverage pursuant to this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter and
section to provide the coverage detailed in this chapter outside and beyond
insurance policies which may be in effect, while not compromising the terms and
conditions of such policies by any conflicting provision contained in this
chapter.
   B.   If a bargaining unit contract covers the subject of any of the
provisions of this chapter, all employees subject to the contract shall be
governed by the terms of the contract. If there is a conflict between the
contract provisions and this chapter, the contract provisions shall control.
(Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
1-14-10: PENDING CLAIMS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any pending claim or lawsuit
against an official or employee, or any such claim or lawsuit hereafter filed,
irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis of
such claim or lawsuit. (Ord. 2015-970, 9-9-2015; amd. 2025-1144, 7-30-2025)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created
2-1-2: Terms Of Office
2-1-3: Vacancies; Removal From Office
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created, in accordance with Revised Code of Washington 35A.63,
a planning commission for the city which will consist of seven (7) members, two
(2) of whom may be nonresident owners of real property within the city, to be
appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. (Ord. 783, 1-8-2004)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The existing members of the planning commission shall be deemed the planning
commission and the members thereof shall continue to serve for their full
terms. Terms shall be for a period of four (4) years. (Ord. 641, 4-14-1994)
2-1-3: VACANCIES; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be
filled for unexpired terms. Members may be removed, after public hearing, by
the mayor, with the approval of the city council, for inefficiency, neglect of
duty or malfeasance in office. (Ord. 641, 4-14-1994)
CHAPTER 2
POLICE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Established; Appointment
2-2-2: Membership, General Provisions
2-2-3: Organization; Officers
2-2-4: Duties And Requirements To Make And Maintain Rules
2-2-5: Applicability To Police Department
2-2-6: Creation Of Positions By Mayor And City Council
2-2-7: Representation By City Attorney
2-2-8: Officers And Employees To Aid Commission
2-2-9: Accommodations Provided By City
2-2-10: Violation; Penalty
2-2-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
The Civil Service Commission for all full time law enforcement, police officer,
and civilian (nonlaw enforcement and nonpolice officer) employees of the Police
Department, created pursuant to chapter 41.12 Revised Code of Washington, shall
be composed of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
members of the Civil Service Commission shall hold office as provided in, and
shall have and exercise all powers and duties prescribed by chapter 41.12
Revised Code of Washington. (Ord. 2015-976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP, GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Compensation: Persons appointed to the commission shall serve without
compensation.
   B.   Qualifications: No person shall be appointed a member of such
commission who is not a citizen of the United States, a resident of the City
for at least three (3) years immediately preceding such appointment, and an
elector of Pierce County.
   C.   Terms: The term of office of the members of the commission shall be for
six (6) years; however, in the event of the death, removal or resignation of a
Commissioner, the appointment made to fill the position shall be only for that
Commissioner's unexpired portion of the six (6) year term.
   D.   Removal From Office; Hearing: Any member of the commission may be
removed from office by the appointing authority for incompetency,
incompatibility or dereliction of duty, malfeasance or misfeasance in office,
or other good cause; provided, that no member of the commission shall be
removed until charges have been preferred in writing, due notice given to the
commission member, and a full hearing held by the appointing authority.
   E.   Performance Of Duties: The members of the commission shall devote due
time and attention to the performance of the duties specified in this chapter
and imposed upon them by this chapter.
   F.   Quorum: Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The votes of the
majority of the members of the commission concurring shall be sufficient for
the decision of all matters and the transaction of all business to be decided
or transacted by the commission under or by virtue of the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, in hearings of appeals on employee discipline or
discharge, a majority of a quorum hearing the matter (e.g., 2 of 3
Commissioners) shall be sufficient for ruling. (Ord. 2015-976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS:
   A.   Chairperson Designated; Meetings: Immediately after appointment of the
commission, the members shall organize by electing one of its members as
Chairperson and hold meetings as may be required for the proper discharge of
their duties.
   B.   Secretary:
      1.   Appointment; Duties: The commission shall appoint a Secretary and
chief examiner who shall keep the records for the commission, preserve all
reports made to it, superintend and keep a record of all examinations held
under its direction, and perform such other duties as the commission may
prescribe pursuant to this chapter. The Secretary and chief examiner shall be
appointed pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 41.12.040.
      2.   Suspension Or Discharge: The Secretary may be subject to suspension,
reduction, or discharge as relates to his/her duties for the commission in the
same manner and subject to the same limitations as are provided in the case of
members of the Police Department. (Ord. 2018-1021, 1-31-2018)
2-2-4: DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS TO MAKE AND MAINTAIN RULES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of the commission to make and maintain
suitable rules and regulations not inconsistent with the purpose of this
chapter, for the purpose of carrying the provisions of this chapter into
effect.
   B.   Duties Enumerated; Requirements:
      1.   Rules And Regulations: The commission shall make suitable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of Revised Code of Washington
41.12 and this chapter and necessary for this chapter's implementation as it
relates to full time employees of the Police Department. Such rules and
regulations shall provide the manner in which examinations may be held, and how
appointments, promotions, transfers, reinstatements, demotions, suspensions and
discharges shall be made where such rules and regulations are not provided in
detail within this chapter or subsequent amendments adopted by ordinance.
Further, the commission may provide for any other matter, which may be
considered desirable to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Such rules and
regulations may be changed from time to time. All rules and regulations and
amendments thereof shall be printed and copies made available to the public
upon request.
   C.   Scope And Purpose: The commission's rules shall govern the continuing
administration of the civil service system of the city and the terms and
conditions of civil service employment in the city. The purpose of such rules
is to assure that the civil service system in the city is administered in
accordance with Revised Code Of Washington chapter 41.12 and ordinances of the
city, and that all proceedings before the commission are conducted in an
orderly, fair and timely manner. The purpose of a civil service system created
pursuant to state law is to establish a system to provide for promotion on the
basis of merit, give police officers tenure, and provide for a civil service
commission to administer the system, and to investigate by public hearing,
removals, suspensions, demotions, and discharges by the appointing power to
determine whether such action was or was not made for political or religious
reasons and whether it was or was not made in good faith for cause.
The civil service system is intended to protect the honest and efficient public
employee from adverse discriminatory action, whether from political or other
improper motive, and thus to secure for the people the services of honest,
efficient and experienced public employees. At the same time it is intended
that the administrative officers shall have ample authority to correct where
possible, and to remove when necessary, dishonest or inefficient employees
without placing upon the administrators an impractical or unfair burden in the
discharge of such duties.
The objective and intent of civil service rules is to establish personnel
policies and procedures that will ensure to the people of Orting the maximum in
honest and efficient public service by attracting to and retaining in the
city's classified service the most qualified and highest motivated employees
available.
   D.   Presumption Of Validity: The civil service system implemented by this
chapter substantially accomplishes the purpose of chapter 41.12 Revised Code Of
Washington. Variation from state models are based on local conditions and are
intended to maintain the purposes of civil service systems: merit selection,
tenure, and an independent civil service commission. The commission's rules are
presumed to be valid and shall be upheld unless in direct conflict with the
purpose of chapter 41.12 Revised Code Of Washington.
   E.   Interpretation: The commission has the power and authority to interpret
its rules. (Ord. 2015-976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-5: APPLICABILITY TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The classified civil service and provisions of this chapter shall only include
all full time employees of the police department, excluding the chief of
police. All appointments to and promotions in classifications within the
departments shall be made solely on merit, efficiency and fitness, which shall
be ascertained by open competitive examination and impartial investigation. The
commission shall have no jurisdiction of assignments of positions or duties
within departments. No person shall be reinstated or transferred, suspended or
discharged from any such full time, monthly salaried place, position or
employment contrary to the provisions of this chapter and Revised Code Of
Washington chapter 41.12.
To further enable the appointing powers to exercise a choice in the filling of
positions, no appointment, employment, or promotion in any position in the
classified service shall be deemed complete until a period of probationary
service as specified in the collective bargaining agreement as applicable to
employees of the city police department has been completed, during which time
the appointing authority may terminate the employment of the person appointed
if, during the performance test thus offered, upon observation or consideration
of the performance of duty, the appointing power deems this person unfit or
unsatisfactory for service in the department. Whereupon the appointing power
shall again request the names of five (5) qualified applicants, who likewise
shall enter upon the duties until some person is found who is deemed fit for
appointment, employment or promotion for the probationary period provided
therefor, whereupon the appointment, employment, or promotion shall be deemed
to be complete. (Ord. 2015-976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-6: CREATION OF POSITIONS BY MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL:
All offices, places and positions coming within the purview of this chapter
shall be created by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and
nothing contained in this chapter shall infringe upon the power and authority
of the mayor and city council to create or eliminate positions, or fix the
salaries and compensation of all employees employed hereunder. (Ord. 2015-976,
12-9-2015)
2-2-7: REPRESENTATION BY CITY ATTORNEY:
The commission shall be advised in the performance of its duties as outlined in
this chapter by the attorney for the city. The commission, with the approval of
the mayor, may appoint special counsel to represent it where a conflict of
interest may prohibit the city attorney from representing the commission. (Ord.
2015-976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-8: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO AID COMMISSION:
Consistent with Revised Code Of Washington 41.12.190, it shall be the duty of
all officers and employees of the city to aid in all proper ways of carrying
out the provisions of this chapter, and such rules and regulations as may from
time to time be prescribed by the commission thereunder, and to afford the
commission, its members and employees all reasonable facilities and assistance
to inspect books, papers, documents and accounts applying to any offices,
places, positions and employments, subject to civil service, and also to
produce the books, papers, documents and accounts, and attend and testify,
whenever required to do so by the commission or any commissioner. (Ord. 2015-
976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-9: ACCOMMODATIONS PROVIDED BY CITY:
Consistent with Revised Code Of Washington 41.12.190, the duly constituted
authorities of the city shall provide the commission with suitable and
convenient rooms and accommodations and cause the same to be furnished, heated
and lighted and supplied with office supplies and equipment necessary to carry
on the business of the commission and with such clerical assistance as may be
necessary, all of which is to be commensurate with the number of persons in the
city coming within the purview of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-976, 12-9-2015)
2-2-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
As provided in Revised Code Of Washington 41.12.210, any person who wilfully
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2015-976, 12-9-2015)
CHAPTER 3
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER PENSION BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Board Established; Membership
2-3-2: Powers And Duties
2-3-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby established a board of trustees as set forth in Revised Code Of
Washington chapter 41.24, consisting of the mayor, city clerk, and the deputy
mayor. (Ord. 959, 6-25-2014)
2-3-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of trustees shall be responsible for the duties required of them
pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 41.24.080, and subsequent amendments
thereto, and shall keep such reports and records as required by law. (1973 Code
§ 2.10.020)
CHAPTER 4
CEMETERY BOARD; REGULATIONS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Cemetery Established
2-4-2: Definitions
2-4-3: Board Of Managers
2-4-4: Cemetery Fund Established
2-4-5: Death Certificate Requirements
2-4-6: Cemetery Lots And Niches
2-4-7: Failure To Pay For Graves, Niches And/Or Services
2-4-8: Opening The Casket
2-4-9: Interment Or Disinterment Requirements
2-4-10: Monument And Marker Restrictions
2-4-11: Disposition Of Unused Or Abandoned Lots
2-4-12: Decorations
2-4-13: General Grave And Niche Regulations And Specifications
2-4-14: Conduct Of Visitors
2-4-15: Care Of Grounds
2-4-16: Prohibition And Removal Of Objects
2-4-17: Donations Of Shrubbery Or Other Articles
2-4-18: Roads And Lanes In Cemetery
2-4-19: Miscellaneous Provisions
2-4-20: Enforcement Of Rules And Regulations
2-4-21: Violation; Penalty
2-4-1: CEMETERY ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of a public burial ground, there is established and created a
public cemetery to be known as "the Orting Cemetery". (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-
2015)
2-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
BURIAL: The placement of human remains in a grave.
CARETAKER: City of Orting employees or appointees of the city who are
responsible for maintenance and care of the cemetery and cemetery grounds.
CEMETERY: The burial ground commonly known as the Orting Cemetery, intended to
be used for the placement of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes:
   A.   All land dedicated, reserved or used for the interment of human
remains;
   B.   All vegetation therein;
   C.   All graves, crypts, columbaria, niches or other interment spaces
therein;
   D.   All works of art, memorials or other objects therein;
   E.   All roads, walkways and other structures of every kind therein;
   F.   All equipment and facilities incidental to the operation of the Orting
Cemetery.
CITY: City of Orting.
COLUMBARIUM OR COLUMBARIA: A structure, room or other space in a building or
structure containing niches for permanent placement of cremated human remains
in a place used, or intended to be used, and dedicated for cemetery purposes.
CREMATED HUMAN REMAINS: The end products of cremation.
CREMATION: The reduction of human remains to bone fragments in a crematory by
means of incineration.
CURBING: Any constructed border and/or interior of a grave or lot, however
marked, including, but not limited to, cement, concrete, stones, wood or other
materials.
DISINTERMENT: The removal of human remains in a cemetery.
GRAVE: A space of ground in a burial park or cemetery, used or intended to be
used for burial.
GRAVE OWNER OR OWNER: Any person in whose name an interment right stands of
record as owner, in the records of the cemetery at Orting City Hall.
HUMAN REMAINS OR REMAINS: The body of a deceased person, includes the body in
any stage of decomposition, and includes cremated human remains.
INTERMENT: The placement of human remains in a cemetery.
INTERMENT RIGHT: The right to inter human remains in a particular space in a
cemetery. Interment right also refers to interment rights that were acquired
through "cemetery deeds" that were previously issued under the prior cemetery
code.
LOT OR PLOT: Space in a cemetery, used or intended to be used for the interment
of human remains.
MAINTENANCE: The routine cleaning of cemetery areas. This shall include grass
mowing and trimming, weeding, raking, and the changing or cleaning of marble
chips, lava rock, cinder rock or beauty bark. Maintenance shall not include
structural changes other than the columbaria, which the city will maintain and
repair as needed.
MEMORIAL: A monument, tombstone, grave marker, tablet or headstone identifying
a grave or graves or a nameplate or inscription identifying a niche to preserve
remembrance.
NICHE: A space in a columbarium for placement of cremated human remains.
OWNER OF INTERMENT RIGHTS: Any person who is listed as the owner of record of a
right or rights of interment in the office of the Orting Cemetery.
REINTERMENT: The act of placing human remains back into a cemetery after
disinterment.
STRUCTURAL CHANGES: Any repair, removal or establishment of any curbing,
structures, gravestones, plaques, effigies, statues, and any other markers or
fencing located in or about the cemetery. It shall also include the use of
cement or concrete. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-3: BOARD OF MANAGERS:
   A.   Board Created; Appointment: There is hereby created a board of managers
of the cemetery which shall consist of the mayor, who shall be ex officio
chairperson of the board, two (2) members of the city council, and one city
staff member, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
city council. The mayor and city council members shall hold the position during
their terms in office and the staff person shall serve at the pleasure of the
mayor.
   B.   Powers And Authority: The board of managers of the cemetery shall have
full power and authority, under the general supervision of the city council, to
make any and all policies, regulations and rules that it deems necessary for
the proper conduct and operation of the cemetery, to assign help and assistants
as may be needed from time to time, to recommend their compensation, and
generally to perform any and all acts for the efficient operation of the
cemetery. The city expressly reserves the right to make from time to time such
additional rules and regulations as may be desirable in the public interest.
(Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-4: CEMETERY FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is created and established a special fund of the city, known as the
"cemetery fund", in which shall be placed all monies received from the sale of
niches, lots or parts thereof, in the cemetery, from gifts, bequests or
donations to the city for cemetery uses, and from which all disbursements shall
be made for cemetery uses and purposes. For maintenance and perpetual care of
lots, graves, columbaria and niches in the cemetery, thirty percent (30%) of
the income from the sale of graves and lots therein, together with all
donations thereto, shall be placed in the "irreducible cemetery fund" and shall
be kept invested in safe, interest bearing securities, and the interest derived
therefrom shall be used to maintain and care for the cemetery, and for no other
purpose. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-5: DEATH CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS:
No interment will be permitted without the proper death certificate and/or
burial permit as required by the health authorities and laws of the state of
Washington. Cremated remains must be accompanied by a copy of the burial or
transit permit or other document acceptable to the cemetery to certify identity
of the cremated remains. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-6: CEMETERY LOTS AND NICHES:
   A.   Right Of Interment: The purchaser of a grave, lot or other parcel of
ground, including niches, is granted or conveyed only the right of interment of
human remains and the right of installation of a memorial on each lot, grave or
other parcel of ground, including niches. The owner of the right of interment
does not possess a fee interest or any other interest in the land itself. Title
and rights to interment shall be governed by chapter 68.32 Revised Code Of
Washington, as now existing or as hereafter amended or adopted.
   B.   Purchase; Interment Rights: For each grave, lot or other parcel of
ground sold in the cemetery, including niches, a "certificate of ownership -
interment rights" (hereinafter "certificate") shall be issued to the purchaser
thereof, which shall be signed by the mayor and city clerk as are other
conveyances for the city. No certificate shall be delivered until the purchase
price of the grave, lot or niche has been fully paid to the city. Previously
issued "cemetery deeds" that were provided pursuant to the former cemetery code
will still be honored. Any reference to interment rights throughout this code
shall also refer to previously issued cemetery deeds.
   C.   Resale Of Lots To City: No cemetery lot, tract, grave space or niche
purchased from the city shall be resold to any person other than the city. The
city will return, upon written application, the purchase price of any lot,
tract, grave space or niche at the price originally charged by the city. (Ord.
2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-7: FAILURE TO PAY FOR GRAVES, NICHES AND/OR SERVICES:
Failure, refusal or neglect to pay for graves, lots, niches or services after
interment on terms agreed upon will work as a forfeiture of all title or
interest in a grave, lot or niche and the same shall revert to the cemetery,
and the city council may, after giving due notice of such intention, cause any
bodies to be disinterred and moved to another location in the cemetery, and
such reburial shall constitute full compensation for any money or fees that may
have been received by the cemetery. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-8: OPENING THE CASKET:
Once a casket containing remains is within the boundaries of the cemetery, the
city reserves the right to refuse permission to all persons to open the casket
or to touch the remains without the consent of a legal representative of the
deceased or a court order. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-9: INTERMENT OR DISINTERMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Interments And Disinterments: No person or persons except bona fide
employees of the city or a city approved contractor with suitable equipment and
ability to perform may dig any grave or make any interment or disinterment in
the Orting Cemetery. All contractor interments and disinterments shall be under
the direction of the caretaker. Owners of graves or niches must arrange for
such interment or disinterment with the city public works director. No
interments or disinterments may be made unless all fees for interment rights
and for services have been paid or satisfactorily arranged for with the public
works director. No interments, disinterments or removals shall be permitted on
Sunday or any holiday observed by the city except in case of contagious disease
as required by law or by special approval from the public works director.
   B.   Requirements For Disinterment:
      1.   Approval Of Nearest Kin: Signed affidavit(s) of the nearest kin
approving the disinterment or removal.
      2.   Approval Of Lot Holder: Signed approval of the lot holder or their
lawful representative.
      3.   Disinterment Permit: Disinterment permit from city and any other
necessary state and county approvals and/or permits.
      4.   Interment Right: The desired interment right must be identified; all
charges for disinterment and reinterment, together with all other charges due,
must be paid.
      5.   Remains From Other Cemeteries: Remains removed from other cemeteries
and brought to the Orting Cemetery for reinterment must be accompanied by the
proper paperwork and permits required by law.
      6.   Liability: The city will exercise utmost care in making a
disinterment, but assumes no liability for damage to any casket, vault, liner,
grave box or any other burial case in making the removal or disinterment.
      7.   Outer Case Replacement: When, in the opinion of the city, a new
outside box is needed, it must be provided by the person arranging for the
removal, at the time of reinterment, through the cemetery.
      8.   Prior Notice: At least one week's prior notice is required for any
disinterment or removal, after compliance with the rules and regulations.
      9.   Removal For Profit Prohibited: Removal by the heirs of any remains
so that the lot may be sold for profit is not permitted. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-
2015)
2-4-10: MONUMENT AND MARKER RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Right To Prohibit: The city reserves the right to prohibit the erection
of any vault, monument, headstone, tablet, or other marker that may be
considered inappropriate in material, design, workmanship or location.
   B.   Placement: All monuments, headstones, markers or other memorials are to
be set flush with the ground to facilitate the mowing and care of the cemetery.
   C.   Set By Employees: All monuments, headstones, columbaria, niches,
markers or other memorials will be set by employees of the city or shall be
installed by a city approved contractor/supplier with suitable equipment and
ability to perform. No other person or persons will be allowed to do such work.
All contractor/supplier installed monuments, headstones or markers shall be
installed under the direction of the caretaker. All installation charges shall
be made in accordance with the size of the monument, marker, headstone, niche,
etc. installed.
   D.   Temporary And Permanent Markers: Grave owners are responsible to
install temporary markers on all graves within ten (10) days of interment.
Permanent markers must be placed on graves within eighteen (18) months of
interment.
   E.   Grave Owner Responsibility: Grave owners must keep in good repair all
stones or monumental work upon the grave. The city does not bind itself to
maintain, repair or replace any grave marker or monumental structures erected
upon the grave other than damage to grave markers or monumental structures
caused by the city in which case the city will repair the stones or monumental
work. Repairs that are necessary due to normal wear and tear of stones or
monumental work will be the responsibility of the grave owner.
   F.   Right To Remove Monuments, Headstones, Markers: The city reserves the
right to exclude or remove from any grave, any headstone, monument, marker or
other structure which may conflict with these regulations or which the city may
consider injurious to the general appearance of the grounds. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-
29-2015)
2-4-11: DISPOSITION OF UNUSED OR ABANDONED LOTS:
   A.   Abandoned Interment Rights: To preserve the active nature of the
cemetery, any interment space will be deemed abandoned if there is no recorded
activity on the space for a period of one hundred (100) years. Any interment
space deemed abandoned may be reclaimed by the cemetery and disposed of as the
cemetery sees fit.
   B.   Disposition Of Unused Rights: Should a holder of unused interment space
no longer need the space in the cemetery they may sell the space back to the
cemetery at the original purchase price. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-12: DECORATIONS:
   A.   Floral Regulation: No planting is permitted on any plot. No flower
receptacles or planter boxes may be placed on any plot or in any niche unless
the material, size and design are approved by the cemetery board. The city
shall have authority to remove from the plot or niche all floral designs,
flowers, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind, when in the judgment of
the caretaker they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or
when they do not conform to the standards maintained by the city. The city
shall not be liable for lost, misplaced, stolen or broken flower vases. The
city reserves the right to regulate the method of decorating plots so that a
uniform beauty can be maintained. Artificial flowers are not allowed on graves
during the mowing season of March 1 to November 30 with the exception of the
following: For a period beginning on the Friday before and extending through
the weekend following Easter, Mother's Day, Memorial Day, and Father's Day.
   B.   Care Of Trees And Shrubs: No person shall remove any part of any tree,
shrub or any other planting in the cemetery. On request, the caretaker will
arrange for necessary pruning of trees and shrubs on property owned by the
cemetery. Only the caretaker or employees of approved contractors/suppliers may
plant any plants, trim vegetation or provide any other maintenance to the
grounds of the cemetery.
   C.   Prohibited Ornaments: The placing upon plots of boxes, tubs, shells,
toys, metal designs, ornaments, chairs, settees, vases, glass jars, tin, iron
or earthenware jars or jugs and similar articles, is not permitted and if so
placed, the city will remove the same.
   D.   Ornaments Prohibited In Columbaria: Artificial, dyed or preserved
flowers, photographs, souvenirs, wreaths or flags, or other emblems, are
prohibited in columbaria and/or niches. If so placed therein, they will be
removed by the city.
   E.   New Burials: All flowers, plants, easels and decorations will be
allowed to remain for forty eight (48) hours following a new burial. Persons
wishing to retain any of the items must remove them within forty eight (48)
hours after interment. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-13: GENERAL GRAVE AND NICHE REGULATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The city adopts by reference general grave and niche regulations and
specifications. Such general regulations and specifications can be found on the
city's website and are available from the city clerk. The city may adopt or
amend grave, niche and other cemetery regulations from time to time as
necessary. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-14: CONDUCT OF VISITORS:
Every visitor to the cemetery is requested to help maintain its sacred quiet
and its best possible appearance. To this end, loud or boisterous language or
improper conduct will be reproved and any person guilty of disturbing the peace
and sanctity of the cemetery will be subject to arrest and trial therefor.
(Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-15: CARE OF GROUNDS:
Refuse and debris of all kinds should be carefully removed, and all requests of
the caretaker to remove objectionable trees, shrubbery or plants should be
complied with promptly. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-16: PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL OF OBJECTS:
The caretaker shall have the right without notice to prohibit or remove from
the cemetery any objectionable ornaments, chairs, settees, vases, glass jars or
cases, artificial flowers, toys or other articles that may interfere with the
care or spoil the appearance of the cemetery. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-17: DONATIONS OF SHRUBBERY OR OTHER ARTICLES:
Persons wishing to make donations of shrubbery or other articles as memorials
must request to do so in writing. All such shrubbery or articles must be
approved by the board of managers prior to placement by city employees. (Ord.
2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-18: ROADS AND LANES IN CEMETERY:
   A.   Vacation: The city council shall have full authority to vacate any road
or lane in the cemetery or to open others that do not trespass upon any
privately owned lot or destroy the usefulness of the official plat of the
cemetery.
   B.   Road Or Lane Construction: The city council has full authority to grade
and level such roads or lanes and to cover the same with such materials as it
deems best to make a good road or lane. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-19: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   The rules and regulations set out in this chapter and subsequent
chapters and as determined by motion or resolution of the city council shall
govern all cemeteries now owned or hereafter acquired by the city of Orting.
The city expressly reserves the right to make from time to time such additional
rules and regulations as may be deemed desirable in the public interest and may
do so through this code or through policies and procedures adopted by the board
of managers.
   B.   In the Orting Cemetery, no fences of any kind, no curbing of any kind,
and no other monuments, stones, objects or things of any kind projecting above
the surface of the ground will be permitted, except as specially authorized by
the ordinance, rules and regulations of the city.
   C.   Heavily loaded vehicles and other heavy or sharp objects that will
mark, damage or tear up the ground shall not be allowed within the cemetery
areas without written permission from the city.
   D.   Every person entering the Orting Cemetery shall be responsible for all
damages done by that person or by any vehicle, person, animal or thing in that
person's charge.
   E.   No animal shall be taken or allowed to enter any cemetery area, with
the exception of service animals.
   F.   No vehicles shall be driven: in any part of the cemetery except on
roads and lanes laid out for that purpose or on unimproved property; in the
cemetery at speeds exceeding fifteen miles per hour (15 mph); be driven or
parked in the cemetery between dusk and dawn each day, except law enforcement
vehicles or city maintenance vehicles.
   G.   Signs and advertisements of every description are strictly prohibited
in the cemetery, except as necessary for cemetery regulations of the city.
   H.   No person other than law enforcement officers or city maintenance
workers shall be in any part of the cemetery one- half (1/2) hour after sunset
and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise each day. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-20: ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Council Authority: The city council has full authority to enforce any
and all rules and regulations for the management and control of the cemetery
and to prevent any use, appropriation, division, improvement or adornment of a
lot which they deem improper and unsuitable.
   B.   Additional Rules: The city council may, as found necessary, make and
enforce any additional regulations thought needful to maintain the cemetery as
a safe, suitable, and desirable place for the burial of the dead and the
orderly and convenient visitation of the same by all interested parties. (Ord.
2015-969, 7-29-2015)
2-4-21: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Every person violating any part of sections
2-4-6 through
2-4-10,
2-4-12 through
2-4-16, and
2-4-19 through
2-4-21 of this chapter, or any section hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   The following acts are prohibited, and every person who unlawfully or
without right wilfully does any of the following is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor punishable under section
1-4-1 of this code:
      1.   Destroys, cuts, mutilates, effaces, or otherwise injures, tears down
or removes any tomb, plot, monument, memorial, niche, columbarium or marker in
the cemetery, or any gate, door, fence, wall, post or railing, or any enclosure
for the protection of the cemetery or any property therein.
      2.   Destroys, cuts, breaks, removes or injures any building, statuary,
ornamentation, tree, shrub, flower or plant within the cemetery.
      3.   Disturbs, obstructs, detains or interferes with any person carrying
or accompanying human remains to a cemetery or funeral establishment, or
engaged in a funeral service or interment.
   C.   The foregoing provisions do not apply to the removal or unavoidable
breakage or injury by the city or its agent or employees, of any thing placed
in or upon any portion of the Orting Cemetery in violation of any of the rules
and regulations of the city, nor to the removal of any thing placed in the
cemetery by or with the consent of the city which has become in a wrecked,
unsightly or dilapidated condition.
   D.   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter is liable to the
city in a civil action, to pay all damages occasioned by his or her unlawful
acts. The sum recovered shall be applied in payment for the repair and
restoration of the property injured or destroyed. (Ord. 2015-969, 7-29-2015)
CHAPTER 5
PARKS ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-5-1: Creation
2-5-2: Powers And Duties
2-5-3: Terms, Vacancy Filling, Removal
2-5-4: Meetings
2-5-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a project specific Parks Advisory Board to promote
citizen participation and provide the City Council with citizen guidance on
community views regarding policies relating to parks, playgrounds or other
recreational facilities within the City. The council may establish project
specific Parks Advisory Board by Resolution which outlines the specific scope
of work that the Board will be advising on.
The board shall consist of a minimum of five (5) citizens, one of whom may be a
nonresident of the City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council. No board member shall receive any compensation for his/her
services. (Ord. 2018-1022, 2-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2023-1111, 8-30-2023)
2-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Parks Advisory Board shall assist the Mayor and the City Council in
reviewing specific policies relating to parks, playgrounds or other
recreational facilities, and shall make recommendations to the Mayor and
Council based on the specific policy matter outlined in the enabling Resolution
approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2018-1022, 2-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2023-1111,
8-30-2023)
2-5-3: TERMS, VACANCY FILLING, REMOVAL:
The members on the Parks Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council.
A position shall become vacant within the period of appointment upon the death,
resignation, removal, or change of residence outside the geographic area of
appointment, if any, of a member of the board. Any vacancies shall be filled by
appointment in the same manner as the appointment of the preceding members.
Three (3) consecutive non-excused absences from regular meetings shall
constitute an automatic resignation. A member may request that an absence be
excused either before or after the absence occurs. Any member of the board may
be removed by the Council for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, and
pursuant to general removal provisions enacted for boards and commissions.
(Ord. 2018-1022, 2-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2023-1111, 8-30-2023)
2-5-4: MEETINGS:
The Parks Advisory Board shall meet as an ad hoc advisory board based on the
enabling resolution, and all meetings shall be properly noticed and open to the
public in accordance with the Washington State Open Public Meetings Act. The
city staff shall notify all Parks Advisory Board Members of any meeting called
to conduct business. The members shall organize by the election of officers and
the adoption of bylaws, as they deem necessary.
Draft summaries of each meeting shall be prepared by staff after each meeting,
and transmitted to the City Clerk for submission to the Community and
Government Affairs Committee. A representative of the Board, selected by the
Board, shall provide an oral report to the Community and Government Affairs
Committee of the City Council at its regular monthly meeting as needed or
requested. (Ord. 2018-1022, 2-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2023-1111, 8-30-2023)
CHAPTER 6
LAND USE HEARING EXAMINER
SECTION:
2-6-1: Appointment
2-6-2: Duties
2-6-3: Decisions
2-6-4: Procedures
2-6-1: APPOINTMENT:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Revised Code of Washington 35A.63.170
there is hereby created the office of Land Use Hearing Examiner. The Mayor
shall appoint said position for an indefinite term subject to confirmation of
the Council. (Ord. 707, 1-8-1998)
2-6-2: DUTIES:
The Land Use Hearing Examiner shall have those duties assigned by ordinance.
(Ord. 707, 1-8-1998)
2-6-3: DECISIONS:
Decisions of the Land Use Hearing Examiner shall be considered to have the same
effect as decisions of the legislative body. Decisions shall conform to the
requirements of Revised Code of Washington 35A.63.170(3). (Ord. 707, 1-8-1998)
2-6-4: PROCEDURES:
The Land Use Hearing Examiner may set his/her own procedural rules for the
conduct of hearings and submission of evidence. Said rules shall be consistent
with the requirements of due process and shall otherwise comply with applicable
State and Municipal law. (Ord. 707, 1-8-1998)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCES
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: License Required; Application; Duration
3-1-3: Furnishing Electricity, Telephones, Gas Or Cable
3-1-4: Deductions
3-1-5: Payment Periods; Return Requirements
3-1-6: Taxpayer Records Required
3-1-7: Failure To Pay; Action
3-1-8: Erroneous Payments
3-1-9: Additional Rules; Compliance Required
3-1-10: Violation; Penalty
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an exercise of the power
of the city to license for revenue. (1973 Code § 3.08.010)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; DURATION:
After July 1, 1968, no person shall engage in or carry on any business,
occupation, act or privilege for which a tax is imposed by section
3-1-3 of this chapter without first having obtained, and being the holder of, a
license so to do, to be known as an occupation license. Each person shall
promptly apply to the city treasurer for such license upon such forms as the
city prepares and provides, giving such information as the city treasurer deems
reasonably necessary to administer and enforce this chapter, and, upon
acceptance of such application the city treasurer shall thereupon issue such
license to the applicant. Such occupation license is personal and
nontransferable, and shall be renewed annually on January 1, conditioned upon
payment of the appropriate fee. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-1-3: FURNISHING ELECTRICITY, TELEPHONES, GAS OR CABLE:
   A.   Electricity: From and after July 1, 1968, there is levied upon and
there shall be collected from every person engaged in furnishing, for a
monetary consideration, the city and the inhabitants thereof, with electricity
and electrical energy for lighting, heating, power and other public purposes
within or partly within the corporate limits of the city, an annual tax for the
privilege of so doing, such tax to be equal to six percent (6%) of the total
gross income derived from subscribers' revenues from business, and residential
electrical power service in the city.
   B.   Telephones: From and after January 1, 1982, there is levied upon, and
there shall be collected from, every person engaged in carrying on a telephone
business within, or partly within, the corporate limits of the city, a tax
equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income, including revenues from
intrastate toll, derived from the operation of such businesses within the
limits of the city.
   C.   Natural Or Manufactured Gas: From and after July 1, 1968, there is
levied upon and there shall be collected from every person engaged in carrying
on or furnishing, for a monetary consideration, natural gas or manufactured gas
for lighting, heating, power, and other public purposes, within or partly
within the corporate limits of the city an annual tax for the privilege of so
doing, such tax to be equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income
derived from subscribers' revenues from business and residential gas service,
both natural and manufactured, in the city.
   D.   Cable Television Services: From and after the effective date hereof,
there is levied upon and there shall be collected from every person engaged in
the cable television service, for a monetary consideration, within or partly
within the corporate limits of the city an annual tax for the privilege of so
doing, such tax to be equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income
derived from subscribers' revenues from cable television service provided in
the city. (Ord. 917, 11-9-2011, eff. 1-1-2012)
   E.   Water Distribution: (Rep. by Ord. 956, 5-14-2014)
   F.   Definitions:
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES: The one-way transmission of video programming and
associated nonvideo signals to subscribers together with subscriber
interaction, if any, which is provided in connection with video programming.
COMPETITIVE TELEPHONE SERVICE: The provision by any person of telephone
telecommunications equipment or apparatus, such as a repair and maintenance
service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type that can be provided by
persons who are not subject to regulations as telephone companies under title
80 Revised Code Of Washington, and for which separate charges are made.
GROSS INCOME: The value proceeding or accruing by reason of the transaction of
the business engaged in and without deduction on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount,
delivery costs, taxes or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and
without any deduction on account of losses, except as otherwise provided for in
this chapter. Gross income does not include charges which are passed on to
subscribers or customers pursuant to tariffs required by regulatory order to
compensate for the cost to the taxpayer of the tax imposed by this chapter.
NETWORK TELEPHONE SERVICE: The provision by any person of access to a local
telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service,
cellular phone service, or coin telephone service, or providing telephonic,
video, data, pagers, or similar communication or transmission for hire via a
local telephone network, toll line, channel, cable, microwave, or similar
communication or transmission system. Network telephone service includes
interstate and international service, including toll service originating from,
or received on telecommunications equipment or apparatus in this state if the
charge for this service is billed to a person in this state. Network telephone
service does not include the provision of competitive telephone service, cable
television service, or broadcast services by radio or television stations.
TELEPHONE BUSINESS: The business of providing "network telephone service" as
defined herein. It includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or
associations operating an exchange. The term "telephone business" shall include
one hundred percent (100%) of the toll service fees from calls originating in
and/or billed to subscribers within the city of Orting. (Ord. 917, 11-9-2011,
eff. 1-1-2012; amd. Ord. 956, 5-14-2014)
3-1-4: DEDUCTIONS:
In computing the annual tax there shall be deducted from the gross income the
following items:
   A.   The amount of credit losses and uncollectibles actually sustained by
the taxpayers;
   B.   Amounts derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce or
from any business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the
constitutions of the United States or the state of Washington;
   C.   Gross income derived from the sale of electricity, natural gas, cable
television services and network telephone services to a single consumer in any
monthly period to the extent that inclusion of such gross income would cause
the tax attributable to gross income derived from such single consumer in such
monthly period to be in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 861, 1-30-2008,
eff. 2-3-2008)
3-1-5: PAYMENT PERIODS; RETURN REQUIREMENTS:
The tax imposed by section
3-1-3 of this chapter shall be due and payable quarterly on November 15 of each
year for the period ending September 30; on February 15 of each year for the
period ending December 31 of the preceding year; on May 15 of each year for the
period ending March 31 of such year; and on August 15 of each year for the
period ending June 30 of such year. On or before the due date, the taxpayer
shall file with the city treasurer a written return, upon such forms and
setting forth such information as the city treasurer reasonably requires,
together with the payment of the amount of the tax. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-1-6: TAXPAYER RECORDS REQUIRED:
Each taxpayer shall keep records reflecting the amount of his gross operating
revenues, and such records shall be open at all reasonable times to the
inspection of the city treasurer, or duly authorized persons, for verification
of the tax returns or for the fixing of the tax of a taxpayer who fails to make
such returns. Such record shall be maintained and available for inspection for
three (3) years after the due date of any applicable tax. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-1-7: FAILURE TO PAY; ACTION:
If any person subject to this chapter fails to pay any tax required by this
chapter within thirty (30) days after the due date thereof, there shall be
added to such tax, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of such tax,
and any tax due under this chapter and unpaid, and all penalties thereon, shall
constitute a debt to the city, and may be collected by court proceedings, which
remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies. (1973 Code § 3.08.070)
3-1-8: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
Any money paid to the city through error or otherwise not in payment of the tax
imposed by this chapter or in excess of such tax, shall upon request of the
taxpayer be credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer
under this chapter, or upon the taxpayer's ceasing to do business in the city,
be refunded to the taxpayer. (1973 Code § 3.08.080)
3-1-9: ADDITIONAL RULES; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
The city treasurer is authorized to adopt, publish and enforce, from time to
time, such rules and regulations for the proper administration of this chapter
as are necessary, and it is a violation of this chapter to violate or to fail
to comply with any such rule or regulation lawfully promulgated under this
chapter. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-1-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person subject to this chapter who fails or refuses to apply for an
occupation license or to make the tax returns or to pay the tax when due, or
who makes any false statement or representation in or in connection with any
such application for an occupation license or such tax return, or otherwise
violates or refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1973 Code § 3.08.090)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESS LICENSE CODE
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Purpose
3-2-3: Conflict
3-2-4: Definitions
3-2-5: License Required
3-2-6: Exemptions
3-2-7: Application And Issuance
3-2-8: Licensee; Applicant
3-2-9: Fees
3-2-10: Determination Of Employees
3-2-11: License Nontransferable
3-2-12: License Term And Renewal
3-2-13: Display
3-2-14: Separate License; When Required
3-2-15: Change Of Location
3-2-16: Multiple Businesses
3-2-17: No Liability Of City
3-2-18: Qualifications Of Licensees; Permit Requirements; Conditional Licenses
3-2-19: Denial, Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2-20: Grounds For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
3-2-21: Denial, Suspension, Revocation Procedure
3-2-22: Appeal From Denial Or From Notice Or Order
3-2-23: Inspections; Right Of Entry
3-2-24: Regulations
3-2-25: Special Business License Requirements - Mobile Vendors
3-2-26: Special Business License Requirements - Farmers' Or Public Market;
Special Event
3-2-27: Special Business License Requirements - Carnival; Circus
3-2-28: Special Business License Requirements - Amusement Devices
3-2-29: Special Business License Requirements - Peddlers And Solicitors
3-2-30: Violation; Penalty
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall constitute the BUSINESS LICENSE CODE of the city and may be
cited as such.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-2: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the
city to license for revenue for the privilege of engaging in business in the
city and to regulate such businesses to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. The provisions of this chapter shall also be liberally construed for
the accomplishment of such purposes. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-3: CONFLICT:
In the event of a conflict between a requirement of this chapter and a
requirement of state or federal law, such requirement of state or federal law
shall control to the extent of the conflict. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given in this section:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Those devices and machines which, through the insertion of a
coin, token, slug, paper currency or through an electronic transaction (e.g.,
bank card, credit card, etc.) will permit a person to play a game. It includes
pinball machines, video games, electromechanical games, claw machines, cranes,
pool tables, bowling machines, and all other devices of like kind, nature, or
purpose; provided that, it does not include gambling devices. A vending machine
is not an amusement device.
APPLICANT: The organization or individual named on the Special Event
Application or Special Business License Application.
AUTHORIZED SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR: A vendor operating under authority of a
special event business license or special event permit.
BLANKET VENDOR PERMIT: A one-time permit purchased by an event organizer to
operate in lieu of the requirement for individual general and special business
licenses for vendors to perform vending services under the authority of a
special event permit or special event business license. Additional days may be
purchased for use of this permit. Non-profit organizations holding a holiday
bazaar, merchandise sale, fundraiser, craft fair, etc. on private property are
exempt.
BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit,
or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or
indirectly.
CARNIVAL: A business activity typically featuring a variety of mechanical rides
and
amusement devices for the enjoyment of customers thereof and that usually, but
not necessarily, also offers food and beverage services, as well as games
involving throwing, pitching or shooting skills, and sideshows.
CART: A mobile, nonmotorized conveyance capable of moving or being moved, which
is intended to be pushed, pulled or otherwise similarly transported by a mobile
vendor during the normal course of business operation.
CIRCUS: A business activity typically featuring a variety of performances and
exhibitions involving wild animals, feats of horsemanship, stunts, acrobatics,
aquatic sports, and clowns for the enjoyment of the customers thereof, and to
which a fee is charged for admission.
CITY: The city of Orting.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator for the city of Orting, or the city
administrator's designee. The mayor shall possess the same authority to act
pursuant to the provisions of this title as is granted herein to the city
administrator.
CITY SPONSORED EVENT: A special event which benefits the community and is open
for participation to the general community at large, and is conducted in whole
or in part on public property or public rights of way, and the city, solely or
in partnership with another entity, produces, manages and/or coordinates the
event, or has agreed to provide in-kind services and/or other financing in
support of the special event, or has agreed to lend its name in support of the
special event, after determining that the special event either:
   A.   Provides a local commemoration of a national holiday;
   B.   Serves a valid municipal purpose, such as strengthening the City's
sense of community or celebrating a City's history; and
   C.   Provides, through increased customers, additional revenues for Orting
businesses and subsequently improved tax revenues for the City.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed at any business enterprise performing any part of
their duties within the city. All officers, agents, dealers, franchisees, etc.,
of a corporation or business trust, and partners of a partnership, except
limited partners, are employees within this definition.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS:
   A.   The term "engaging in business" means commencing, conducting, or
continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers,
as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves
out to the public as conducting such business.
   B.   This definition sets forth examples of activities that constitute
engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of
those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de
minimus business activities in the City without having to pay a business
license fee. The activities listed in this definition are illustrative only and
are not intended to narrow this definition of "engaging in business". If an
activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City
shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and
applicable law.
   C.   Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities
conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative,
independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf constitutes
engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business
license.
      1.   Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use,
or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real
property permanently or temporarily located in the City.
      2.   Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining, an office, place of
business, or other establishment in the City.
      3.   Soliciting sales.
      4.   Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or
tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.
      5.   Providing technical assistance or service, including quality
control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in
connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
      6.   Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or
construction of, real or tangible personal property.
      7.   Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other
similar agreements.
      8.   Collecting current or delinquent accounts.
      9.   Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste,
construction debris, or excavated materials.
      10.   Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and
labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising,
landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real
estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.
      11.   Rendering professional services such as those provided by
accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers,
professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations,
chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives,
laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.
      12.   Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales
or orders are solicited at the meetings.
      13.   Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent
contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City,
acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.
      14.   Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving
customer complaints.
      15.   In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and
owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took
place.
      16.   Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or
maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.
   D.   If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent
contractor, broker or another acting on the person's behalf, engages in no
other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register
and obtain a business license.
      1.   Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.
      2.   Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity,
other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.
      3.   Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and
conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in
connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee
engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a
board meeting.
      4.   Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the
property is not used in the City.
      5.   Attending, but not participating in a "trade show" or "multiple
vendor events". Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City's
trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.
      6.   Conducting advertising through the mail.
      7.   Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.
   E.   A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City
by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business
license, provided that it engages in no other business activities in the City.
Such activities do not include those in subsection D of this definition.
The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity
sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under
the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington.
Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the
activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent
contacts.
EVENT ORGANIZER: Any person who conducts, manages, promotes or organizes a
commercial or noncommercial special event.
FOOD: For the purpose of this chapter includes ice cream, candy, gum, soft
drinks, and other similar prepackaged products. The preparation and sale of any
other food item not defined by this chapter shall fall under the food truck
program guidelines policy.
FOOD TRUCK: A motor vehicle, or trailer, used to prepare and serve food and
that vends food from a curbside location or on private property. Food trucks
that comply with the City of Orting Food Truck Program guidelines and have an
active food truck license are exempt from this section through OMC
3-2-29.
FOOD VENDING OR FOOD VENDING SERVICES: Engaging in the business of vending food
as described in this chapter.
LICENSE OR BUSINESS LICENSE: As used generally in this chapter shall mean a
written authorization to engage in business in the City issued by the City
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. A business license is categorized
either as a general business license or a special business license. Unless
otherwise provided herein, a reference to license or business license shall
mean and refer to both a general and special business license.
LICENSEE: Any person issued a business license pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
LIFE AND SAFETY CODES: Building codes, fire codes, electrical codes and other
codes of the city relating to health, safety and related requirements for use
and occupancy of buildings.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: An mobile vendor providing food vending services from a
mobile vending unit.
MOBILE VENDOR: Any business operator or vendor who conducts business from a
motor vehicle or cart upon public streets, not including food trucks as defined
in this chapter.
MOBILE VENDOR UNIT: A vehicle, cart or other conveyance capable of moving or
being moved and being used, or intended for use, by a person or persons to
provide vending services while located within or upon the public rights of way.
NONCOMMERCIAL DOOR TO DOOR ADVOCATE: A person who goes door to door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other
ideological beliefs. For purpose of this chapter, the term door to door
advocate shall fall under the term solicitor and include door to door
canvassing and pamphleteering intended for noncommercial purposes.
NONPROFIT: Any business enterprise registered as a nonprofit corporation within
the state of Washington or granted nonprofit status through the code of the
internal revenue service of the United States.
OMC: The Orting municipal code.
PEDDLER: An individual who, on his or her own behalf or on behalf of, or as an
agent, contractor or employee of another person, goes from house to house, door
to door, business to business, street to street, or any other type of place to
place movement, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing
for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale,
the goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting. For purpose of this chapter, the
term peddler shall have the same common meaning as the term "hawker".
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in
bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company,
joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political
subdivision of the state of Washington, corporation, limited liability company,
association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether
mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise and the United States
or any instrumentality thereof.
PHYSICAL PRESENCE: An address where the business is located. A post office box
with an address in the city of Orting for a business is considered a physical
presence.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: The physical location of the business.
PROMOTER OR ORGANIZER: Any person engaged in the business of providing to any
vendor, directly, or indirectly, sales areas within a farmers' market, public
market, or special event location for the purpose of using such location during
the term of a farmers' market, public market or special event.
RESIDENCE: Means and includes every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
SALES AREA: Any stall, booth, stand, space, section, unit, or specified floor
area within any farmers' or public market or special event location where
vending services will be provided.
SOLICITOR: An individual, on his or her own behalf or on behalf of, or as an
agent, contractor or employee of another person, who goes from house to house,
door to door, business to business, street to street, or any other type of
place to place movement, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain
orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property, or
services of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that
may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or
performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs
shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual
purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as
discussed above. For purposes of this chapter, the term "solicitor" shall have
the same meaning as the term "canvasser". The following are examples of
activities of a solicitor:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for, or the sale of, goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, character, or description,
for any kind of consideration whatsoever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication; or
   D.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing, or other
valuable things for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
organization, association, or corporation.
SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSE: A business license issued pursuant to this chapter
and subject to special license requirements as set forth in this chapter and
denominated as a special business license.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any event which is to be conducted on public property or public
right-of-way; and, any event held on private property which would have a direct
significant impact on traffic congestion or traffic flow to and from the event
over public streets or rights-of-ways near the event, or, which would
significantly impact the need for City-provided emergency services, such as
police, fire, or medial aid. It is presumed that any event on private property
which involves an open invitation to the public, or events where the attendance
is by private invitation of 100 or more people are each an event that will have
a direct significant impact on public streets, rights-of-way or emergency
services. A special event can include, but is not limited to:
   A.   Any organized formation, parade, procession or assembly consisting of
persons, animals, vehicles or any combination thereof, traveling in unison and
with a common purpose upon any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other
public way which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or
control; or
   B.   Any organized assemblage of 50 or more persons at any public park or
city facility which is to gather for a common purpose under the direction and
control of a responsible person or agency; or
   C.   Any other organized activity or set of activities open to the public
conducted by an individual, group or entity for a common or collective use or
benefit and which involves the use of public facilities or rights-of-way and
the possible or necessary provision of City services ancillary thereto.
   Examples of special events include fun runs/walks, athletic competitions,
bike-a-thons, parades, carnivals, city/town heritage celebrations, shows or
exhibitions, holiday festivals, circuses, block parties, markets, musical
entertainments, and motion picture filming.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT: A conditions of approval letter provided to the Applicant
by the City, signed by the Applicant.
SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR: A vendor providing vending services at a farmers' or
public market or special event under authority of a special event business
license.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine which, through the insertion of a coin, token, slug,
paper currency or through an electronic transaction (e.g., bank card, credit
card, etc.), will return to the persona predetermined specific article of
merchandise or which will install, repair, clean, alter, imprint, or improve
tangible personal property of or for consumers. It includes machines which vend
photographs, toilet articles, cigarettes and confections as well as machines
which provide laundry and cleaning services.
VENDING OR VENDING SERVICES: Exhibiting goods or services for sale for the
purpose of selling, bartering, trading, exchanging, or advertising such goods
or services.
VENDOR: Any person who exhibits goods or services for sale for the purpose of
selling, bartering, trading, exchanging, or advertising such goods or services.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2018-1036, 9-26-2018; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-
27-2024)
3-2-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage in business
in the City without first having obtained through the Department of Revenue,
and keeping in full force and effect, a valid business license authorizing such
person to engage in the business authorized therein.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in a business in the City
for which a business license has previously been issued but has expired until
such time as that business license has been renewed or a new business license
has been issued.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in a business in the City
for which a business license has been suspended until such time as the period
of suspension has ended.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in a business in the City
for which a business license has been revoked until such person is qualified
for, and obtains, and keeps in full force and effect, a valid business license
authorizing such person to engage in the business authorized therein.
   E.   All business licenses approved for issuance by the City Administrator
shall be and are conditioned upon compliance at all times with all ordinances,
regulations and laws of the City and the State applicable to the operation of
such business or which otherwise bears a direct relationship to the conduct of
the business licensed.
   F.   Upon issuance, unless revoked or suspended or relinquished by the
licensee, a business license shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period,
provided that licensee continues in business and pays the license fee due
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and must be renewed annually. No
business license may be issued for a period longer than twelve (12) months. No
business license may be issued for multiple years or more than one hundred
eighty (180) days in advance of the effective date of said business license.
   G.   Issuance of a business license does not imply compliance with other
City codes, regulations or laws, and does not permit business operation unless
the business is properly zoned and/or in compliance with all applicable laws/
rules.
   H.   Applicants for a special business license shall be required to comply
with the additional special business license requirements set forth in this
chapter. Upon issuance of a special business license, licensees shall be
subject to both the general business license requirements and the applicable
special business license requirements of this chapter. In the event of a
conflict between the general license provisions and the special business
license provisions of this chapter, the special business license provisions
shall control to the extent of the conflict.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The requirement set forth in this chapter to have and maintain a valid business
license (either a general or a special business license) as a condition of
engaging in business in the City shall not apply to:
   A.   Minors doing business or operating a business concern where no other
person is employed by the minor;
   B.   The United States or any instrumentality thereof and the State of
Washington or any Municipal subdivision thereof;
   C.   Persons whose sole activity is the rental of real property;
   D.   Fraternal benefit associations or societies as defined in Revised Code
of Washington 48.36A.010;
   E.   Nonprofit religious organizations;
   F.   Nonprofit associations, clubs, or corporations maintained for the
purpose of organized sports, charity, public school related activities or
Municipal corporation related activities, including Police and Fire Department
reserve organizations;
   G.   Any farmer, gardener, or other person selling, delivering, or peddling
any fruits, vegetables, berries, eggs, or any farm produce or edibles raised,
gathered, produced, or manufactured by such person;
   H.   A vendor not otherwise exempt pursuant to subsection G of this section,
participating in a farmers' or public market or special event for which a
special event business license and blanket vendor permit has been issued;
provided that, complete information for such vendor has been provided by the
event organizer to the City in compliance with the provisions of subsection
3-2-26B of this chapter and the vendor is otherwise qualified to engage in
business in the City;
   I.   A person participating in a collective garden within the meaning of
Revised Code of Washington chapter 69.51A; and
   J.   A person, employee, agent, representative, independent contractor,
broker or a person acting on behalf of another person, whose activities within
the City are limited to the following:
      1.   Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer;
      2.   Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity,
other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions;
      3.   Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and
conferences or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in
connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf;
      4.   Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the
property is not used in the City;
      5.   Attending, but not participating in, a trade show or multiple vendor
events;
      6.   Conducting advertising through the mail;
      7.   Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside of the City;
      8.   Selling products to businesses within the City by wholesale
distributors, unless said distributor has an office, warehouse or other
business establishment located within the City;
      9.   Delivering goods by a seller located outside of the City into the
City by means of common carrier; provided, that the seller engages in no other
business activities in the City;
      10.   Meeting with customers or potential customers when no sales or
orders are solicited at the meeting; or
      11.   Collecting current or delinquent accounts by phone from a location
outside of the City.
   K.   Food trucks that comply with the City of Orting food truck program
guidelines and have an active food truck license are exempt from this section
through OMC
3-2-29.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-7: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   Any person desiring to obtain a general business license under this
chapter shall apply to the City Administrator or his or her designee for such
license upon such forms as the City prepares and provides, and shall give such
information as the City Administrator or his or her designee deems reasonably
necessary to administer and enforce this chapter. Such person shall pay the
City Administrator or his or her designee the sum or sums required to be paid
therefor pursuant to section
3-2-9 of this chapter. Any person desiring to obtain a special business license
under this chapter shall be subject to the application requirements as set
forth herein for a general business license and any additional application
requirements set forth in this chapter for such special business license.
   B.   For purposes of the license by this chapter, any person or business
whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the
business in the City is equal to or less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
and who does not maintain a place of business within the City, shall file a
business license registration, declare no fee due, and submit the registration
to the Director or designee. The threshold applies to general business
licenses, not regulatory licenses or activities that require a specialized
permit. (Ord. 2018-1036, 9-26-2018)
3-2-8: LICENSEE; APPLICANT:
When a license is applied for on behalf of a person other than an individual or
sole proprietorship, the licensee shall be such person on whose behalf the
license is applied for (e.g., the corporation, limited liability company,
etc.). When a license is applied for on behalf of an individual or sole
proprietorship, the licensee shall be such individual or sole proprietor on
whose behalf for which the license is applied. When the licensee will be an
individual or sole proprietorship, the "applicant" shall be the licensee. When
the licensee is a corporation, the "applicant" shall be a principal officer
authorized by requisite board action to file a business license application on
behalf of the licensee, or a representative of licensee if the application is
accompanied by a power of attorney designating the representative as attorney
in fact for the applicant with full power and authority to complete and submit
the application on behalf of the licensee. When the licensee is a limited
liability company, "applicant" shall include the members, or if the certificate
of formation vests management of the limited liability company in a manager or
managers, the term "applicant" shall include such manager or managers. When the
licensee is a partnership, the "applicant" shall include principal partners.
Applicant shall provide, at a minimum, the business name, business address, and
telephone number of the proposed business, a listing and explanation of all
services to be provided, a description of any other business activity to be
conducted on the premises or adjoining premises owned and controlled by the
applicant, and the principal enterprise of the business if different from the
activity being licensed.
In addition to such other information deemed necessary by city administrator,
the application shall require the disclosure of the number of employees at each
location and state whether the owner, or owners, work in the business at each
specific location. If an applicant claims an exemption or deduction under the
terms of this chapter, the application shall also include a full disclosure of
those facts pertinent to the exemption or deduction.
The city administrator, upon receipt of such application, the required
information and the required sum or sums, shall issue to each person a receipt
stating therein the date, amount paid and the kind of trade, profession or
business for which such license is required. Every business license issued
under this chapter shall recite the amount paid therefor, the date of issue,
the date of expiration, to whom it is issued, and the kind of business
licensed. The business license shall also be signed by the city administrator.
Upon filing such application with the city administrator, the person shall be
entitled to be issued and to receive a business license or special event
business license, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 939,
4-30-2014)
3-2-9: FEES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a business license fee shall be
collected from every person engaging in business in the city. Unless a flat fee
is established for a particular type of business by resolution of the city
council, the license fee shall be based on the business's number of employees
as set forth in the current fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the city
council. The fee for a special event business license shall be set by
resolution of the city council and shall be a flat fee; provided that, the
special event business license fee shall be waived for city sponsored events.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-10: DETERMINATION OF EMPLOYEES:
For purposes of determining the number of employees for calculating the license
fee, the following rules shall govern:
   A.   Only those individuals working in the city shall be considered in the
total number of employees. However, the fact an individual also works outside
the city shall not exclude him or her from the total sum of employees for
purposes of this chapter.
   B.   The owner or officers of a business shall be included in the total
number of employees.
   C.   Individuals working less than twenty (20) hours per week for a business
shall be considered a fraction of an employee in such amount as their average
weekly hours worked bear to forty (40) hours.
   D.   The annual license fee shall be determined by the greatest number of
employees employed by the business between January 1 and December 31 of the
preceding year in which the license is payable. The number of employees shall
be determined by the employer's highest numerical count and most recent
employer's unemployment compensation quarterly report filed with the Washington
state employment security department.
   E.   A new business that has not yet established or reported employee
information to the state shall determine their initial license fee by the
maximum number of employees estimated to be employed during that calendar year.
   F.   Businesses doing business in the city that have no employees physically
working within the city shall pay the minimum license fee required under this
chapter.
   G.   Real estate and insurance agents or salespeople shall be considered
employees of the agency/entity from which they work, and shall not be required
to obtain a separate license, but shall be included in the calculation of total
employees if the license fee is based upon the number of employees. (Ord. 939,
4-30-2014)
3-2-11: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter is personal and nontransferable. Any
unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer a license shall automatically void
such license. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-12: LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL:
   A.   In General: A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid
for a twelve (12) month period and shall be renewed annually upon application
and payment of the annual business license fee prior to expiration of the
active business license. It is the obligation of the licensee to be aware of
the time period for renewal. No person may apply for renewal of a business
license more than sixty (60) days prior to expiration. Application for renewal
shall be submitted upon such forms and in such manner as may be established
from time to time by the city administrator. No application for renewal shall
be deemed complete unless it is accompanied by payment of the applicable fees.
License fees will not be prorated.
   B.   Nonrenewal; Expiration Of License: Failure to renew the required
business license prior to its expiration shall result in the expiration of the
license and the inability to engage in business within the city.
   C.   Renewal After Expiration: Submittal of an application for a new
business license is not required to apply for renewal of an expired business
license, provided that the business activities for which the initial license
was issued have not materially changed and applicant submits a completed
application for renewal of the expired business license within sixty (60) days
following expiration. Nothing herein is intended, or shall be construed, to
authorize a person to engage in business in the city without having in place a
valid business license as required in this chapter.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-13: DISPLAY:
   Every license issued under this chapter shall be displayed for inspection,
by the owner or holder thereof, on demand by any city officer. Unless so
displayed upon demand, it shall be conclusively presumed that such person has
not obtained a valid business license.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-14: SEPARATE LICENSE; WHEN REQUIRED:
   A separate business license shall be obtained for each branch,
establishment, or location at which the business related activity is engaged
in, and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in that
business or business enterprise at that location. A separate business license
shall not be required for a business activity determined by the city
administrator to be an accessory activity to a branch, establishment or
location for which a business license is issued. A separate business license
shall not be required for the renting and/or leasing of real property in
multiple locations which shall be considered a single business encompassing all
rental or leased units in the city by a single owner or property manager. A
separate business license is not required for each location at which a mobile
vendor engages in business in the city. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-15: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
When the physical location of a business located in the city is moved to
another location in the city, the licensee shall return the business license to
the city administrator and a new license shall be issued for the new place of
business and shall be valid for the unexpired term. The fee for a new license
shall be set by resolution of the city council. This requirement shall not
apply to mobile vendors. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-16: MULTIPLE BUSINESSES:
When more than one business is operated at the same location, each business
shall be required to obtain a separate business license. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-17: NO LIABILITY OF CITY:
Issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not constitute the creation
of a duty by the city to indemnify the licensee for any wrongful acts against
the public, or to guarantee the quality of goods, services or expertise of a
licensee, or lawfulness of the business activities engaged in. The issuance of
such a license does not shift responsibility from the licensee to the city for
proper training, conduct, or equipment of the licensee or its agents, employees
or representatives, even if specific regulations require standards of training,
conduct or inspection. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-18: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEES; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; CONDITIONAL LICENSES:
   A.   No general or special business license shall be issued, nor shall any
license be renewed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to:
      1.   An individual who is not eighteen (18) years of age at the time of
application;
      2.   A licensee/applicant who has had a similar license revoked or
suspended pursuant to applicable city codes or other similar code provisions of
any jurisdiction, within two (2) years prior to the license application;
      3.   A licensee/applicant whose business activities, or proposed business
activities, are unlawful under state, federal or local laws;
      4.   A licensee/applicant whose business activities, or proposed business
activities, constitute a public nuisance; or
      5.   A licensee/applicant for a special business license who does not
meet the qualifications under the business license code for issuance of such
special business license.
   B.   A licensee/applicant may be denied a license by reason of the prior
conviction for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor, if the crime for
which he or she was convicted directly relates to the business for which the
license is sought, and the time elapsed since the conviction is less than ten
(10) years for a felony or less than five (5) years for a misdemeanor or gross
misdemeanor.
   C.   No person or business may reapply for a denied or revoked business
license merely by renaming the business. The denial or revocation of a license
applies to any business entity, regardless of its name, that is operating under
the same ownership and/or management and engages substantially in the same type
of business as that of a business that has been previously denied a license or
has had its license revoked under this chapter within two (2) years of such
application for a license.
   D.   In the event an applicant seeks a business license for a business to be
located in a building or structure for which a building permit is required,
whether as a newly constructed building or structure, or a remodeled building
or structure, the building permit process, including final inspections/issuance
of occupancy permits, shall be completed prior to issuance of a business
license.
   E.   In the event an applicant seeks a business license for a business to be
located in a building or structure for which no building permit is required,
the applicant shall be entitled to receive a "conditional" business license,
assuming that all other applicable licensing requirements of this chapter have
been met. Such conditional license shall be conditioned on the business
premises being inspected for compliance with applicable life and safety codes,
and subject to the following:
      1.   The applicant shall arrange for such inspection(s) within sixty (60)
days of commencing business at the premises by contacting the city; provided,
however, that the applicant may request from the city administrator an
extension of the sixty (60) day time period, which request may be granted upon
a good cause showing of why the inspection could not be timely completed; and
      2.   Failure of the applicant to arrange for and complete the life and
safety code compliance inspection within the sixty (60) day time period shall
cause the conditional business license to be automatically canceled. Such
cancellation shall not require compliance with the provisions for denial,
revocation or suspension of business licenses set forth in this chapter.
Thereafter, until all licensing and inspection requirements have been fully
complied with, any continued operation of the business shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-19: DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any business license application submitted under the provisions of this chapter
may be denied, and any business license issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked, or suspended at any time, as provided for in this
chapter. No person may engage in business or continue to engage in business for
which a business license has been denied, revoked or suspended; provided that,
this prohibition shall not apply to the extent that such suspension or
revocation has been stayed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or lawful
order of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-20: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a business license shall
include any one or more of the following:
   A.   The license or application therefor was procured or submitted by fraud
or misrepresentation of fact;
   B.   The licensee/applicant has failed to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter or other applicable state, federal or local law, or has failed
to meet the qualifications set forth in this chapter;
   C.   The licensee/applicant, or licensee's/applicant's employees or agents,
have been convicted of a crime, or suffered civil judgment or consent decree
which bears a direct relationship to the conduct of the business licensed
pursuant to this chapter; provided that, such conviction, if for a felony is
less than ten (10) years old, and if for a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor is
less than five (5) years old;
   D.   The licensee/applicant, or licensee's/applicant's employees or agents,
have violated any law or ordinance relating to the regulation of the business
licensed issued pursuant to this chapter, or any health or safety ordinance
which bears a direct relationship to the conduct of the business licensed
pursuant to this chapter;
   E.   The licensee/applicant has caused or permitted a public nuisance to
exist;
   F.   The licensee/applicant has failed to pay a civil penalty or to comply
with any lawful notice and order of the city administrator which bears a direct
relationship to the conduct of the business licensed pursuant to this chapter;
   G.   The licensee's/applicant's continued conduct of the business will, for
any other reason, result in a danger to the public health, safety or welfare;
   H.   The licensee is delinquent in the payment of taxes to the city that are
due and owing for the licensed business, and has failed to pay, or enter into
agreement with the city for payment of, such amounts due and owing within
thirty (30) days of written notice of such delinquency; and
   I.   The licensee/applicant, or licensee's/applicant's employees or agents,
have engaged in, have permitted or have acquiesced in unlawful drug activity on
the business premises. For purposes of this section, the term "permitted" shall
mean, in addition to its ordinary meaning, that licensee/applicant has actual
or constructive knowledge of the circumstances which would foreseeably lead to
the unlawful drug activity. "Unlawful drug activity" means manufacturing,
delivering, selling, storing, or giving away any controlled substance, as
defined in the Washington uniform controlled substances act 1  or the federal
controlled substances act (21 USC section 801 et seq.), in violation of state,
federal or local law. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 69.50.
3-2-21: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Upon determination by the city administrator that a license application
is to be denied or that a license is to be suspended or revoked pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the city administrator shall give a written notice
and order of such action to the licensee/applicant by certified mail. The
notice and order shall set forth the facts and grounds for the denial,
revocation or suspension and shall include a statement advising that the
applicant/licensee may appeal from the notice and order or from any action of
the city administrator to the city hearing examiner, provided that the appeal
is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the city
administrator within fourteen (14) days after the date of receipt of the notice
and order, and that failure to appeal shall constitute a waiver of all right to
an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   B.   The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order,
shall be served upon the applicant/licensee either personally or by mailing a
copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested to such applicant/licensee at the address which appears on
the application/business license.
   C.   Service by mail shall mean sending the document by regular, first class
mail, postage prepaid and properly addressed, to the applicant's/licensee's
address as provided by the applicant/licensee. Service shall be deemed complete
upon the third day following the day upon which the notice is placed in the
mail, unless the third day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or federal legal
holiday, in which event service shall be deemed complete on the first day other
than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday following the third day. "Personal
service" shall mean handing the document to the applicant/licensee or leaving
it at the applicant's/licensee's place of business in the city with a person in
charge thereof.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-22: APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR FROM NOTICE OR ORDER:
   A.   The city hearing examiner appointed pursuant to title 1, chapter 12 of
this code is designated to hear appeals by applicants or licensees aggrieved by
actions of the city administrator pertaining to any denial, suspension, or
revocation of business licenses. The hearing examiner may adopt reasonable
rules and regulations for conducting such appeals. Copies of all rules and
regulations so adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall make them
freely accessible to the public.
   B.   Any licensee/applicant may, within fourteen (14) days after receipt of
a notice and order of denial, suspension or revocation, file with the city
clerk a written notice of appeal containing the following:
      1.   A heading with the words: "Before the Hearing Examiner of the City
of Orting";
      2.   A caption reading: "Appeal of             " giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal;
      3.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the business involved in the notice and order;
      4.   A brief statement, in concise language, of the specific order or
action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant or appellants;
      5.   A brief statement, in concise language, of the relief sought, and
the reasons why it is claimed that the protested action or notice and order
should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside. Appellant shall specify
the errors of law and/or errors of fact upon which the appeal is based;
      6.   The signatures of all persons named as appellants, and their
official mailing addresses; and
      7.   The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of each
appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
   C.   As soon as practicable after receiving a written appeal, the city
administrator shall fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of the appeal
by the hearing examiner. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing by the
city administrator, by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, by certified
mail with return receipt requested, addressed to each appellant at his or her
address shown on the notice of appeal.
   D.   At the hearing, the appellant(s) shall be entitled to appear in person,
and to be represented by counsel and to offer such evidence as may be pertinent
and material to the notice and order. Technical rules of evidence need not be
followed.
   E.   Only those errors of law and fact specifically raised by the appellant
(s) in the written notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing of the
appeal. Appellant(s) shall bear the burden of proof by a preponderance of the
evidence that the city administrator erred in issuing the denial, suspension,
or revocation.
   F.   Within fourteen (14) days following conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing examiner shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law,
supported by the record, and issue a decision which may affirm, modify, or
overrule the denial, suspension, or revocation of the city administrator. The
hearing examiner may also impose terms as conditions to issuance or
continuation of a business license; provided that, when deemed necessary by the
hearing examiner, at the conclusion of the hearing or within the ten (10)
business days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing examiner may
announce the need for a longer time period, not to exceed fifteen (15) days,
within which the written findings of fact and conclusions of law and decision
shall be made.
   G.   Any party aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may appeal
that decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal, within
ten (10) days after receipt of the decision of the hearing examiner, with the
city clerk. The city administrator shall transmit a complete copy of the
hearing examiner's record, findings and conclusions, and decision, and all
exhibits, to the city council and shall cause the appeal to be placed upon the
agenda of the city council within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice
of appeal. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing by the business license
clerk, by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, by certified mail with
return receipt requested, addressed to each appellant at his or her address
shown on the notice of appeal.
   H.   Any appeal of the decision of the city council must be filed within
fourteen (14) days of issuance of the decision.
   I.   Enforcement of any suspension or revocation of any business license, or
other order of or by the city administrator, shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. The city
administrator shall have the authority to issue a temporary business license in
the event that such issuance is necessary to protect appellant's
constitutionally protected rights.
   J.   Failure of any aggrieved party to file an appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of the right to an
administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order of denial,
revocation or suspension. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-23: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The city administrator is authorized to make such inspections of the premises
and facilities of establishments licensed or required to be licensed under this
chapter, and to take such action as may be required to enforce the provisions
of business license ordinances or other applicable codes. The mayor or city
administrator may designate any appropriate city employees, including, but not
limited to, code enforcement officers, building inspectors and commissioned
police officers, to undertake such inspections. Inspections shall, to the
extent possible, comply with the following:
   A.   The person(s) designated to make such inspection(s) may enter any
licensed business location, at any reasonable time, to inspect the same and/or
perform any duty imposed by law;
   B.   If the place of business is occupied, said inspector(s) shall first
present proper credentials and demand entry and right to inspect;
   C.   If the place of business is unoccupied, said inspector(s) shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the licensee or other person having charge
or control of the premises and shall then present proper credentials and demand
entry and right to inspect;
   D.   No licensee, or its employees or agents, shall fail or neglect, after
proper demand, to admit said inspector(s), acting within the scope of the
inspector's employment, to any location licensed for business, or to interfere
with an inspector while in the performance of the inspector's duty; and
   E.   Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit undercover investigations or
inspections by appropriate officers in appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 939, 4-
30-2014)
3-2-24: REGULATIONS:
The city administrator may establish administrative rules and regulations as
deemed appropriate, consistent with this chapter, for the purpose of enforcing
and carrying out its provisions. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-25: SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS - MOBILE VENDORS:
In addition to the general business license requirements, the following
additional requirements and regulations shall apply to mobile vendors:
   A.   Purpose: The general purpose of this section is to promote the health,
safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens,
businesses and visitors of Orting by limiting business activities of mobile
vendors within the city and requiring that new and existing mobile food vendors
provide the community and customers with a minimum level of cleanliness,
quality, safety and security. It is the purpose and intent of the city council
in enacting this chapter, to provide mobile food vendors with clear and concise
regulations to prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to
preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. It is further the
purpose of this chapter to authorize and permit mobile food vendors to use the
public rights of way to provide food vending services in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter. The city does not intend this section to
otherwise authorize or allow mobile vendors to use the public rights of way to
provide vending services other than in locations zoned for such uses or
otherwise allowed pursuant to a special events permit.
   B.   Findings:
      1.   The city council hereby finds and declares that mobile vending
activity occurring on public streets and sidewalks and private property creates
or may create the following negative impacts:
         a.   An increase in the amount of litter and an increased risk of
public health and safety violations due to lack of connections to power and
water, especially when in connection with on site food preparation;
         b.   Increased concerns over health and proper sanitation because
mobile vendors do not provide bathroom facilities for vendor operators or
customers;
         c.   Difficulty in enforcing health and other regulations applicable
to mobile vendors due to the mobile nature of the business;
         d.   Trampling down lawns when mobile vendors and their customers
trespass upon or walk across private property;
         e.   Invasion of personal privacy when mobile vendors remain parked
for long periods of time in front of a person's home or business;
         f.   Heightened intensity of use to surrounding areas;
         g.   Impediments to vehicular and pedestrian traffic on public rights
of way;
         h.   Increased risk of traffic congestion, vehicle accidents and
personal injuries when vending from mobile vendor units;
         i.   Hazards to motorists, pedestrians, and mobile vendors and their
customers when operating on public and private streets and sidewalks and public
rights of way;
         j.   Traffic hazards, including disruption of traffic flow and
distracted drivers, when other vehicles stop to make purchases from such mobile
vendors;
         k.   Impediments to the clear path of travel for pedestrians and
diminished space on sidewalks, which could force pedestrians onto streets and
create particular difficulties for residents with disabilities;
         l.   Safety hazards from street geometry, traffic circulation
patterns, and from differences between motor vehicle and mobile vendor unit
travel speeds;
         m.   A heightened degree of accident vulnerability, particularly near
intersections and driveways or on streets with higher speeds and traffic
volumes, when mobile vendors operate and conduct business on the shoulders of
streets and public rights of way;
         n.   Decreased on and off street parking availability; and
         o.   Substantial public health, safety and welfare concerns requiring
a higher level of compliance monitoring and applicant screening than for other
businesses operating in the city, thereby substantially increasing city costs.
      2.   The city council hereby also finds and declares that:
         a.   There is an increased public interest and demand for access to
mobile vendors engaged in the business of selling food;
         b.   It is in the public interest to provide a business friendly
environment and balance the unmet demands that itinerant vendors can provide
within the existing business climate against the negative impacts that
activities of mobile vendors and their customers can have upon the community;
and
         c.   These public interests can be served by providing mobile vendors
with the opportunity to conduct business on private property and within public
rights of way while protecting the public health, safety and welfare through
establishment of business license requirements and regulations.
   Based upon the foregoing findings, the city council has determined that the
adoption of reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on mobile food
vending activities are necessary in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare.
   C.   Mobile Vendor License Required:
      1.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for a mobile vendor, not otherwise
exempt from the provisions of this chapter, to engage in vending services
within the city except as provided and authorized in this chapter. No mobile
vendor may park overnight.
      2.   Mobile Food Vending Authorized: A mobile vendor is authorized to
provide food vending services upon having first obtained, and thereafter
keeping in full force and effect, a valid mobile food vendor license issued by
the city in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Separate License Required: A separate mobile food vendor license is
required for each mobile food vendor unit operating within the city.
      4.   Compliance With Laws: All mobile food vendor licenses approved for
issuance pursuant to this chapter shall be and are conditioned upon compliance
at all times with all ordinances and regulations of the city and the laws of
the state applicable to the operation of such business or which otherwise bear
a direct relationship to the conduct of the business licensed, including, but
not limited to, compliance with the Tacoma-Pierce County health department
regulations. Issuance of a business license does not imply compliance with
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
      5.   Special License; Endorsement: A mobile food vendor license is a
special and limited license and authorizes the holder only to engage in
business in the city as a mobile food vendor. A mobile food vendor license
endorsed for the holder to operate as a mobile food vendor does not authorize
the holder to operate as a stationary food vendor.
      6.   Nuisance: Any mobile food vending unit being operated by a person
without a valid mobile food vendor license with the proper endorsement shall be
deemed a public safety hazard and public nuisance.
      7.   Incidental Sale Of Goods: A licensed mobile food vendor may engage
in exhibiting and selling goods that are incidental to the food vending
services being provided.
   D.   Licensee; Applicant: Where the license is applied for on behalf of a
person other than an individual or sole proprietorship, the licensee shall be
such person on whose behalf the license is applied (e.g., the corporation,
limited liability company, etc.). Where the license is applied for on behalf of
an individual or sole proprietorship, the licensee shall be such individual or
sole proprietor on whose behalf for which the license is applied. Where the
licensee will be an individual or sole proprietorship, the applicant shall be
the licensee. Where the licensee is a corporation, the "applicant" shall be the
principal officers of the corporation. Where the licensee is a limited
liability company, "applicant" shall include all of the members, or if the
certificate of formation vests management of the limited liability company in a
manager or managers, the term "applicant" shall include such manager or
managers. Where the licensee is a partnership, the "applicant" shall include
principal partners.
   E.   Application And Issuance: Any person desiring to obtain a mobile food
vendor license under this chapter shall apply to the city for such license upon
such forms as the city prepares and provides, give such information as required
herein and any such additional information that the city administrator deems
reasonably necessary to administer and enforce this chapter, and pay the city
the sum or sums required to be paid pursuant to section
3-2-9 of this chapter. An application not including the required information
and license fee shall not be deemed complete and will not be processed by the
city. (Note: When applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited liability
company, the application shall include the required information for each of the
partners, managers or members identified as applicants in subsection D of this
section.)
   Applicant shall provide the following information, which shall be included
with and made a part of the application:
      1.   The business name;
      2.   A business address at which licensee will receive notices from the
city;
      3.   A telephone number at which the licensee can be contacted;
      4.   Each applicant's: name, prior name(s) and aliases; address; present
place of residence and the length of residence at such address; and business
address if other than above identified address;
      5.   Address or place of residence of each applicant during the two (2)
years prior to the date of the application;
      6.   In the event the name or address of an applicant has changed within
the two (2) years prior to the date of application, each name and address used
for the preceding two (2) year period;
      7.   Each applicant's physical description, date of birth and social
security number;
      8.   Whether the applicant(s) has ever been, within the ten (10) year
period prior to the date of the application, convicted of a violation of a
felony under the laws of this state or any other state or federal law of the
United States;
      9.   Whether the applicant(s) has ever been, within the five (5) year
period prior to the date of the application, convicted of a violation of a
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor under the laws of this state or any other
state or federal law of the United States;
      10.   A description of the item(s) or services being sold and/or a
description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the business
in which the applicant will engage;
      11.   A description of the mobile food vending unit, including unique
identifying serial numbers or vehicle identification numbers;
      12.   Proof of insurance required pursuant to this chapter;
      13.   The uniform business identifier (UBI) number issued by the state of
Washington or a federal tax identification number; and,
      14.   A letter, or equivalent, issued no greater than ninety (90) days
prior to the date of application, from the Tacoma-Pierce County health
department certifying, or otherwise evidencing, that the mobile food vendor
unit is in compliance with required health department regulations.
   F.   Authorization For Background Check: Applicants shall complete an
authorization form to release information allowing the city police department
to conduct a local criminal history background check and allowing the
Washington state patrol to conduct a state and national criminal history check
in accordance with the provisions of Revised Code Of Washington 35A.21.370 and
10.97.050. Applicants may be required to submit to fingerprinting or palm
scanning by the police department, in connection with an application for a
mobile food vendor license. Applicants shall be required to provide a copy of a
valid driver's license or picture ID for identification purposes.
   G.   Attestation: Each applicant shall sign the application either in the
presence of the city clerk, or designee, or the city administrator, and shall
provide proof of applicant's identity, or each such applicant's signature shall
be notarized. Each applicant shall attest as to the truth and accuracy of the
contents of the application provided by the applicant.
   H.   Receipt: Upon receipt of a complete application and the required sum or
sums, the city administrator shall issue to applicant a receipt stating therein
the date, amount paid and for which type of license was applied.
   I.   Content Of Mobile Vendor License: Every mobile vendor license issued
under this chapter shall recite the date of issue, date of expiration, and the
name of the licensee, shall include an endorsement for a mobile vendor license,
and shall be signed by the city administrator.
   J.   Investigation Of Applicants: It shall be the duty of the chief of
police, or his or her designee, to investigate each application. The chief of
police shall endeavor to complete such investigation within a reasonable time
period after receipt of a complete application. In his/her investigation, the
chief of police shall determine to the best of his/her ability:
      1.   The genuineness of all credentials presented by the applicant(s);
      2.   The truth of the facts set forth in the application; and
      3.   If the applicant(s) has been convicted of a crime, which bears a
direct relationship to the conduct of the business licensed pursuant to this
chapter; provided that, such conviction, if for a felony is less than ten (10)
years old, and if for a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor, is less than five (5)
years old. In considering whether or not the conduct in question relates to the
applicant or licensee's ability to operate as a mobile vendor, the city may
consider, whether the conduct indicates that the applicant or licensee is unfit
to operate as a mobile vendor. The city will presume that any one of the
following categories of crimes that constitute a felony or misdemeanor under
Washington state law, or under the laws of the state or district in which the
crime was committed and for which a conviction is less than ten (10) years old
for a felony and less than five (5) years old for a misdemeanor, has a direct
relationship to the fitness of such person to engage in business as a mobile
vendor:
         a.   Homicide;
         b.   Assault;
         c.   Crimes of dishonesty;
         d.   Sex crimes;
         e.   Drug related crimes;
         f.   Crimes against children and/or vulnerable adults;
         g.   Burglary and/or trespass; or
         h.   Kidnapping and/or unlawful imprisonment.
   K.   Limitation On Activities Permitted By Mobile Vendor License: Mobile
food vendors shall be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Mobile food vendors shall not operate the mobile food vendor unit in
such a manner as to impede the normal usage of arterial streets;
      2.   Mobile food vendors shall not stop on the traveled portion of any
street or within fifty feet (50') from a corner to provide vending services;
      3.   No mobile food vendor shall locate his or her mobile food vendor
unit in such a manner as to cause a traffic hazard, such as on streets with
inadequate shoulders or restricted sight distance, and mobile food vendor unit
displays of merchandise, seating, signage, or temporary shelters shall not
obscure traffic;
      4.   The retail sale of any nonfood products is prohibited except for the
exhibition and sale of goods incidental to the food vending services being
provided;
      5.   No mobile food vendor shall conduct business so as to violate any
ordinances of the city, including those regulating traffic and rights of way
and zoning, as now in effect or hereafter amended;
      6.   All mobile food vendors shall operate in compliance with applicable
health and sanitation laws, rules and regulations of the city, the state and
the Tacoma-Pierce County health department regarding food handling, and all
mobile food vendor units and related equipment and devices used for the
handling, storage, transportation and/or sale of food shall comply with all
laws, rules and regulations respecting such mobile food vendor units and
related equipment and devices as may be established by the city, the state and
the Tacoma-Pierce County health department;
      7.   No customer shall be served on the street side of a mobile food
vendor unit. All service must be on the curb side when the mobile food vendor
unit is on or abutting a public street;
      8.   All mobile food vendors shall provide garbage receptacles for
customer use and shall maintain the area around the mobile food vendor unit,
clean and free from litter, garbage, and debris;
      9.   At the conclusion of business activities at a given location, the
mobile food vendor shall clean all the public way surrounding his or her mobile
food vendor unit of all debris, trash and litter generated by the food vendor's
business activities;
      10.   Mobile food vendors shall at all times while engaging in business
in the city have and maintain insurance in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
   L.   Insurance Required: No mobile food vendor business license shall be
issued to a mobile food vendor, or renewed, unless a certificate is furnished
to the city showing that the mobile food vendor is carrying the following
minimum amounts of insurance: 1) general comprehensive liability insurance in
an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for
injuries, including those resulting in death, resulting from any one
occurrence, and on account of any one accident; and 2) property damage
insurance in an amount of not less than twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for damages on account of any one accident or occurrence.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-26: SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS - FARMERS' OR PUBLIC MARKET;
SPECIAL EVENT:
   A.   The event organizer of a farmers' or public market or other special
event may apply for a special event business license. The special event
business license and blanket vendor permit will, upon issuance, operate in lieu
of the requirement for individual general and special business licenses for
vendors operating at the farmers' or public market or special event, to the
extent a business license would otherwise be required under the provisions of
this chapter. The special event business license shall be of limited duration
commensurate with the term of the farmers' or public market or special event
for which the special event business license is issued. The fee for a special
event business license shall be as set forth in section
3-2-9 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no vendor, not otherwise
qualified to obtain a business license from the city, may engage in vending
services pursuant to a special event business license.
   B.   The event organizer of the farmers' or public market or special event
shall, at least five (5) business days prior to the first day of the farmers'
or public market or special event, submit to the city administrator a complete
list of all vendors operating under authority of the special event business
license at the event. The event organizer may supplement the list prior to the
first day of the special event upon the city administrator's determination of
good cause for delay. The vendor list shall not be deemed complete unless it
includes the following for each vendor:
      1.   The name, contact phone number, and address of the vendor operating
under the special events business license and the type of business engaged in
(except with regard to vendors described at subsection
3-2-6H of this chapter, vendors exempt from the business license requirements
of this chapter are not required to be identified);
      2.   The name and address of the persons authorized to act, and provide
vending services, on behalf of the vendor;
      3.   The department of revenue unified business identifier number issued
to the vendor; and
      4.   A depiction of the approximate location of the sales area for each
vendor.
   C.   Each vendor must display on site a copy of the special event license
issued to the event organizer of the farmers' or public market or special
event. A vendor that has not been identified on the vendor list, or
supplemental vendor list, submitted to the city, and not otherwise exempt from
the business license requirements, is not authorized to operate at the special
event under such special event business license.
   D.   The special event business license shall not replace, and shall be in
addition to, a special event permit that may be required for the special event.
No nonexempt vendor may operate under a special event business license that
would not otherwise be qualified to obtain a valid business license from the
city.
   E.   Identification of a vendor on the vendor list does not imply compliance
with applicable laws, ordinances or regulations and does not relieve the vendor
from compliance at all times with all ordinances and regulations of the city
and the laws and regulations of the state and other regulatory agencies,
applicable to the operation of such business or which otherwise bears a direct
relationship to the conduct of the business licensed, including, but not
limited to, compliance with the Tacoma-Pierce County health department
regulations.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-27: SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS - CARNIVAL; CIRCUS:
In addition to the general business license requirements, the following
additional requirements and regulations shall apply to carnivals and circuses:
   A.   License; Fee; Regulations; Terms: No person may operate, or aid in the
operation of, a carnival and/or circus in the city without first obtaining, and
having in full force and effect, a special business license for the operation
of such carnival or circus. All fees required for a circus or carnival special
license shall be in accordance with section
3-2-9 of this chapter, the fee schedule. The term of the license shall be
limited to the days that the licensee will be in operation in the city as
specified in the license application.
   B.   Hours Of Business: All carnivals and/or circuses shall be discontinued
and no part thereof shall be open to the public after the hour of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M., and shall remain closed until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of
the same day unless for good cause, the hours of operation are extended by the
city administrator at the time of application for the special business license.
   C.   Sanitary Conditions And Lighting: Every carnival and circus and any
building in which any carnival or circus is held shall at all times be kept in
a clean, healthy and sanitary condition and in compliance with the health and
sanitation regulations of the Tacoma-Pierce County health department. All
stairways, halls, passages, and rooms which are open to the public shall be
kept open and well lighted during the time that said carnival or circus is in
operation. Every carnival and circus shall maintain adequate sanitary
facilities, including toilets, at all times during installation, operation, and
removal of all carnival or circus structures and equipment, unless such
facilities are otherwise provided on site.
   D.   Duty Of Preserving Order: The burden of preserving order is upon the
licensee of the carnival and/or circus, and if any carnival or circus in the
city is not deemed operated in accordance with the rules and regulations
prescribed in this chapter and as set forth in the state law, the licensee
shall be subject to revocation of the business license, and the licensee or
other individual responsible shall be subject to such other punishment as the
law and this chapter provide.
   E.   Employment Of Law Enforcement Officers: In the event it becomes
necessary to secure the services of one or more law enforcement officers to
properly enforce these rules and regulations and to maintain order at a
carnival and/or circus, all expense for such services shall be borne by the
licensee and it is the duty of the licensee to secure the service of such
officer or officers as are necessary to preserve order and enforce the rules
and regulations prescribed by this chapter and state law.
   F.   Smoking Prohibited: No person shall be permitted to smoke or carry in
his or her hand a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe inside of any tent,
building, or other structure during the hours when said carnival and/or circus
is open to the public.
   G.   Fire Code: All carnivals and circuses must comply with the provisions
of the city of Orting fire code as enacted or thereafter amended.
   H.   Location Of Site: No carnival and/or circus shall be operated in a
location which is closer than one thousand (1,000) yards from any school or
church, or one hundred (100) yards from any house, residence or other human
habitation, except in such instances where the city administrator determines
that there exists good cause to waive such requirements, based upon a review of
the facts and circumstances pertaining to said carnival and/or circus.
   I.   Inspections: The chief of police or any police officer or code
enforcement officer of the city shall at all times have full and free access to
any carnival or circus without fee, compensation or reward, for the purpose of
maintaining order, inspecting such entertainment or exhibition or enforcing
laws and ordinances of the city. It shall be a misdemeanor offense for any
person willfully refusing such officer or officers admission.
      No license shall be issued until inspections and approval shall have been
made as follows:
      1.   The fire district shall be responsible for inspections of all
carnival and circus premises and equipment for compliance with all applicable
fire code requirements. The license applicant shall be responsible for payment
to the fire district of the costs for such required inspection.
      2.   The Tacoma-Pierce County health department, or its equivalent, shall
be responsible for inspection of all carnival and circus premises and all
applicable equipment for compliance with all applicable health regulations. The
license applicant shall be responsible for payment to the Tacoma-Pierce County
health department of the costs for such required inspection.
      3.   The city administrator may review all carnivals and circuses to
ensure that they have adequate liability insurance covering installation and
operation of their equipment, including amusement rides.
   J.   Duty To Comply With All State And Federal Laws And Regulations; License
Revocation: All persons licensed pursuant to this section are responsible for
ensuring that all equipment and devices used in the carnival or circus comply
with all applicable state and federal regulations. Violation of this section
shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special business license.
   K.   Liability Insurance: No special business license shall be issued until
inspections and approval shall have been made as follows:
      1.   Any carnival or circus operating amusement rides shall, prior to
operation, provide a certificate of insurance showing evidence of comprehensive
general public liability and property damage liability insurance with limits of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
      2.   Each carnival and circus operating amusement rides shall provide to
the city administrator certification that all rides have been inspected for
safety by a recognized safety inspection program approved by the current
liability insurance carrier with inspectors certified by the Washington state
department of labor and industries. The city administrator shall be authorized
to conduct an inspection of all amusement rides to verify passage of
inspection.
   L.   Nuisance: Any carnival or circus operating in the city without the
license required by this chapter shall be considered a nuisance and shall be
subject to abatement by the city.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-28: SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS - AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   A.   Purpose: No person shall operate, maintain, possess or install in any
store, building, public or quasi-public place where the public is invited, or
wherein the public may enter, any amusement device unless such person or entity
shall have first obtained an amusement device license for that purpose from the
city administrator. Such license shall be in addition to the general business
license required for the applicant to engage in business activities on the
premises.
   B.   Gambling Devices Not Permitted: Nothing in this chapter shall in any
way be construed to authorize, license, or permit a gambling device, or a
mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in
any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to future laws of the state.
   C.   License Issuance: All amusement device licenses for the placement,
operation, or use of amusement devices shall be issued to and in the name of
the licensee. An amusement device license shall be required for each number of
amusement devices placed for operation in a business. Such license shall be
transferable from one amusement device to another similar amusement device
within that business; provided, however, the total number of amusement devices
placed for operation shall not at any time exceed the number of amusement
device licenses issued to that business. The licensee shall notify the city
administrator of the transfer of the amusement device license within ten (10)
business days of its occurrence, identifying, by serial number and title by
which the game is commonly known, the device which is now installed, possessed
or operated.
   D.   Term; Transfer: The term of an amusement device license commences
January 1 and expires at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 of the
same year. The fee for each such amusement device license shall be as set forth
pursuant to section
3-2-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
3-2-29: SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS:
   A.   Purpose: The city council finds that the public health, safety, and
welfare requires that the citizens of the city be protected from uninvited
solicitors to: 1) protect against criminal activity, including fraud, bunco and
burglary; 2) minimize the unwelcome disturbance of residents and their privacy;
3) preclude solicitation and sales by individuals who have been convicted of
certain crimes; and 4) preclude soliciting where it would interfere with
pedestrian and vehicular passage.
   B.   License Required: Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be
unlawful for any individual to engage in business in the city as a solicitor or
peddler without first having applied for and obtained, and having in full force
and effect, a valid solicitor or peddler license.
   C.   Compliance With Laws: All solicitor or peddler licenses issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be and are conditioned upon compliance at all times with
all ordinances and regulations of the city, state laws, and regulations of
regulatory agencies having authority over the licensee applicable to the
operation of such business or which otherwise bear a direct relationship to the
conduct of the business licensed. Issuance of a business license does not imply
compliance with applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
   D.   Limitation On Activities Permitted By Solicitors And Peddlers: Except
as otherwise authorized pursuant to this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a
solicitor or peddler within the city to:
      1.   Engage, or attempt to engage, in the business of soliciting or
peddling upon public property, including public parks, public trails, public
rights of way, and public sidewalks; provided that, such prohibition shall not
apply to use of the public rights of way for travel and shall not prohibit
constitutionally protected activities;
      2.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, enter upon any other person's private property, home,
residence, apartment complex or business that conspicuously displays a "No
Peddlers" or "No Solicitors" sign, or any other similar sign that communicates
the occupant's desire not to be contacted by solicitors;
      3.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, persist or continue in any solicitation or attempted
solicitation, or peddling or attempted peddling, of any particular member of
the general public after such person has expressed his or her desire that
further solicitation or peddling efforts discontinue;
      4.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, call attention to his or her business or the items to
be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out,
or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure;
      5.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, obstruct the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or
pedestrian, on any street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right of way;
      6.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, conduct business in a way so as to create a threat to
the health, safety, and welfare of any specific individual or the general
public;
      7.   Engage in or attempt to engage in business before eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.;
      8.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, fail to provide proof of license, or registration, and
identification when requested;
      9.   Use the solicitor or peddler license of another person;
      10.   While engaged, or attempting to engage, in the business of
soliciting or peddling, allege false or misleading statements about the
products or services being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No
peddler or solicitor shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person; or
      11.   Remain on the property of another when requested to leave.
   E.   Exemptions: In addition to the exemptions set forth at section
3-2-6 of this chapter, no solicitor or peddler license shall be required for
the following:
      1.   Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles or commodities; newspaper couriers; and persons who have been invited
to call upon another person for the purpose of displaying for possible purchase
goods, literature or giving information about any article, thing, product or
service;
      2.   Farmers, gardeners, or other persons who deliver or sell any
agricultural, horticultural, or farm products which they have actually grown,
harvested, or produced; provided, that this exemption does not apply to the
sale of firewood;
      3.   Any person who makes casual sales of seasonal articles such as
produce, holiday items, handmade gift articles, etc., or provides seasonal
services such as lawn care, snow removal and other household jobs;
      4.   Any person engaged in the business of selling through the United
States mail;
      5.   Charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations, or organizations
that have received exempt status under 26 USC 501(c)(3) or are registered
pursuant to and in compliance with chapter 19.09 Revised Code Of Washington
(charitable solicitations) and have proof of such exempt status or
registration;
      6.   Candidates for political office, campaign workers, members and
representatives of political committees or political organizations campaigning
on behalf of ballot issues, distributors of sample ballots and other political
literature and persons soliciting signatures of registered voters on petitions
to be submitted to any governmental agency;
      7.   Minors conducting fundraising activities, who represent an
organization for the benefit of youths, including, but not limited to, Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, and Little League groups;
      8.   Any person going from house to house, door to door, business to
business, street to street, or any other type of place to place movement for
the primary purpose of exercising that person's state or federal constitutional
rights such as the freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of
religion, and the like. This exemption shall not apply if the person's exercise
of constitutional rights is merely incidental to what would properly be
considered a commercial activity;
      9.   Mobile food vending activities pursuant to and in compliance with a
valid mobile food vendor license;
      10.   Authorized special event vendors engaging in vending activities at
a farmers' or public market or special event; and
      11.   Persons engaged in activities as a noncommercial door to door
advocate.
   F.   Licensee; Applicant: All applications shall be made by, and on behalf
of, each individual who will engage in business in the city as a solicitor or
peddler, and such individual shall be the licensee. If the licensee is not a
sole proprietor, and is acting as an agent, contractor, or employee of another
person, such person shall have and maintain a valid general business license in
the city.
   G.   Application And Issuance: Any individual desiring to obtain a solicitor
or peddler license under this chapter shall apply to the city for such license
upon such forms as the city prepares and provides, and shall give such
information as required herein and any such additional information that the
city administrator deems reasonably necessary to administer and enforce this
chapter, and shall pay the city the sum or sums required to be paid therefor
pursuant to section
3-2-9 of this chapter. An application not including the required information
and license fee shall not be deemed complete and will not be processed by the
city.
The following information shall be included with and be made a part of the
application:
      1.   The applicant's name;
      2.   An address at which the licensee will receive notices from the city;
      3.   A telephone number at which the licensee can be contacted;
      4.   Applicant's name, prior name(s) and aliases; address; present place
of residence and the length of residence at such address; and business address
if other than above identified address;
      5.   Address or place of residence of applicant during the two (2) years
prior to the date of the application;
      6.   In the event the name or address of applicant has changed within the
two (2) years prior to the date of application, each name and address used over
the last two (2) year period;
      7.   Applicant's physical description, date of birth and social security
number;
      8.   Whether applicant has ever been, within the ten (10) year period
prior to the date of the application, convicted of a violation of a felony
under the laws of this state or any other state or federal law of the United
States;
      9.   Whether applicant has ever been, within the five (5) year period
prior to the date of the application, convicted of a violation of a misdemeanor
or gross misdemeanor under the laws of this state or any other state or federal
law of the United States;
      10.   A description of the item(s) or services being sold and/or a
description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the business
in which applicant will engage;
      11.   The license plate number, registration information, vehicle
identification number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle to be used
in conjunction with the licensed business operation;
      12.   Applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of
identification; and
      13.   The uniform business identifier number issued by the state of
Washington or federal tax identification number for the business on whose
behalf the licensee is performing soliciting or peddling services.
   H.   Authorization For Background Check: Applicant shall complete an
authorization form to release information allowing the police department to
conduct a local criminal history background check and allowing the Washington
state patrol to conduct a state and national criminal history check in
accordance with the provisions of Revised Code Of Washington 35A.21.370 and
10.97.050. Applicant may be required to submit to fingerprinting or palm
scanning by the police department, in connection with the application for the
license, and shall be required to provide a copy of a valid driver's license or
picture ID for identification purposes.
   I.   Attestation: Each applicant shall sign the application either in the
presence of the city clerk, or designee, or the city administrator, and shall
provide proof of applicant's identity, or each such applicant's signature shall
be notarized. Each applicant shall attest as to the truth and accuracy of the
contents of the application provided by applicant.
   J.   Receipt: The city shall, upon receipt of a complete application and the
required sum or sums, issue to applicant a receipt stating therein the date,
amount paid and for which type of license was applied.
   K.   Content Of Solicitor Or Peddler License: Every peddler or solicitor
license issued under this chapter shall recite the date of issue, date of
expiration, and the name of the licensee, include an endorsement for either a
peddler or solicitor license, and be signed by the city administrator.
   L.   Investigation Of Applicants: It shall be the duty of the chief of
police, or his/her designee, to investigate each application. The chief of
police, or his/her designee, shall endeavor to complete such investigation
within a reasonable time period after receipt of the complete application. In
his/her investigation, the chief of police, or his/her designee, shall
determine to the best of his/her ability:
      1.   The genuineness of all credentials presented by the applicant;
      2.   The truth of the facts set forth in the application; and
      3.   If the applicant has been convicted of a crime which bears a direct
relationship to the conduct of the business licensed pursuant to this chapter;
provided that, such conviction, if for a felony is less than ten (10) years
old, and if for a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor, is less than five (5) years
old. In considering whether or not the conduct in question relates to the
licensee's/applicant's ability to operate as a mobile vendor, the city may
consider whether the conduct indicates that the applicant or licensee is unfit
to operate as a mobile vendor. The city will presume that the following
categories of crimes that constitute a felony or misdemeanor under Washington
state law or under the laws of the state or district in which the crime was
committed and for which a conviction is less than ten (10) years old for a
felony and less than five (5) years old for a misdemeanor, have a direct
relationship to the fitness of such person to engage in business as solicitor
or peddler:
         a.   Homicide;
         b.   Assault;
         c.   Crimes of dishonesty (e.g., theft, bunco, embezzlement, fraud,
etc.);
         d.   Sex crimes;
         e.   Drug related crimes;
         f.   Crimes against children and/or vulnerable adults;
         g.   Burglary and/or trespass; or
         h.   Kidnapping and/or unlawful imprisonment.
   M.   Carrying Of License Required: The license required by this section
shall be carried at all times by the solicitor or peddler for whom it was
issued when soliciting in the city. The license shall be displayed by the
solicitor or peddler whenever and wherever he or she shall be requested to do
so by any police officer, city official or person solicited or peddled.
   N.   Uninvited Solicitors/Peddlers Prohibited; Violation A Nuisance: It is
unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for a person to go upon a premises and ring
the doorbell upon or near a door, or create a sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence or
business for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof, and
engage in soliciting or peddling, in defiance of the notice prohibiting
soliciting or peddling conspicuously posted upon the premises of such residence
or business.
   O.   Uninvited Solicitors/Peddlers; Departure From Premises Required: It
shall be the duty of every solicitor and peddler upon going onto any premises
of any residence or business in the city to determine if a notice prohibiting
soliciting or peddling has been posted, and to be governed by the statement
contained on the notice by immediately and peacefully departing from the
premises.
      A solicitor who has gained entrance to a residence, business, or
development, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1124, 3-27-2024)
3-2-30: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any act or omission in violation of subsection
3-2-5A of this chapter (failure to obtain a business license) constitutes a
class 1 civil infraction under title 1, chapter 4 of this code for which a
monetary penalty may be assessed and enforced.
   B.   Any act or omission in violation of subsection
3-2-5B of this chapter (expired license) constitutes a class 4 civil infraction
under title 1, chapter 4 of this code for which a monetary penalty may be
assessed and enforced.
   C.   Any act or omission in violation of subsection
3-2-5C or D of this chapter (suspended or revoked license) constitutes a class
1 civil infraction under title 1, chapter 4 of this code for which a monetary
penalty may be assessed and enforced.
   D.   Any act or omission in violation of section
3-2-11, "License Nontransferable", of this chapter constitutes a class 1 civil
infraction under title 1, chapter 4 of this code for which a monetary penalty
may be assessed and enforced.
   E.   It shall be a misdemeanor offense for any person who, with intent
thereby to obtain a business license pursuant to this chapter, knowingly makes
any materially false statement in a written instrument submitted or offered as
part of or in conjunction with a business license application. "Materially
false statement" means any false statement oral or written, regardless of its
admissibility under the rules of evidence, which could have affected the course
or outcome of the issuance of a business license.
   F.   Any act or omission in violation of section
3-2-13, subsection
3-2-26C or
3-2-29M of this chapter (display license) constitutes a class 1 civil
infraction under title 1, chapter 4 of this code for which a monetary penalty
may be assessed and enforced.
   G.   It shall be a misdemeanor offense for any person to operate a carnival
or circus in the city without first having obtained, and having in full force
and effect, a valid special business license issued pursuant to section
3-2-27 of this chapter.
   H.   Except as otherwise provided herein, any act or omission in violation
of this chapter constitutes a class 3 civil infraction under title 1, chapter 4
of this code for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and enforced.
   I.   Every act or omission which constitutes a civil violation under this
chapter, or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto, shall constitute a
separate civil violation for each and every day during any portion of which the
act or omission constituting the violation is committed, continued or
permitted.
   J.   The penalties set forth herein are in addition to any other penalties
or remedies that may be otherwise available pursuant to this code or applicable
laws, or in equity. (Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
CHAPTER 3
ADMISSIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Places Of Amusement
3-3-2: School Activities
3-3-3: Entertainment Places; Refreshments And Merchandise Sales
3-3-4: Collection Of Tax; Remission
3-3-5: Monies Paid Into General Fund
3-3-6: Violation; Penalty
3-3-1: PLACES OF AMUSEMENT:
There is levied and imposed upon every person who enters any place of
amusement, dance hall, or where any game is conducted, or where any
entertainment is provided, or any theater, or any building or enclosure where
any sport is conducted, or entertainment is provided for those that attend the
same, and a charge is provided or collected of or from such person in part or
whole, a tax in an amount equal to one cent ($0.01) on twenty cents ($0.20) or
fraction thereof upon each and every such person entering or attending, and
such charge levied regardless whether the particular person is admitted free,
or at a cut rate, and regardless of age, employment or service. (1973 Code §
3.04.010; amd. 1996 Code)
3-3-2: SCHOOL ACTIVITIES:
No tax shall be imposed on persons paying an admission to any activity of any
elementary or secondary school. (1973 Code § 3.04.020)
3-3-3: ENTERTAINMENT PLACES; REFRESHMENTS AND MERCHANDISE SALES:
Any person who pays admission charge to any public performance for profit at
any roof garden, cabaret, floor show or other similar entertainment, to which
the charge of admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid for
refreshments, service or merchandise, shall pay a tax of three percent (3%)
upon the amount of money collected. (1973 Code § 3.04.030)
3-3-4: COLLECTION OF TAX; REMISSION:
Every person owning or conducting any place where any person is subject to the
foregoing tax, shall collect the tax from each person so entering or taking
part therein, and shall remit the same to the city treasurer within thirty (30)
days from the day the tax is due (except temporary entertainment which shall be
remitted immediately after collection) and take the receipt of the city
treasurer therefor, and shall be liable to the city for the full amount of the
tax for failure so to do. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-3-5: MONIES PAID INTO GENERAL FUND:
The city treasurer shall, within ten (10) days, pay the same into the general
fund of the city. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter and any person convicted of such violation shall
be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1973 Code § 3.04.080)
CHAPTER 4
USE TAX ON NATURAL OR MANUFACTURED GAS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Tax Imposed
3-4-2: Tax Rate Formula
3-4-3: Exemption
3-4-4: Credits
3-4-5: Administration And Collection
3-4-1: TAX IMPOSED:
Pursuant to RCW 82.14.230, there is hereby fixed and imposed on every person a
use tax for the privilege of using natural gas or manufactured gas in the City
as a consumer. (1973 Code § 3.10.010)
3-4-2: TAX RATE FORMULA:
The amount of the tax imposed shall be an amount equal to the value of the
article used by the taxpayer in the City, multiplied by the rate specified in
subsection
3-1-3C of this Title. The "value of the article used", does not include any
amounts that are paid for the hire or use of a natural gas business in
transporting the gas subject to tax under this Section if those amounts are
subject to tax under subsection
3-1-3C of this Title. (1973 Code § 3.10.020)
3-4-3: EXEMPTION:
The tax imposed under this Chapter shall not apply to the use of natural or
manufactured gas if the person who sold the gas to the consumer has paid the
tax under subsection
3-1-3C of this Title, with respect to the gas for which exemption is sought
under this Section. (1973 Code § 3.10.030)
3-4-4: CREDITS:
There shall be a credit against the tax levied under this Section in an amount
equal to any tax paid by:
   A.   The person who sold the gas to the consumer when that tax is a gross
receipts tax similar to that imposed pursuant to the RCW 35.21.870, as
implemented in subsection
 3-1-3C of this Title, by another state with respect to the gas for which a
credit is sought under this Section; or
   B.   The person consuming the gas upon which a use tax similar to the tax
imposed by this Chapter was paid to another state with respect to the gas for
which a credit is sought under this Section. (1973 Code § 3.10.040)
3-4-5: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION:
The use tax hereby imposed shall be paid by the consumer. The administration
and collection of the tax hereby imposed shall be pursuant to RCW 82.14.050.
(1973 Code § 3.10.050)
CHAPTER 5
SALES OR USE TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Imposition; Collection Generally
3-5-2: Tax Rate
3-5-3: Administration And Collection
3-5-4: Inspection Of Records
3-5-5: Failure To Collect Or Pay Tax
3-5-1: IMPOSITION; COLLECTION GENERALLY:
There is imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable
event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020 and RCW 82.14.050, occurring within the
City. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from whom the State sales or
use tax is collected pursuant to RCW chapters 82.08 and 82.12. (1973 Code §
3.12.010)
3-5-2: TAX RATE:
The rate of tax imposed by Section
3-5-1 shall be one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the selling price or value of
the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such
period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Pierce County, the
rate of tax imposed by this Chapter shall be four hundred twenty five one-
thousandths of one percent (0.425%). (1973 Code § 3.12.020)
3-5-3: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION:
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be
in accordance with RCW 82.14.050. (1973 Code § 3.12.030)
3-5-4: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify
the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to
RCW 82.32.330. (1973 Code § 3.12.040)
3-5-5: FAILURE TO COLLECT OR PAY TAX:
Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent
to violate the provisions of this Chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit,
either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under
this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 3.12.050)
ARTICLE A. ADDITIONAL SALES OR USE TAX
SECTION:
3-5A-1: Imposition Of Tax
3-5A-2: Tax Rate
3-5A-3: Administration And Collection
3-5A-4: Inspection Of Records
3-5A-5: Execution Of Contract
3-5A-6: Special Initiative
3-5A-7: Violation; Penalty
3-5A-8: Severability
3-5A-9: Effective Date
3-5A-1: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, as authorized by
Revised Code Of Washington 82.14.030(2), upon every taxable event, as defined
in Revised Code Of Washington 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax
shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state
sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to chapters 82.08 and 82.12 Revised
Code Of Washington. (1973 Code § 3.14.010)
3-5A-2: TAX RATE:
The rate of the tax imposed by section
3-5A-1 of this article shall be one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the selling
price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that
during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by
Pierce County under section 17(2), chapter 49, laws of 1982, first
extraordinary session at a rate equal to or greater than the rate imposed by
this section, the county shall receive fifteen percent (15%) of the tax imposed
by section
3-5A-1 of this article; provided further, that during such period as there is
in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Pierce County under section 17(2),
chapter 49, laws of 1982, first extraordinary session at a rate which is less
than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive from the tax
imposed by section
3-5A-1 of this article that amount of revenues equal to fifteen percent (15%)
of the rate of the tax imposed by the county under section 17(2), chapter 49,
laws of 1982, first extraordinary session. (1973 Code § 3.14.020)
3-5A-3: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION:
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be
in accordance with the provisions of Revised Code Of Washington 82.14.050.
(1973 Code § 3.14.030)
3-5A-4: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify
the city for inspection of records of the department of revenue, pursuant to
Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.330. (1973 Code § 3.14.040)
3-5A-5: EXECUTION OF CONTRACT:
The mayor and city treasurer are authorized to enter into a contract with the
department of revenue for the administration of this tax. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-5A-6: SPECIAL INITIATIVE:
This chapter shall be subject to a special initiative. The number of registered
voters needed to sign a petition for special initiative shall be fifteen
percent (15%) of the total number of names of persons listed as registered
voters within the city on the day of the last preceding municipal general
election. If a special initiative petition is filed with the city council, the
operation of this chapter shall not be suspended pending a final decision on
the disposition of the special initiative. The procedures for initiative
contained in Revised Code Of Washington 35A.11.100 shall apply to any such
special initiative petition. (1973 Code § 3.14.060)
3-5A-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent
to violate the provisions of this article or to gain some advantage or benefit,
either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under
this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1973 Code § 3.14.070; amd. 1996 Code)
3-5A-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application
of the provisions to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (1973 Code
§ 3.14.080)
3-5A-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1983. (1973 Code § 3.14.090)
CHAPTER 6
EXCISE TAX ON SALE OF REAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-6-1: Tax Imposed
3-6-2: Additional Tax
3-6-1: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Excise Tax: Pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 82.46.010, the city
hereby imposes an excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate
limits of the city, at a tax rate of twenty five one-hundredths of one percent
(0.25%) of the selling price. (1973 Code § 3.40.010; amd. Ord. 828, 5-31-2006)
   B.   Use Of Funds: Pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 82.46.010, the
monies received by the city from this tax shall be placed into the general fund
and identified as being available only for capital improvement purposes as
authorized by state statute. (1973 Code § 3.40.020; amd. 1996 Code; Ord. 828,
5-31-2006)
   C.   Administration And Collection: The administration and collection of the
tax imposed by this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Revised Code of Washington 82.46.030. (1973 Code § 3.40.040; amd. Ord. 828, 5-
31-2006)
3-6-2: ADDITIONAL TAX:
   A.   Imposition: Pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 82.46.035, there is
imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a
taxable event as defined in Revised Code of Washington 82.45 and occurring
within the corporate limits of the city. The tax imposed under this section
shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Revised Code
of Washington 82.45 and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules,
regulations, laws, and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as
imposed by the state under Revised Code of Washington 82.45.
   B.   Tax Rate: The rate of tax imposed by this section, pursuant to Revised
Code of Washington 82.46.035(2), shall be one- fourth of one percent (0.25%) of
the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed, and is
in addition to the tax imposed by section
3-6-1 of this chapter.
   C.   Use Of Proceeds: Revenues generated from the tax imposed by this
section shall be used solely for the financing of capital projects specified in
a capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan approved by the city
council. (Ord. 828, 5-31-2006)
CHAPTER 7
CITY FUNDS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Permanent Building Fund
3-7-2: Payrolls Fund
3-7-3: Claims Fund
3-7-1: PERMANENT BUILDING FUND:
   A.   Fund Established: There is authorized, created and established in the
city a cumulative reserve fund for the construction, replacement and repair of
the buildings of the city to be known as the "permanent building fund". (1973
Code § 3.16.050)
   B.   Use Restricted:
      1.   The monies hereafter deposited in the permanent building fund shall
be expended for municipal buildings of the city as the council may hereafter
determine. (1973 Code § 3.16.060; amd. 1996 Code)
      2.   Any monies in the fund shall never be expended for any other purpose
than that specified without an approving vote by a majority of the electors of
the city at a general or special election voting on a proposal submitted to the
electors to allow other specified uses to be made of the fund. (1973 Code §
3.16.080)
   C.   Accumulation Until Expenditure: The monies in the permanent building
fund shall be allowed to accumulate from year to year until the council
determines to expend the monies in the fund for the purpose specified. (1973
Code § 3.16.070)
3-7-2: PAYROLLS FUND:
   A.   Fund: There is created in the treasury of the city a special fund to be
known and designated as "payrolls fund".
   B.   Purpose: The special fund is created for the purpose of paying all
monies due employees for salaries and wages and any and all payroll deductions
subsequent to April 1, 1971.
   C.   Transfer Of Funds: For the purpose of making expenditures from the
payrolls fund as herein authorized the city treasurer is empowered to make
current transfers of monies to the fund from the various other city funds
heretofore or hereafter established in the city treasury against which such
expenditures shall be properly chargeable. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
3-7-3: CLAIMS FUND:
Pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 35.21.085, there is created in the
treasury of the city a special fund to be known and designated as "claims
fund", and to which may be paid monies from time to time from any funds which
are available and upon which warrants may be issued and paid in payment of
claims against the city for any purpose. The accounts of the city shall be so
kept that they shall show the department or departments and the respective
amounts for which the warrant is issued and paid. (1973 Code § 3.28.010)
CHAPTER 8
USE FEES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Scheduling Multi-Purpose Center And Covered Facilities
3-8-2: Priority And Secondary Uses
3-8-3: Change In Schedule/Reservation Of Rights
3-8-4: Fees, Deposits And Other Charges
3-8-5: Deposits/Waiver Of Use Fee And Deposit
3-8-6: Special Event
3-8-7: Event Organizer
3-8-8: Sponsorship
3-8-1: SCHEDULING MULTI-PURPOSE CENTER AND COVERED FACILITIES:
   A.   Policies And Procedures: The city administrator or his/her designee is
authorized to establish, publish, and implement policies and procedures for
special events and for the use of the Multi-Purpose Center, athletic fields and
covered facilities within the city parks, and all other city facilities,
including public rights of way, that are subject to use fees (collectively
referred to as "city facilities"). Such policies shall be consistent with this
chapter and title 8, chapter 6 of this code. The use fees established hereto
may only be waived in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Administration: The parks and recreation director or his/her designee
shall administer this chapter and the policies and procedures established by
the city administrator or his/her designee. The parks and recreation director,
or designee, will schedule and collect the applicable fees for the use of city
facilities. Applications and regulations for the use of city facilities can be
picked up at city hall during normal business hours or on the city website at
www.cityoforting.org. Reservations will not be made until completed
applications are returned to city hall with the approval of the Orting parks
and recreation director or his/her designee. Reservations for the use of city
facilities must be made at least two (2) weeks prior to the event, unless, in
the discretion of the parks and recreation director or his/her designee, good
cause exists to waive the two (2) week notice requirement. In general,
completed applications for requested use of the MPC and covered facilities
shall be processed on a first come, first served basis. (Ord. 919, 11-30-2011)
3-8-2: PRIORITY AND SECONDARY USES:
The city of Orting shall have priority for use of city facilities and all other
users shall be considered secondary uses. In the event a conflict occurs in the
requested use of a city facility, the city parks and recreation director shall
resolve such conflict by reference to the priority for use as set forth below:
   A.   Group 1 city of Orting use: This includes meetings of the city's
elected and appointed bodies and open houses, activities or events conducted or
sponsored by the city of Orting.
   B.   Group 2 associated groups: This includes individuals or entities
contracted to perform services for the city wherein use of the MPC or covered
facilities is necessary in the course of performance of such services.
   C.   Group 3 local groups/residents: This includes entities with their
principal place of business in the city of Orting and individuals who reside
within the city limits.
   D.   Group 4 nonlocal groups/residents: This includes entities with their
principal place of business outside the city of Orting and individuals who
reside outside the city limits. (Ord. 919, 11-30-2011)
3-8-3: CHANGE IN SCHEDULE/RESERVATION OF RIGHTS:
The city reserves the right to make changes in the scheduling, if in the sole
judgment of the city, a city facility is needed for an activity or event for
governmental purposes, including, by way of example and not limitation,
scheduling of a special or emergency meeting, open houses, hearings, or events
or activities of the city of Orting. The city reserves the right to, without
recourse to the city, cancel a reservation and refund any prepaid deposits and
use fees in the event that the reserved city facility, in sole judgment of the
city administrator or his/her designee, is needed for an activity or event for
use by the city of Orting, becomes unsafe for use, requires emergency
maintenance to render the city facility safe, or otherwise requires unplanned
maintenance that, taking into consideration cost and availability of resources,
cannot reasonably be performed at another time. (Ord. 919, 11-30-2011)
3-8-4: FEES, DEPOSITS AND OTHER CHARGES:
All fees, deposits and other charges for use of city facilities shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 919, 11-
30-2011)
3-8-5: DEPOSITS/WAIVER OF USE FEE AND DEPOSIT:
   A.   MPC And Covered Park Facilities Deposit Required: Except as provided
below, all groups using the city's MPC and covered park facilities shall be
required to make a refundable deposit at the time of application for use of the
MPC and covered park facilities. The deposit shall be refunded within five (5)
business days provided that reasonable care has been exercised in the use of
the MPC and covered park facilities, no part of the MPC and covered park
facilities have been damaged, and the MPC and covered park facilities are left
in a clean and orderly condition.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages Served - Additional Deposit And Insurance
Requirement: When serving alcoholic beverages users shall pay an additional
deposit and obtain liability insurance applicable to such an event with a
minimum one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence coverage. Alcoholic
beverage consumption on city property is regulated by section
8-6-4 of this code.
   C.   Use Fee And Deposit Waived: Except as provided below, no use fee or
deposit shall be required for the following users or uses of a city facility:
      1.   Use by the city of Orting for official purposes, including, without
limitation, Orting parks and recreation programs;
      2.   Limited use by state or local governmental agencies for official
government purposes; or
      3.   Use by any person, association, partnership, organization, company,
or corporation for activities or events that are funded or sponsored in whole
or in part by the city of Orting. (Ord. 2016-982, 3-30-2016)
3-8-6: SPECIAL EVENT:
"Special event" shall mean any event which is to be conducted on public
property or public right-of-way; and, any event held on private property which
would have a direct significant impact on traffic congestion or traffic flow to
and from the event over public streets or rights-of-ways near the event, or,
which would significantly impact the need for City-provided emergency services,
such as police, fire, or medial aid. It is presumed that any event on private
property which involves an open invitation to the public, or events where the
attendance is by private invitation of one hundred (100) or more people are
each presumed to be an event that will have a direct significant impact on
public streets, rights-of-way or emergency services. A special event can
include, but is not limited to:
   A.   Any organized formation, parade, procession or assembly consisting of
persons, animals, vehicles or any combination thereof, traveling in unison and
with a common purpose upon any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other
public way which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or
control; or
   B.   Any organized assemblage of fifty (50) or more persons at any public
park or city facility which is to gather for a common purpose under the
direction and control of a responsible person or agency; or
   C.   Any other organized activity or set of activities open to the public
conducted by an individual, group or entity for a common or collective use or
benefit and which involves the use of public facilities or rights-of-way and
the possible or necessary provision of City services ancillary thereto.
   Examples of special events include but are not limited to fun runs/walks,
athletic competitions, bike-a-thons, parades, carnivals, city/town heritage
celebrations, shows or exhibitions, holiday festivals, circuses, block parties,
markets, musical entertainments, and motion picture filming.
   Mobile Vendors (OMC
3-2-25) are prohibited in residential zones except where associated with a
permitted special event.
   Events shall meet all applicable, adopted City policies and procedures.
Event organizers must fill out and submit the Special Event Application.
(Ord. 919, 11-30-2011; amd. Ord. 2024-1122, 2-28-2024)
3-8-7: EVENT ORGANIZER:
   "Event organizer" shall mean any person who conducts, manages, promotes,
organizes, aids or solicits attendance at a special event.
(Ord. 919, 11-30-2011)
3-8-8: SPONSORSHIP:
   A.   Definition: "Sponsorship" shall mean a special event that meets one or
more of the following criteria: 1) that is managed or organized by the city, or
by another person on the city's behalf, 2) funded in whole or in part by the
city, 3) for which the city provides, at no cost, in kind services in support
of the special event, or 4) for which the city has agreed to lend its name as a
sponsor or cosponsor.
   B.   Criteria For All Sponsored Events: Sponsorship is extended to events
that serve valid municipal purposes for which the City Council approves use of
city facilities and services by a non-profit group without charge. Sponsorship
is extended to events upon application, on a case-by-case basis and at the
discretion of the council. To qualify for sponsorship, an approved event must:
      1.   Be one where all citizens can reasonably participate;
      2.   Serve a valid municipal purpose, such as strengthening the City's
sense of community or celebrating a City's history; and
      3.   May provide, through increased customers, additional revenues for
Orting businesses and subsequently improved tax revenues for the City.
      4.   Organizations must be a non-profit that is actively registered with
the Washington Secretary of State.
      5.   Organizations must fill out the Special Event Application and carry
their own liability insurance that complies with the Special Event Sponsorship
policy.
   C.   Sponsorship Decisions: A special event may be sponsored by the city
upon approval by the city council in accordance with applicable sponsorship
policies.
(Ord. 919, 11-30-2011; amd. Ord. 2024-1122, 2-28-2024)
CHAPTER 9
LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-9-1: Established
3-9-2: Membership
3-9-3: Appointments
3-9-4: Terms
3-9-5: Compensation
3-9-6: Duties
3-9-7: Meetings
3-9-1: ESTABLISHED:
The Orting lodging tax advisory committee is hereby established. (Ord. 908, 6-
29-2011)
3-9-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The lodging tax advisory committee shall consist of at least five (5) members.
The committee membership shall be in accordance with Revised Code Of Washington
67.28.181 and shall include:
   A.   At least two (2) members who are representatives of businesses required
to collect the lodging tax;
   B.   At least two (2) members who are persons involved in activities
authorized to be funded by revenue received from the lodging tax; and
   C.   One elected official of the city who shall serve as chair of the
committee.
Persons eligible for appointment under subsection A of this section are not
eligible for appointment under subsection B of this section. Persons eligible
for appointment under subsection B of this section are not eligible for
appointment under subsection A of this section. The number of members who are
representatives of business required to collect the lodging tax shall equal the
number of members who are involved in activities authorized to be funded by
revenue received from the lodging tax. (Ord. 908, 6-29-2011)
3-9-3: APPOINTMENTS:
The members of the lodging tax advisory committee shall be appointed by the
mayor and approved by the city council. (Ord. 908, 6-29-2011)
3-9-4: TERMS:
Each lodging tax advisory committee member shall serve for a term of three (3)
years, except that the first two (2) members of the committee shall be
appointed for terms of two (2) years. The city council shall review the
membership of the committee annually and make changes as appropriate. (Ord.
908, 6-29-2011)
3-9-5: COMPENSATION:
The members of the lodging tax advisory committee shall receive no compensation
and are not eligible for reimbursement of expenses incidental to service on the
committee. The committee may request in advance to the city administrator
specific support necessary to carry out its responsibilities. (Ord. 908, 6-29-
2011)
3-9-6: DUTIES:
The lodging tax advisory committee will review and make recommendations to the
city council regarding:
   A.   Plans to impose any new lodging tax;
   B.   Plans to repeal and exemption from the lodging tax; and/or
   C.   Propose changes to the use of lodging tax proceeds.
The committee recommendations shall include an analysis of the extent to which
the proposal will accommodate activities for tourists or increase tourism, and
the extent to which the proposal will affect the long term stability of the
fund created under Revised Code Of Washington 67.28.181. The lodging tax
advisory committee will comply with all local, state, and federal statutes
regarding the open public meetings act and the public disclosure act. (Ord.
908, 6-29-2011)
3-9-7: MEETINGS:
The lodging tax advisory committee shall convene meetings when necessary to
meet the duties required under this chapter. Records of the committee meetings
will be kept by a committee member who shall be appointed secretary and who
shall submit such records to the city clerk. A majority of the members of the
committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and any
action taken by a majority of those present shall be deemed action of the
committee. The committee may establish administrative procedures for the
conduct of meetings, voting, review, analysis, and preparation of comments.
Each member, including the chair, shall be entitled to one vote. (Ord. 908, 6-
29-2011)
CHAPTER 10
LODGING TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Tax Imposed
3-10-2: Definitions Adopted
3-10-3: Tax In Addition To License Fees Or Other Taxes
3-10-4: Special Fund Created For Tourism
3-10-5: Collection And Administration
3-10-6: Violation; Penalty
3-10-7: Tax Credit; Amount Due
3-10-1: TAX IMPOSED:
Pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 67.28.180, there is hereby created a
special excise tax of two percent (2%) on the sale of or charge made for the
furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under chapter 82.08 Revised Code
Of Washington. The tax imposed under chapter 82.08 Revised Code Of Washington
applies to the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel,
rooming house, tourist court, motel, or trailer camp, and the granting of any
similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or
leasing of real property. It shall be presumed that the occupancy of real
property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or
lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. (Ord.
933, 8-8-2012)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS ADOPTED:
The definitions of "selling price", "seller", "buyer", "consumer", and all
other definitions as are now contained in Revised Code Of Washington 82.08.010,
and subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted as the definitions for the tax
levied in this chapter. (Ord. 929, 5-30-2012)
3-10-3: TAX IN ADDITION TO LICENSE FEES OR OTHER TAXES:
The tax imposed in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any
other tax imposed or levied under any other law or any other ordinance of the
city. (Ord. 929, 5-30-2012)
3-10-4: SPECIAL FUND CREATED FOR TOURISM:
There is created a special fund to be known as the "tourism promotion fund no.
107" in the treasury of the city. All such taxes collected under this chapter
shall be placed in this special fund to be used solely for the purpose of
paying all or any part of the cost of tourism promotion, or acquisition of or
operation of tourism related facilities or to pay for other uses as authorized
in chapter 67.28 Revised Code Of Washington, as now permitted or hereafter
amended. Until withdrawn for use, the monies accumulated in such fund may be
invested by the city in any manner authorized by law. (Ord. 929, 5-30-2012)
3-10-5: COLLECTION AND ADMINISTRATION:
For the purposes of the tax levied in this chapter:
   A.   The department of revenue is designated as the agent of the city for
the purposes of collection and administration of the tax.
   B.   The administrative provisions contained in chapters 82.08 and 82.32
Revised Code Of Washington shall apply to the administration and collection of
the tax by the department of revenue.
   C.   All rules and regulations adopted by the department of revenue for the
administration of chapter 82.08 Revised Code Of Washington are adopted by
reference.
   D.   The department of revenue is authorized to prescribe and utilize such
forms and reporting procedures as the department may deem necessary and
appropriate. (Ord. 929, 5-30-2012)
3-10-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter and any person convicted of such violation shall
be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 929, 5-30-2012)
3-10-7: TAX CREDIT; AMOUNT DUE:
In accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 67.28.1801, the tax collected
pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 67.28.180 on a sale of lodging shall be
credited against the amount of sales tax due to the state under chapter 82.08
Revised Code Of Washington on the same sale of lodging. (Ord. 933, 8-8-2012)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 2 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Hours Of Sale
4-2-1: HOURS OF SALE:
It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, give away or dispose of beer or wine or
other intoxicating liquor, within the corporate limits of the City, or permit
the same to be consumed on the premises during any hours other than those
presently allowed by the rules and regulations and orders of the Washington
State Liquor Control Board in force and effect on the effective date of the
Ordinance codified herein. (1973 Code § 5.04.010)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 939, 4-30-2014)
CHAPTER 5
GAMBLING ACTIVITIES TAX
SECTION:
4-5-1: State Statutes Incorporated
4-5-2: Persons Subject To Tax; Rates
4-5-3: Quarterly Computation And Payment; Exceptions
4-5-4: Administration And Collection; Report To State
4-5-5: Payment Method
4-5-6: Failure To Make Payment
4-5-7: Conducting Taxable Activity; Declaration Of Intention
4-5-8: Maintaining Records
4-5-9: Erroneous Payments
4-5-10: Failure To Make Return
4-5-11: Tax Additional To Others
4-5-12: Debt To City
4-5-13: Limitation On Right To Recovery
4-5-14: Violation; Penalty
4-5-1: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
The provisions of Revised Code Of Washington 9.46 are incorporated in total by
reference, including any amendments thereto. Taxation of gambling devices is
covered by Revised Code Of Washington 9.46.110. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAX; RATES:
   A.   Charitable, Nonprofit And Other Organizations: There is levied upon all
charitable or nonprofit organizations and all associations conducting or
operating within the city any of the activities listed below, a tax in the
following amounts to be paid to the city:
      1.   Punchboards Or Pull-Tabs: Any punchboards or pull-tabs, in the
amount of ten percent (10%) of the gross receipts less the amount paid out as
prizes, generated directly from the operation of the punchboards and/or pull-
tabs themselves.
      2.   Card Playing: Card playing in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the
gross receipts received as fees charged persons for the privilege of playing in
card games; provided, however, a minimum tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per year shall be imposed on each licensee, said tax payable at such time as
the licensee is authorized to conduct social card games within the city.
      3.   Bingo: Bingo in the amount of ten percent (10%) of gross revenues,
less amounts distributed for prizes.
   B.   Taverns And Restaurants: There is levied upon all commercial stimulant
operators (taverns and restaurants) conducting or operating within the city any
of the activities listed below, a tax in the following amounts to be paid to
the city:
      1.   Punchboards Or Pull-Tabs: Any punchboards or pull-tabs, in the
amount of four percent (4%) of the gross receipts generated directly from the
operation of the punchboards and/or pull-tabs themselves.
      2.   Card Playing: Card playing in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the
gross receipts received as fees charged persons for the privilege of playing in
card games; provided, however, a minimum tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per year shall be imposed on each licensee, said tax payable at such time as
the licensee is authorized to conduct social card games within the city.
      3.   Bingo: Bingo in the amount of ten percent (10%) of gross revenues,
less amounts distributed for prizes. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-3: QUARTERLY COMPUTATION AND PAYMENT; EXCEPTIONS:
Each of the various taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed on the
basis of activity during each calendar quarter year, shall be due and payable
in quarterly installments, and remittance therefor, together with return forms,
shall be made to the city, on or before the last day of the month next
succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, that is, on January
31, April 30, July 31 and October 31 of each year; provided, that the following
exceptions to this payment schedule shall be allowed, or required:
   A.   Whenever any person, association or organization taxable hereunder
conducting or operating a taxable activity for a period of more than two (2)
consecutive weeks, quits business, sells out, otherwise disposes of its
business or terminates the business, any tax due hereunder shall become due and
payable, and such taxpayer shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, make a
return and pay the tax due.
   B.   Whenever it appears to the city treasurer that the collection of taxes
from any person, association or organization may be in jeopardy, the city
treasurer, after not less than ten (10) days' notice to the taxpayer, is
authorized to require that taxpayer to remit taxes and returns at such shorter
intervals than quarterly or annually, as the city treasurer shall deem
appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-4: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION; REPORT TO STATE:
   A.   Payment And Collection: Administration and collection of the various
taxes imposed by this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city
treasurer. Remittance of the amount due shall be accompanied by a completed
return form prescribed and provided by the city treasurer. The taxpayer shall
be required to swear and affirm that the information given in the return is
true, accurate and complete.
   B.   Return Forms: The city treasurer is authorized, but not required, to
mail to taxpayers forms for returns. Failure of the taxpayer to receive such a
form shall not excuse a taxpayer from making the return and timely paying all
taxes due. The city treasurer shall make forms available to the public in
reasonable numbers in the city treasurer's office during regular business
hours.
   C.   State Report: In addition to the return form, a copy of the taxpayer's
quarterly report to the Washington state gambling commission required by WAC
230-08 for the period in which the tax accrued, shall accompany remittance of
the tax amount due. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-5: PAYMENT METHOD:
Taxes payable hereunder shall be remitted to the city treasurer on or before
the time required by bank draft, certified check, cashier's check, personal
check, money order or in cash. If payment is made by draft or check, the tax
shall not be deemed paid until the draft or check is honored in the usual
course of business, nor shall the acceptance of any sum by the city treasurer
be an acquittance or discharge of the tax unless the amount paid is the full
amount due. The return, and copy of quarterly report to the Washington state
gambling commission, shall be filed in the office of the city treasurer after
notation by that office upon the return of the amount actually received from
the taxpayer. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-6: FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENT:
   A.   Penalty Amount: If full payment of any tax or fee due under this
chapter is not received by the city treasurer on or before the date due, there
shall be added to the amount due a penalty fee as follows:
      1.   One to ten (10) days late, ten percent (10%) of tax due,
      2.   Eleven (11) to sixty (60) days late, thirty percent (30%) of tax
due,
but in no event shall the penalty amount be less than ten percent (10%). In
addition to this penalty, the city treasurer may charge the taxpayer interest
of nine percent (9%) of all taxes and fees due for each thirty (30) day period,
or portion thereof, that said amounts are past due.
   B.   Civil And Criminal Violation: Failure to make payment in full of all
tax amounts, and penalties, within sixty (60) days following the day the tax
amount initially became due shall be both a civil and a criminal violation of
this section. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-7: CONDUCTING TAXABLE ACTIVITY; DECLARATION OF INTENTION:
   A.   Filing Declaration: In order that the city may identify those persons
who are subject to taxation under this chapter, each person, association or
organization, including charitable and nonprofit organizations, shall file with
the city treasurer a sworn declaration of intent to conduct an activity taxable
under this chapter upon a form to be prescribed by the city treasurer together
with a copy of the license issued therefor by the Washington state gambling
commission. The filing shall be made not later than ten (10) days prior to
conducting or operating the taxable activity. No fee shall be charged for such
filing, which is not for the purpose of regulation of this activity but for the
purposes of administration of this chapter only.
   B.   Failure To File; Tax Liability: Failure to timely file shall not excuse
any person, association or organization from any tax liability. (Ord. 958, 7-9-
2014)
4-5-8: MAINTAINING RECORDS:
   A.   Duration Of Keeping Records: Each person engaging in an activity
taxable under this chapter shall maintain records respecting that activity
which truly, completely and accurately discloses all information necessary to
determine the taxpayer's tax liability hereunder during each base tax period.
Such records shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than three
(3) years. In addition, all information and items required by the Washington
state gambling commission under WAC 230-08, and the United States internal
revenue service respecting taxation, shall be kept and maintained for the
periods required by those agencies.
   B.   Inspection And Audit: All books, records and other items required to be
kept and maintained under this chapter shall be subject to, and immediately
made available for, inspection and audit at any time, with or without notice,
at the place where such records are kept, upon demand by the city treasurer or
his designees, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Records Outside City Jurisdiction: Where a taxpayer does not keep all
of the books, records or items required to be kept or maintained under this
chapter in this jurisdiction so that the city treasurer may examine them
conveniently, the taxpayer shall either:
      1.   Produce all of the required books, records or items within this
jurisdiction for such inspection within ten (10) days following a request of
the local official that he do so; or
      2.   Bear the actual cost of inspection by the city treasurer or his
designee, at the location at which such books, records or items are located,
provided that a taxpayer choosing to bear these costs shall pay in advance to
the city treasurer the estimated cost thereof, including, but not limited to,
round trip fare by the most rapid means, lodging, meals and incidental
expenses. The actual amount due, or to be refunded for expenses shall be
determined following said examination of the records.
   D.   Jeopardy Fee Or Tax Assessment:
      1.   A taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to produce such books and
records either within or without this jurisdiction, in addition to being
subject to other civil and criminal penalties provided by this chapter shall be
subject to a jeopardy fee or tax assessment by the city treasurer.
      2.   This penalty fee or jeopardy assessment shall be deemed prima facie
correct and shall be the amount of fee or tax owing the city treasurer by the
taxpayer unless he can prove otherwise by competent evidence. The taxpayer
shall be notified by mail by the city treasurer of the amount of tax so
determined by jeopardy assessment, together with any penalty and/or interest,
and the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and
payable. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-9: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
If, upon application by a taxpayer for a refund or for an audit of his records,
or upon any examination of the returns or records of any taxpayer, it is
determined by the city treasurer that within three (3) years immediately
preceding receipt by the city treasurer of the application of the taxpayer for
a refund, or an audit, or, in the absence of such an application, within the
three (3) years immediately preceding the commencement by the city treasurer of
such examination:
   A.   Overpayment: A tax or other fee has been paid in excess of that
properly due, the total excess paid over all amounts due the city within such
period of three (3) years shall be credited to the taxpayer's account or shall
be allowed with respect to the city treasurer more than three (3) years before
the date of such application or examination;
   B.   Underpayment: A tax or other fee has been paid which is less than that
properly due, or no tax or other fee has been paid, the city treasurer shall
mail a statement to the taxpayer showing the balance due, including separate,
additional violation of this chapter, both civil and criminal, if the taxpayer
fails to make payment in full within ten (10) calendar days of such mailing.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-10: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN:
If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make and file his return as and
when required under this chapter, the city treasurer is authorized to determine
the amount of tax payable, together with any penalty and/or interest assessed
under the provisions of this chapter, and by mail to notify such taxpayer of
the amount so determined, which amount shall thereupon become the tax and
penalty and/or interest and shall become immediately due and payable. (Ord.
958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-11: TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHERS:
The tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or
levied under the law or any other ordinance of the city except as herein
otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-12: DEBT TO CITY:
Any tax due and unpaid under this chapter and all penalties or fees shall
constitute a debt to the city, a municipal corporation, and may be collected by
court proceedings the same as any other debt in like amount which shall be in
addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-13: LIMITATION ON RIGHT TO RECOVERY:
The right of recovery by the city from the taxpayer for any tax provided
hereunder shall be outlawed after the expiration of three (3) calendar years
from the date said tax became due. The right of recovery against the city
because of overpayment of tax by any taxpayer shall be outlawed after the
expiration of the three (3) calendar years from date such payment was made.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
4-5-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the city treasurer pursuant
thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
CHAPTER 6
LICENSING FOR ANIMAL BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-6A-1: Applicability
4-6A-2: Definitions
4-6A-3: Licenses Required
4-6A-4: Requirements For Issuance Or Renewal Of License
4-6A-5: Denial Of License
4-6A-6: Term Of License
4-6A-7: Probationary License; Temporary License
4-6A-8: Renewal Of License
4-6A-9: Display Of License
4-6A-10: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-6A-11: Appeals
4-6A-12: Death Or Incapacity Of Licensee
4-6A-13: Limitation Of Transfers And Reapplications
4-6A-14: Liability Insurance
4-6A-15: Authorization To Enter And Inspect Premises
4-6A-16: Civil Penalty
4-6A-17: Notice And Order
4-6A-18: Operating Without A License
4-6A-19: Criminal Penalties
4-6A-20: Right To Pick Up And Hold License
4-6A-21: Validity Of This Chapter
4-6A-22: License Fee; Nonrefundable
4-6A-1: APPLICABILITY:
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall apply to all
articles of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUDITOR: The Pierce County auditor and/or his agents.
COUNCIL: The city of Orting city council.
EXAMINER: Any hearing board or hearing examiner appointed by the city of Orting
city council.
PERSON: Means and includes, but is not limited to, natural persons of either
sex, firms, corporations, partnerships or associations. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-
2016)
4-6A-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
Licenses required are for regulation and control. This entire chapter shall be
deemed an exercise of the power of the state of Washington, Pierce County and
the city of Orting to license for regulation and/or control and all its
provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of either or
both such purposes. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
No license required hereunder shall be issued except upon application therefor
made in writing to the auditor by filing the same with the auditor. The auditor
shall provide application forms for each license under this chapter, which
shall require such information as the auditor deems appropriate, in addition to
the information required by the various licensing provisions of this chapter,
as now existing or hereafter amended. The applicant himself must prepare and
sign the application. If the application is a partnership, a partner must sign
and the names of the partners in full shall be given with their current
residences. If the applicant is a corporation, an authorized officer thereof
must sign and the names and current residences of all of the officers and
directors or trustees of the corporation shall be given together with the
location of the principal office or place of business of such corporation. All
corporations must have a designated manager who meets the requirements of this
section. All corporations must designate an agent, who resides in Pierce
County, to receive service for said corporation. The auditor shall approve or
deny all applications for license required hereunder.
No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to the
following persons:
   A.   Any person who is not eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the
application (except as may specifically otherwise be provided herein).
   B.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, excluding
minor traffic violations, if:
      1.   The felony or misdemeanor for which he was convicted directly
relates to the license sought, and
      2.   The time elapsed since the felony is less than ten (10) years, or
      3.   The time elapsed since the misdemeanor is less than three (3) years.
This section shall not preclude the fact of any prior conviction of a felony or
misdemeanor from being considered.
   C.   Any person who has had a license revoked within a period of one year
prior to the date of making application for a license hereunder.
   D.   Any person who is not qualified under any specific provision of this
chapter for any particular license for which application is made.
   E.   Any person who at the time of application is in default in the payment
of any sum due Pierce County for any license.
   F.   Any person whose license is under suspension or revocation at the time
of application for a license.
   G.   Any partnership or corporation having as a partner, member of the board
of directors, corporate officer or stockholder holding over twenty percent
(20%) of the stock, anyone who does not meet the qualifications of this
section.
   H.   Any person who has made a materially false statement in the application
for a license.
No license shall be issued unless the premises where the activity is to be
conducted complies with the requirements of all governmental agencies,
including, but not limited to, federal, state, city and county resolutions
relating to buildings, fire, health, sanitation, zoning, taxation, public
safety, and all other requirements and conditions specifically set forth in
other sections of this chapter.
The mere filing of an application for a license shall not give the applicant
any right to engage in the activity covered thereby. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-5: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
If the requirements for issuance or renewal of a license are not met, the
application shall be denied by the auditor. A decision regarding denial shall
be in writing. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant to the address
listed on the application via first class and certified mail with return
receipt requested. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except a
probationary license and those licenses for which a shorter term is herein
specified, shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless sooner
revoked in the manner provided for in this article. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-7: PROBATIONARY LICENSE; TEMPORARY LICENSE:
The auditor may, if deemed in the public interest, grant a probationary license
which shall authorize limited operation on such terms and conditions as the
auditor deems necessary to provide reasonable safeguards for the public against
misuse of such license. Grounds for issuances of a probationary license
include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Applicant has had a business occupation license for any nature revoked
within ten (10) years prior to the date of application;
   B.   Applicant has been convicted of a felony within ten (10) years prior to
the date of application. Except as otherwise provided herein, the auditor may
issue a temporary license to be operative pending the sheriff's investigation,
if a preliminary investigation indicates the applicant will more than likely
receive a license. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-8: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except as
otherwise specifically provided, may be renewed at the expiration of the term
thereof in the same manner as provided in section
4-6A-4 of this article on or before fifteen (15) days from the date of
expiration of such license. Any licensee who shall fail to submit application
or make payment on or prior to the expiration date of said license shall be
subjected to penalty payments in the following amounts:
   A.   One to ten (10) days inclusive: No penalty;
   B.   Eleven (11) days to thirty (30) days inclusive: A penalty of ten
percent (10%) of the license fee or two dollars ($2.00), whichever is greater;
   C.   Over thirty (30) days: Canceled. No person may continue to work
subsequent to the expiration date of his license.
The auditor shall review all applications for a renewal and cause such
investigation, as he deems necessary, to be conducted.
All licenses issued subsequent to the initial license period shall be deemed
renewal licenses if there has been no discontinuance of the licensee's
operations or activities, or unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-
2016)
4-6A-9: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Unless otherwise stated in the specific provisions of other sections of this
chapter, all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be posted on the device, vehicle or thing licensed or at the place where the
licensed business, calling, profession, trade, occupation or activity is
carried on, in such a manner as to be readily viewed by the general public.
(Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The auditor or any examiner appointed by the council shall have the power and
authority to suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter when the auditor determines that there are sufficient grounds for
suspending or revoking any license issued pursuant to this chapter. The auditor
shall notify such licensee in writing by certified mail of the suspension or
revocation of his license and the grounds therefor. Notice mailed to the last
business address on file with the auditor shall constitute sufficient notice.
In addition to grounds specifically provided in the individual licensing
sections, any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked based on one or more of the following grounds:
   A.   The license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact.
   B.   The licensee has violated or failed to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The licensee, or any of his servants, agents, or employees while acting
within the scope of their employment, has committed a felony or misdemeanor,
excluding minor traffic violations.
   D.   The licensee or any of his servants, agents, or employees, while acting
within the scope of their employment, have violated any law or resolution
relating to the sale or possession of intoxicating liquor; the use, possession
or sale of narcotic or dangerous drugs or violated any law or resolution
relating to public morality and decency.
   E.   The conduct of the business or activity for which the license was
issued has resulted in the creation of a nuisance or has caused disorderly
conduct to occur on or immediately adjacent to the business premises.
   F.   The check submitted with the license application has been dishonored.
The city, the auditor and Pierce County sheriff are hereby designated as the
enforcing officers of this code. Any failure or refusal on the part of any
licensee to obey any rule, regulation or request of the city or its agent,
auditor or his/her agent, or sheriff or his/her agent, shall be grounds for the
revocation of a license.
A decision regarding suspension or revocation shall be in writing. The decision
shall be mailed to the applicant/licensee to the address listed on the
application via first class and certified mail with return receipt requested.
The period of revocation shall be at least one year and the licensee shall not
again be licensed for a similar business during such period or for such
additional period as is fixed by the auditor or examiner.
The period of suspension shall be fixed by the auditor or examiner at not more
than three hundred sixty five (365) days. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-11: APPEALS:
   A.   An applicant/licensee shall have the right to appeal the auditor's
decision by submitting a written notice of appeal along with payment of a two
hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) appeal fee to the auditor within ten (10)
calendar days of the date of the decision.
   B.   The appeal shall be heard within ninety (90) calendar days by the
examiner, unless the parties agree otherwise.
   C.   The timely filing of a notice of appeal and payment of the appeal fee
by an applicant/licensee shall stay the decision of the auditor until a final
decision is issued by the examiner, unless the examiner determines that the
actions of the applicant/licensee constitutes an imminent danger to public
health, safety, or welfare, in which case the examiner may order that the
action not be stayed pending appeal. A stay shall automatically terminate if
the check that was submitted with the written appeal is dishonored.
   D.   Except as provided in this section, the appeal shall proceed in
accordance with section
1-12-3 of this code.
   E.   The burden of proof shall be upon the county to show, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the requirements for issuing a license have not
been fulfilled, or that the applicant is ineligible for the license, or that
the standards for suspending or revoking a license have been met.
   F.   The scope of evidence and the scope of review before the examiner shall
be de novo.
   G.   The examiner may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision, and may
reinstate the license and may impose any terms upon the continuance of the
license which may seem advisable.
   H.   All decisions of the examiner shall be rendered within thirty (30)
calendar days following the conclusion of all testimony. Copies of the decision
shall be sent to the auditor and the applicant/licensee.
   I.   If the applicant/licensee prevails on appeal, the appeal fee listed in
this section shall be refunded.
   J.   The decision of the examiner shall be final, unless a writ of review is
filed in superior court within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the
decision. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-12: DEATH OR INCAPACITY OF LICENSEE:
In the event of the incapacity, death, receivership, bankruptcy, or assignment
for benefit of creditors of any licensee, then his guardian, executor,
administrator, receiver, trustee in bankruptcy or assignee for benefit of
creditors may, upon written authority from the auditor or its designated
agents, continue the business of the licensee on the licensed premises for the
duration of the license, unless sooner terminated. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-13: LIMITATION OF TRANSFERS AND REAPPLICATIONS:
   A.   Except as provided herein, no individual may transfer a license issued
pursuant to this chapter.
      1.   This limitation shall not apply in any of the circumstances set
forth in section
4-6A-12 of this article.
      2.   In the event of the withdrawal of a partner, the license may be
transferred to the remaining partner or partners.
   B.   No reapplication for a license shall be made within a period of ninety
(90) days following a denial of such license.
   C.   No change shall be made in the management or officers of any licensed
business unless said personnel comply with section
4-6A-4 of this article.
   D.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, no licensee shall change
location without reapplying for a license. No portion of any prior licensee fee
shall be refundable.
   E.   All corporations must have a designated manager. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-
2016)
4-6A-14: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Unless otherwise provided, such applicant for any license under this chapter
shall at all times maintain in full force and effect a policy of property
damage and public liability insurance equal to the minimum state requirement
for private vehicles on any vehicle used by said applicant, his servants,
agents, or employees in the conduct of the business or thing licensed. A copy
of such policy shall be filed with the auditor with written endorsements
thereon showing that the auditor must be given written notice in the event of
cancellation of said policy either by the company or the insured. (Ord. 2016-
987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-15: AUTHORIZATION TO ENTER AND INSPECT PREMISES:
By making application for the privilege of having any license included in this
chapter, each applicant authorizes the city or its agent, auditor or his/her
agent, the sheriff and/or any other appropriate agency to enter and inspect to
ensure compliance with code provisions, all licensed premises, or any premises
in any way connected physically or otherwise with a licensed business,
including vehicles used in connection therewith, at any time during normal
business hours. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-16: CIVIL PENALTY:
In addition to, or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by
law, any person who engages in any activity, for which a license is required
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, while his or her license is
suspended or revoked, or who fails to obtain a license prior to engaging in the
activity for which a license is required, shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of operation without a
license, and shall be subject to such further penalties as set forth herein.
The penalty shall be paid within fifteen (15) days unless a timely appeal is
filed. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-17: NOTICE AND ORDER:
The auditor or his/her agent may issue a notice and order directed to the
person whom the auditor or his/her agent has determined to be in violation of
any of the terms and provisions of this chapter. The notice and order shall
contain:
   A.   The street address, when available, or a description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the violation occurred;
   B.   A statement that the auditor or his/her agent has found a violation of
this chapter or the terms of any license with a brief and concise description
of the violation;
   C.   A statement of any corrective action required to be taken;
   D.   If the auditor or his/her agent has decided to assess a civil penalty,
the order shall so state along with the payment due date;
   E.   A statement that failure to comply with the instructions outlined in
the notice and order will constitute sufficient grounds for suspension or
revocation of the license;
   F.   A statement advising:
      1.   That the licensee may appeal the notice and order in accordance with
section
4-6A-11 of this article; and
      2.   That the failure to file a timely and complete appeal will
constitute a waiver of all rights to an appeal.
The notice and order, and any amended notice and order, shall be served upon
the person either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by
regular and certified mail with return receipt requested to such person at his
address as it appears on the license. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-18: OPERATING WITHOUT A LICENSE:
Each day that any person operates any device, vehicle or thing, or engages in
any business, calling, profession, trade, occupation or activity licensed
herein without having a valid existing license as provided for by this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense and be punished as such. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-
17-2016)
4-6A-19: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person violating or failing to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in any sum
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or both, at the discretion of
the court. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-20: RIGHT TO PICK UP AND HOLD LICENSE:
The city, auditor or his agent and the sheriff shall have the right to pick up
and hold a license when a violation of this chapter has been committed in his
presence, to be held by the auditor where said license could be used as
evidence in a criminal or administrative hearing. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-21: VALIDITY OF THIS CHAPTER:
If any phrase, phrases, section or sections of this chapter are determined to
be invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the other sections of this
chapter. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6A-22: LICENSE FEE; NONREFUNDABLE:
Any license fee submitted to the auditor is nonrefundable. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-
17-2016)
ARTICLE B. BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
4-6B-1: Kennel, Cattery, Grooming Parlor, Short Term Boarding Facility, And Pet
Shop Fees
4-6B-2: Miscellaneous Fees
4-6B-1: KENNEL, CATTERY, GROOMING PARLOR, SHORT TERM BOARDING FACILITY, AND PET
SHOP FEES:
The application for a commercial kennel or cattery, foster shelter/kennel/
cattery, boarding kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor,
private kennel/cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop license as
required by article C of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as follows:
Boarding kennel or cattery                $200.00
Commercial kennel or cattery              250.00
Foster shelter/kennel/cattery             $75.00 if all altered, $150.00 if not
Grooming parlor                           $100.00
Hobby kennel/cattery (6 to 20 dogs and/or 150.00
cats)
Pet shop                                  200.00
Private kennel/cattery                    150.00
Short term boarding facility              200.00
Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was issued
shall be subject to reclassification and an appropriate adjustment of the
permit fee.
If the license is denied, no part of the application fee shall be refunded to
the applicant. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6B-2: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
   A.   Duplicate License Fee: Any licensee who makes a change in trade or
corporate name or who loses or misplaces his license card or certificate may
obtain a new card or certificate from the auditor without the necessity of
submitting a new application by the payment of a five dollar ($5.00) fee,
provided, the license has not expired. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE C. KENNEL OR CATTERY, GROOMING PARLOR, SHORT TERM BOARDING FACILITY, OR
PET SHOP
SECTION:
4-6C-1: Purpose
4-6C-2: Exemption
4-6C-3: Definitions
4-6C-4: License Requirement
4-6C-5: Application
4-6C-6: License
4-6C-7: Kennel Regulations
4-6C-8: Advertising Limitations
4-6C-9: License Expiration
4-6C-10: License Renewal
4-6C-11: License Suspension And Revocation
4-6C-12: Appeals
4-6C-13: Inspection
4-6C-14: Impoundment
4-6C-15: Civil Remedy
4-6C-16: Criminal Penalty
4-6C-17: Compliance
4-6C-1: PURPOSE:
This article is necessary to the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the
people in the city of Orting and has as its purpose to provide for the humane
care and treatment of animals; to provide for the control and regulation of
facilities and kennels; to prevent nuisances; and to prevent endangerment of
the health and safety of the public. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-2: EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any facility which is owned,
operated, or maintained by any city, county, state, or the federal government
for the purpose of maintaining or possessing dogs. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-3: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT DOG AND ADULT CAT: Any dog or cat past the age of seven (7) months.
ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated by the city of Orting or its authorized
agents, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the
authority of this article or of state law.
BOARDING KENNEL OR CATTERY: Any premises wherein a person engages in the
business of boarding cats and dogs for private pet owners, for all or part of a
day, including pet sitting establishments, and short term boarding facilities
for purposes other than veterinary medical procedures and observation. Any
boarding kennel or cattery engaging in the business of breeding, letting for
hire, selling, bartering or giving away any dogs and/or cats must be licensed
as a commercial kennel or cattery.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL OR CATTERY: Any premises wherein a person(s) engages in the
business of breeding and possibly boarding, letting for hire, selling,
bartering, or giving away dogs and/or cats.
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The city of Orting, or such organization as designated by
contract or ordinance of the city council, including the Pierce County auditor.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any city of Orting employee designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, or the employee or agent of any other agency
authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
FOSTER SHELTER/KENNEL/CATTERY: Any premises where at least six (6) or more
adult dogs and/or cats are kept and a person(s) provides temporary housing and
care of owner released dogs/cats for the purpose of placing them into a
permanent home. Animals kept more than sixty (60) days will be considered owned
by the person housing the animal and must be licensed under section
6-3D-2 of this code.
GROOMING PARLOR: Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals
are bathed, clipped, or combed for a consideration.
HOBBY KENNEL OR CATTERY: Any premises where at least six (6) but less than
twenty (20) adult dogs and/or cats are kept for hunting, breeding, for
exhibition, organized events, field working, or obedience trials. Any person(s)
or premises which exceeds the numbers or engages in practices beyond the
definition herein for a hobby kennel or cattery, as determined by the
enforcement agency, shall be subject to penalties and/or be required to
purchase the appropriate license. Note: The occasional selling of offspring
shall not be construed as a commercial venture.
IMPOUNDING AUTHORITY: City of Orting or any organization appointed by the city
to impound animals and handle and care for impounded animals.
KENNEL FACILITIES: Kennels, animal runs, enclosures, and/or any other building
used for the keeping or housing of dogs and/or cats.
LICENSING OFFICER:
   A.   The Pierce County auditor, or
   B.   Any officer, agency or organization appointed or empowered by the city
to register and license dogs and/or cats.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or unincorporated
association.
PET SHOP: Any person or establishment that acquires animals (dogs, cats, birds,
fish, rodents, reptilians, primates, insects, and any or all others) bred by
others, whether as owner, agent, or on consignment, sells or boards any species
of animals and offers to sell such animals to the public.
PREMISES: Includes a private house or dwelling.
PRIVATE KENNEL/CATTERY: Any premises where at least six (6) but less than
twenty (20) altered adult dogs and/or cats are kept as pets and not used for
any other purpose than companionship for their owners. All pets are to be
altered.
SHORT TERM BOARDING FACILITY: Any place of business or establishment that
watches or houses animals for a fee for the owner.
TEMPORARY: As used in this article means less than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 2016-
987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENT:
   A.   License Requirements; Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person to
own, maintain, or have six (6) or more dogs and/or cats, or operate a
commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery, foster shelter/kennel/
cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private kennel/cattery, short
term boarding facility, or pet shop, within the city without an applicable
license as provided for by this article.
      1.   License Fees: Any person(s) who engages in more than one of the
services or maintains more than one of the types of facilities cited in this
section shall pay all appropriate license fees as provided in section
4-6B-1 of this chapter.
      2.   Licensed Veterinarians: Licensed veterinarians who, in addition to
veterinary medical services on the premises, provide the ancillary services of
boarding, grooming, and foster care for their patients, are exempt from the
licensing requirements of this article.
      3.   Noncommercial Kennel: A noncommercial kennel with five (5) or fewer
dogs or cats must be licensed under section
6-3D-2 of this code and not under this article.
      4.   Phase Out Provisions For Small Kennels In The City Of Orting: Owners
of small kennels may choose to phase out a commercial kennel by gradually
reducing the number of dogs and/or cats to below the six (6) animal threshold.
Owners of kennels with less than eleven (11) animals who elect the phase out
option will not be required to obtain a kennel license provided the following:
         a.   The owner/operator of the kennel has a current pet license for
each dog or cat and the licenses are timely renewed.
         b.   The owner/operator of the kennel does not add to or replace the
animals and thereby allows the number of animals to be reduced to five (5) or
less.
Any owner/operator who does not meet these conditions, or does not comply with
these conditions, must obtain a kennel license. Larger kennels are not subject
to the phase out provisions. The owner/operator of a kennel that contains
eleven (11) or more dogs and/or cats are not subject to the phase out
provisions herein and must obtain a kennel license through Pierce County by
December 1, 2016.
      5.   Grooming Parlors: Currently licensed grooming parlors will be issued
a Pierce County grooming parlor license and not be subject to a first time
kennel application process.
   B.   Transfer Of License: If there is any change in ownership of any
commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery, foster shelter/kennel/
cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private kennel/cattery, short
term boarding facility, or pet shop, the new owner may have the current permit
transferred to his or her name upon the payment of seventy five dollar ($75.00)
transfer fee and upon the approval of the licensing officer, or the licensing
officer's designated agent.
   C.   Grounds For Denial: A permit or license may be denied for the following
causes:
      1.   Conviction by the applicant of crimes related to animals.
      2.   Withholding or falsifying any information on the application.
      3.   Failure to meet the requirements for approval from the city planning
department or the Tacoma-Pierce County health department within ninety (90)
days from the date of application.
      4.   Failure to comply with the applicable zoning codes of the city.
   D.   Renewal: Upon compliance with section
4-6C-5 of this article and the tender of any fees required by section
4-6B-1 of this chapter, the licensing officer, or the licensing officer's
designated agent shall issue a renewal license, and the applicant for such
license shall post such license in a conspicuous place upon the premises. A
penalty fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the license fee shall be assessed
if the license application is not submitted by March 31. Payment of this
penalty shall not preclude the imposition of penalties prescribed in sections
4-6C-16 and
4-6C-17 of this article.
   E.   License; Required Information: Every license shall state on its face
the name of the owner and operator of the animal facility, the address, the
maximum number of animals which can be kept in the facility at any one time,
and the expiration date of the license. The number of animals which can be kept
in the facility at any one time shall be determined by the county who inspected
the premises, and may be modified by licensing agent from time to time if the
facility conditions change. The location of any kennel shall not be changed
without prior permission of the licensing officer, or the licensing officer's
designated agent, and such permission will be granted only after appropriate
inspections have been conducted.
   F.   Records; Duty To Maintain: Every licensed person shall maintain records
for three (3) years (current year and past 2 years) on dogs and/or cats. Said
records shall contain a list of the names and addresses of persons from whom
animals are received and to whom animals are sold, traded, given away, or
groomed. All animal transactions shall be listed on the records and these
records shall be made available for inspection by the city and/or agent at all
reasonable times for a specific reason. (Ord. 2016-993, 8-31-2016)
4-6C-5: APPLICATION:
   A.   Application; Generally: Application for a new license under the
provisions of this article may be made at any time.
   B.   Application; Required Information: Any person applying for a license as
required by this article shall submit to the licensing officer, or the
licensing officer's designated agent, the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the person(s) owning the facility;
      2.   The name and address of the person(s) having the supervision of the
facility;
      3.   The address or location of the facility;
      4.   The maximum number of dogs and/or cats or combination thereof which
such facility will contain;
      5.   The name and address of the person designated by the applicant as
agent for the service of legal process or notice;
      6.   A written statement or permit issued by the city planning department
verifying that such commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery,
foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private
kennel/cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop is in compliance with
applicable zoning codes of the city, or is denied;
      7.   A statement by the applicant giving permission for inspection of the
facilities at any reasonable time;
      8.   A statement or permit from the Tacoma-Pierce County health
department to ensure that adequate provisions for sanitary facilities can be
provided;
      9.   If the applicant is a pet store, a list of all species of animals;
i.e., dogs, cats, birds, reptiles, primates, insects, fish, rodents, and any or
all others, that are to be sold;
      10.   The name and address of the licensed veterinarian who cares for the
applicant's sick or injured animals;
      11.   Proof that the application indicates the appropriate type of kennel
category (commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery, foster
shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private kennel/
cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop). Proof may be in the form
of a business license, a bona fide membership in a purebred animal club, or
other such evidence acceptable to the licensing officer. (Ord. 2016-993, 8-31-
2016)
4-6C-6: LICENSE:
Upon compliance with section
4-6C-5 of this article and the tender of any fees as required by this chapter,
the licensing officer or the licensing officer's designated agent, shall issue
a license for such commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery,
foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private
kennel/cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop.
   A.   Duty To Comply: The licensee shall comply with all standards, rules and
regulations set forth in this article throughout the licensing period.
   B.   Duty To Post: The licensee shall post such license in a conspicuous
place upon the premises where such commercial kennel or cattery, boarding
kennel/cattery, foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming
parlor, private kennel/cattery or pet shop is maintained. (Ord. 2016-993, 8-31-
2016)
4-6C-7: KENNEL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Standards, Rules, And Regulations: The county shall promulgate such
standards, rules, and regulations as are necessary for the operation of this
article. The standards for inspections are attached hereto and made a part by
reference herein. These standards, rules, and regulations shall be developed in
conjunction with one representative from each group covered under this article
and a representative from Pierce County fire prevention bureau, Pierce County
planning and land services department, and Tacoma-Pierce County health
department. These standards, rules, and regulations may be amended and shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Sanitation and safety regulations;
      2.   Minimum standards for food and water;
      3.   Standards for facility construction and maintenance;
      4.   Classification and separation of animals;
      5.   Requirements for veterinarian care.
   B.   Copies Provided To Applicant: A copy of the standards, rules, and
regulations promulgated by the county shall be furnished to each applicant for
a license or license renewal.
   C.   Compliance: Initial application for any of the licenses covered under
this article shall be provisional and will be issued after the applicant
complies with these regulations and any rules and regulations that may
subsequently be formulated. The applicant must be in total compliance with the
rules and regulations at the end of six (6) months or within a correction time
schedule for compliance with this article.
   D.   Kennel Facilities; Minimum Requirements:
      1.   Any person keeping more than ten (10) dogs and/or cats must provide
kennel facilities.
      2.   Kennel facilities shall comply with all applicable zoning
regulations, including setback requirements.
      3.   Owners and operators of any kennel shall comply with the rules and
regulations referenced in section
4-6C-4 of this article.
      4.   All dogs and cats over the age of seven (7) months shall be included
as part of the kennel for payment of fees. (Ord. 2016-993, 8-31-2016)
4-6C-8: ADVERTISING LIMITATIONS:
No hobby kennel or private kennel/cattery shall have signs, displays, or other
visual representation advertising animals for sale or breeding. (Ord. 2016-987,
8-17-2016)
4-6C-9: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
Each license issued under the authority and provisions of this article shall
expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-10: LICENSE RENEWAL:
All license renewals shall be processed in the same manner as the original
application except that a written statement from the agencies listed in
subsection
4-6C-5B8 of this article will not be required. License renewals shall require
the applicant to prove that the facility is still used for the same category of
kennel activity (commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery, foster
shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private kennel/
cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop). Proof may be in the form
of a business license, a bona fide membership in a purebred animal club, or
other such evidence acceptable to the licensing officer or the licensing
officer's designated agent. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-11: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
Any license issued for commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery,
foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private
kennel/cattery, short term boarding facility or pet shop under the provisions
of this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation if the city or its
designee determines that such commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/
cattery, foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor,
private kennel/cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop is being
operated in violation of this article.
The auditor or any examiner appointed by the council shall have the power and
authority to suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter when the auditor determines that there are sufficient grounds for
suspending or revoking any license issued pursuant to this chapter. The auditor
shall notify such licensee in writing by certified mail of the suspension or
revocation of his license and the grounds therefor. Notice mailed to the last
business address on file with the auditor shall constitute sufficient notice.
In addition to grounds specifically provided in the individual licensing
sections, any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked based on one or more of the following grounds:
   A.   The license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact.
   B.   The licensee has violated or failed to comply with any of the
provisions of this article.
   C.   The licensee, or any of his servants, agents, or employees while acting
within the scope of their employment, has committed a felony or misdemeanor,
excluding minor traffic violations.
   D.   The licensee or any of his servants, agents, or employees, while acting
within the scope of their employment, have violated any law or resolution
relating to the sale or possession of intoxicating liquor; the use, possession
or sale of narcotic or dangerous drugs or violated any law or resolution
relating to public morality and decency.
   E.   The conduct of the business or activity for which the license was
issued has resulted in the creation of a nuisance or has caused disorderly
conduct to occur on or immediately adjacent to the business premises.
   F.   The check submitted with the license application has been dishonored.
Any failure or refusal on the part of any licensee to obey any rule, regulation
or request of the enforcement agency, or enforcement official, shall be grounds
for the revocation of a license.
A decision regarding suspension or revocation shall be in writing. The decision
shall be mailed to the applicant/licensee to the address listed on the
application via first class and certified mail with return receipt requested.
The period of revocation shall be at least one year and the licensee shall not
again be licensed for a similar business during such period or for such
additional period as is fixed by the city or examiner.
The period of suspension shall be fixed by the city or examiner at not more
than three hundred sixty five (365) days. (Ord. 2016-993, 8-31-2016)
4-6C-12: APPEALS:
The denial, revocation or suspension of any license issued under the provisions
of this article may be appealed to the hearing examiner, pursuant to the
procedures set forth in section
1-12-3 of this code.
The sole method of judicial review from a decision of the hearing examiner
shall be before the superior court for Pierce County. Notice of appeal shall be
filed with the clerk of the court within ten (10) days of the action or
decision by which a person is aggrieved.
Any person whose license or permit is revoked shall, within thirty (30) days
thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored by such
person, or be sold, or given away, and no part of the permit or license fee
shall be refunded. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-13: INSPECTION:
It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that the city
or its designee be permitted to inspect all animals, and the premises where
animals are kept, at reasonable intervals to protect the health and safety of
the animals and of the community. If permission for such inspection is refused,
the permit or license of the refusing owner may be revoked.
An enforcement officer shall have the authority to enter the premises if a
permit or license holder is keeping animals in his/her own residence. (Ord.
2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-14: IMPOUNDMENT:
An enforcement officer may impound any animal that is disabled or diseased
because of neglect, abuse, or improper care, or whose condition constitutes a
threat or danger to the public health or safety. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-15: CIVIL REMEDY:
Whenever a violation of the provisions of this article constitutes a public
nuisance, the prosecuting attorney may bring action on behalf of the city or
the enforcement agency, for abatement, damages, and/or mandatory or prohibitory
relief as provided for by law. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-16: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and in addition to any other remedies or penalties specifically
provided for herein, may be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
4-6C-17: COMPLIANCE:
Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed compliance
with, or eliminate the necessity for compliance with, other applicable
provisions of the laws of the state of Washington, Pierce County, or the city.
(Ord. 2016-987, 8-17-2016)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Purpose; Construction
5-1-2: Definitions
5-1-3: Public Nuisances Declared
5-1-4: Offensive Noise Disturbances 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-1-5: Prohibited Conduct
5-1-6: Enforcement; Notice
5-1-7: Abatement Of Nuisances
5-1-8: Violation; Penalty
5-1-9: Remedies Not Exclusive
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 8 of this title.
5-1-1: PURPOSE; CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City and is
deemed necessary for the continued peace, health and welfare of the City.
Therefore, all of its provisions shall be liberally construed for the
accomplishment of such purposes. (1973 Code § 8.16.010)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
indicates, shall have the following meanings:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition
which constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means and in such a
manner and to such an extent as the Enforcement Officer, or designee(s) in his
or her judgment, determines is necessary in the interest of the general health,
safety and welfare of the community.
BUILDING MATERIALS: Lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal,
plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing materials, paint,
solvents, fuel, cleaners, and similar materials.
CONSIDERABLE NUMBER OF PERSONS: Three (3) or more persons from different
households.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The building inspector of the City of Orting or his or her
designee.
PERSON: An individual, group of individuals, corporation, government or
governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association,
two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal
or commercial entity.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks, parking strips,
planting strips, and permanent BMPs (see section
9-5A-4 of this code for definition of BMP).
PROPERTY: Any object of value that a person may lawfully acquire and hold, and/
or any land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land,
including but not limited to any business or residence, grounds, vacant lots,
facilities, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or
any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether
or not permanent.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: A thing, act, omission to act, occupation, or use of property
which:
   A.   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
the public;
   B.   Offends public decency;
   C.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage
any stream, river, channel, public park, square, street, alley, highway or
sidewalk;
   D.   In any way renders the public insecure in life or use of property.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Unless otherwise defined, any of the following: any person
who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to this
chapter; an occupant in control of the property or structure which is subject
to this chapter; a developer, builder, or business operator or owner who is
developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure
which is subject to this chapter; a mortgagee that has filed an action in
foreclosure on the property that is subject to the regulation, based on breach
or default of the mortgage agreement, until title to the property is
transferred to a third party; a mortgagee of property that is subject to the
regulation and has not been occupied by the owner, the owner's tenant, or a
person having the owner's permission to occupy the premises for a period of at
least ninety (90) days; and/or any person who has control over the property
and/or who has created, caused, participated in, or has allowed a violation to
occur.
VINES: Any plant with a growth habit of trailing or climbing stems, lianas or
runners.
(1973 Code § 8.16.020; amd. Ord. 2016-995, 9-28-2016; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020;
Ord. 2024-1121, 1-31-2024)
5-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES DECLARED:
   A.   Declaration Of Nuisance: Each of the conditions listed in subsection B
of this section, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a
public nuisance.
   B.   Nuisances Enumerated: Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that
any of these conditions exist upon any premises, the officer may require or
provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter: the erecting,
maintaining, using, placing, depositing, causing, allowing, leaving or
permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure, or
premises, or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, park, parkway or other
public or private place in the City, any one or more of the following places,
conditions, things or acts to the prejudice, danger, or annoyance of others:
      1.   Manure Or Rubbish Accumulations: Accumulations of manure or rubbish
except a compost pile so covered or concealed as not to affect the health,
safety or depreciation of adjoining property;
      2.   Burning Refuse Or Hay:
         a.   Burning or disposal of refuse, sawdust or other material in such
a manner to cause or permit ashes, sawdust, soot or cinders to be cast upon the
streets or alleys of the City, or to cause or permit dense smoke, noxious
fumes, ashes, soot or gases arising from such burning to become annoying or
injurious to the health, comfort, or repose of the general public;
         b.   The depositing or burning or causing to be deposited or burned in
any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway, or other public place which is open
to travel, any hay, straw, grass, grass clippings, paper, wood, boards, boxes,
leaves, manure, or other rubbish or material;
      3.   Animal Carcasses: Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed
within twenty four (24) hours after death;
      4.   Stagnant Water: Ponds or pools of stagnant water;
      5.   Snow And Ice On Sidewalks: All snow and ice not removed from public
sidewalks within a reasonable time after the snow and ice have ceased to be
deposited thereon;
      6.   Tree Limbs Overhanging Sidewalks: All limbs of trees overhanging a
public sidewalk which are less than ten feet (10') above the surface of said
sidewalk, or overhanging a City street which are less than twelve feet (12')
above the surface of said street;
      7.   Vines Or Climbing Plants Growing Into Streets: The existence of any
vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street, public hydrant, pole
or elect roller, or the existence of any shrub, vine or plant, growing on,
around or in front of any hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or
any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes in such a
way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto; or obstruct or
interfere with the proper diffusion from the light from any streetlamp;
      8.   Obstructing Streets: Any use of property abutting on a public street
or sidewalk or any use of public street or sidewalk which causes any
obstructing of traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks; provided,
that this subsection shall not apply to events, programs or parades authorized
by the City Council;
      9.   Poisonous Substances: Any poisonous or harmful substance which is
reasonably accessible to persons or to animals;
      10.   Nauseous Pens Or Stables: The keeping, using or maintaining of any
pen, stable, lot, place or premises in which any hog, sheep, goat, cattle,
mink, fox, chinchilla, nutria, fowl or in which any other animal or bird may be
confined or kept, in such a manner as to be nauseous, foul or offensive to any
considerable number of persons, or violates the city's animal control chapter;
      11.   Animals Making Noises: See section
5-8-5 of this title;
      12.   Dead Or Diseased Trees And Shrubs:
         a.   The existence of any dead, diseased, infested or dying tree that
may constitute a danger to property or persons;
         b.   All shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation which has grown and died
and which is a fire hazard;
      13.   Weeds: All grass and/or weeds which exceed twelve inches (12") in
height in a nonagricultural use;
      14.   Horticultural Pests: The existence of caterpillar infestations or
other horticultural pests;
      15.   Blackberry or other vines that encroaches onto, within five feet
(5') of, or traverses any property line or boundary line, whether physically
divided or otherwise, shared by or between adjoining landowners or the premises
or property of another;
      16.   Building Materials Storage; Permit: The storage or keeping on any
premises for more than sixty (60) days of any used or unused building
materials, without a special permit from the building inspector; provided, that
nothing herein shall:
         a.   Prohibit such storage without a permit when done in conjunction
with a construction project for which a building permit has been issued and
which is being prosecuted diligently to completion;
         b.   Prohibit such storage without a permit on the premises of a bona
fide lumberyard, dealer of building materials or other commercial enterprise
when the same is permitted under the zoning ordinance and other applicable
ordinances;
         c.   Make lawful any such storage or keeping when it is prohibited by
other ordinances or laws;
      17.   Dilapidated Fence: The existence of any fence or other structure or
thing on private property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk
or place which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed or other dilapidated
or unsafe condition;
      18.   Drainage Onto Sidewalk: The existence of any drainage onto or over
any sidewalk or public pedestrian way;
      19.   Privies And Cesspools: Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits, or
like places;
      20.   Trash Or Abandoned Materials:
         a.   Any tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap
iron, wire, pipe, metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all other trash or abandoned
material, unless the same is kept in covered bins or metal receptacles approved
by the building inspector;
         b.   Any trash, litter, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes,
crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding excelsior, packing hay, straw, or
other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin, pipe, and
other metal not neatly piled;
      21.   Dangerous Buildings: Any unsightly and dangerous building,
billboard or other structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed
building or structure, or any building or structure commenced and left
unfinished;
      22.   Junkyards Or Dumping Grounds Not Properly Fenced: All places not
properly fenced which are used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds,
or for the wrecking, disassembling, repair or rebuilding of automobiles,
trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of
worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of
any kind or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any
machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons,
which said places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others;
      23.   Discarded Vehicles: Deposit, keep or leave or to permit to be
deposited, kept or left in any place accessible to children, or in any place
viewable from a public street or alley, any abandoned, unused, nonrunning or
discarded automobile, truck or other such vehicle, or any vehicle hulk or any
part thereof. For the purposes of this subsection "abandoned, unused,
nonrunning" refers to a vehicle which is not movable under its own power and
which has been in a stationary position for more than fourteen (14) days;
      24.   Repairing Vehicles On Streets: Repair of an automobile, truck or
other motor vehicle of any kind upon the public streets, alleys or other public
property of the City;
      25.   Unwholesome Meat Or Hides: Any putrid, unsound or unwholesome
bones, meat, hides, skins, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or
fowl, butcher's trimmings and offal, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in
any quantity, garbage, human excreta or other offensive substance; provided,
nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the temporary retention of
waste in receptacles in the manner approved by the building inspector of the
City;
      26.   Offensive Businesses: The erection, continuance or use of any
building, room or other place in the City for the exercise of any trade,
employment or manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive
odors or other annoyances, is discomforting or offensive or detrimental to the
health of individuals or of the public;
      27.   Playing Mechanical Musical Instrument To Attract Customers: The
playing or causing to be played, in front of any building where any show,
moving picture exhibition or theatrical performance is given, or in the open
vestibule or area of any building, of any automatic or mechanical musical
instrument for the attraction of customers;
      28.   Loudspeakers, Unnecessary Use: Making, causing or permitting to be
made by means of any speaker or other sound amplifying device, or horn or other
mechanical device, or by outcry, loud speaking, singing or by any other means
of discordant and unnecessary noise of any kind which annoys any considerable
number of persons lawfully in the immediate area;
      29.   Abandoned Excavations: Any unguarded or abandoned excavation, pit,
well, or holes which would endanger safety.
   C.   Graffiti:
      1.   Definitions:
      ABATE: To remove the graffiti by such means, in such a manner and to such
an extent and within the time frame as the enforcement officer, as defined in
OMC
5-1-2, reasonably determines is necessary to remove the graffiti from public
view.
      GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized writing, painting, drawing, inscription,
figure, or mark of any type that has been placed upon any property through the
use of paint, ink, chalk, dye, markers, objects, adhesive material, or any
other substance capable of marking property.
      GRAFFITI NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which graffiti has not been
abated after the abatement date established by the enforcement officer.
      OWNER: Any entity or entities having a legal or equitable interest in
real or personal property including but not limited to the interest of a tenant
or lessee.
      PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC: All public spaces, including, but not
limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, and public open space, as well
as private property onto which the public is regularly invited or permitted to
enter for any purpose, the doorways and entrances to those buildings or
dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.
      PROPERTY: Any real or personal property and that which is affixed,
incidental or appurtenant to real property, including but not limited to any
structure, fence, wall, sign, or any separate part thereof, whether permanent
or not.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY: An owner, or an entity or person acting as an agent
for an owner by agreement, who has authority over the property or is
responsible for the property's maintenance or management. Irrespective of any
arrangement to the contrary with any other party, each owner shall always be a
responsible party for the purposes of this chapter. There may be more than one
responsible party for a particular property.
      UNAUTHORIZED: Without the consent of a responsible party.
      2.   Violation:
         a.   Any property located in the city of Orting that becomes a
graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to
its remedies.
         b.   Every responsible party who permits a property to become a
graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its
remedies.
      3.   Removal Of Graffiti: Notwithstanding the remedies available under
this chapter, whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by a public
agency, or a private property owner, the city may remove it with the consent of
the public entity or private property owner owning such property. However,
nothing in this chapter imposes a duty on the city to abate any nuisance
graffiti on any property other than that which is owned and controlled by the
city.
      4.   Prevention Of Nuisances: In addition to the nuisances declared in
subsection B of this section, all violations of City of Orting ordinances are
found and declared to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare
and are further found and declared to be nuisances. It is unlawful and a
violation of this chapter, whether by act or omission, to cause, create,
maintain, suffer, or allow a nuisance to occur, exist, or remain. Nuisances
create public harm. Prevention and correction of nuisances are necessary to
prevent public harm.
(Ord. 2019-1042, 2-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-1121, 1-31-2024)
5-1-4: OFFENSIVE NOISE DISTURBANCES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 8 of this title.
5-1-5: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any responsible person or owner to create, permit,
maintain, suffer, carry on or allow, upon any premises, any of the acts or
things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance. (1973 Code § 8.16.040)
5-1-6: ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE:
The Enforcement Officer, upon receipt of a written complaint of any public
nuisance, shall cause any owner or other responsible person to be notified of
the existence of a public nuisance on any premises and shall direct the owner
or other responsible person to abate the condition within ten (10) calendar
days after notice or other reasonable period, whether shorter or longer in time
than ten (10) days, as determined by the Enforcement Officer. The notice shall
be substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE TO ABATE UNSAFE OR UNLAWFUL CONDITION
   (Name and address of person notified)
   As owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or
control of the building, lot or premises at
                                                       you are hereby notified
that the undersigned pursuant to Ordinance No.                         of the
City of Orting has determined that there exists upon or adjoining said premises
the following condition contrary to the provisions of subsection
                     of Ordinance No.                         :
   You are hereby notified to abate said condition to the satisfaction of the
undersigned within ten days of the date of this notice. If you do not abate
such condition within ten days the city will abate the condition at your
expense.
   Abatement is to be accomplished in the following manner:
Dated:                        (Name of enforcement officer)
   By                        
(1973 Code § 8.16.050; amd. 1996 Code)
5-1-7: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
   A.   Abatement By City: In all cases where the Enforcement Officer has
determined to proceed with abatement, ten (10) days after giving notice the
City shall acquire jurisdiction to abate the condition at the person's expense
as herein provided. Upon the abatement of the condition or any portion thereof
by the City, all the expenses thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to
the City jointly and severally by such of the persons who have been given
notice as herein provided. The debt shall be collectible in the same manner as
any other civil debt owing to the City. (1973 Code § 8.16.060)
   B.   Abatement By Owner Or Other Responsible Person: If and when an owner or
other responsible person shall undertake to abate any condition described in
this chapter, whether by order of the Enforcement Officer or otherwise, all
needful and legal conditions pertinent to the abatement may be imposed by the
Enforcement Officer. It is unlawful for the owner or other responsible person
to fail to comply with such conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve
any owner or other responsible person of the obligation of obtaining any
required permit to do any work incidental to the abatement. (1973 Code §
8.16.070)
   C.   Immediate Danger; Summary Abatement: Whenever any condition on or use
of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute
an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a
significant portion thereof, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority
to summarily and without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement
shall become a civil debt against the owner or other responsible party and be
collected as provided in subsection A of this section. (1973 Code § 8.16.080)
5-1-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Misdemeanor: Every act or omission by a person responsible
for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter, any provision of a
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil regulatory order issued
pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition of an approval issued
or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   B.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of an approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this Code.
   C.   Every Act A Separate Violation: Every act or omission which constitutes
an offense or violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation or offense for each and every day during any portion of which the act
or omission constituting the offense or violation is committed, continued or
permitted. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-1-9: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies prescribed in this chapter are in addition to all other remedies
provided or authorized by law. (1973 Code § 8.16.100)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Application And Intent
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Collection And Disposal
5-2-4: Promulgation Of Rules, Rates And Duties Of Sanitary Department
5-2-5: Deposit In Receptacles
5-2-6: Biomedical And Hazardous Waste
5-2-7: Outdoor Dumping And Burning
5-2-8: Waste Recycling; Separation Of Garbage
5-2-9: Violation; Penalty; Enforcement
5-2-1: APPLICATION AND INTENT:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all territory embraced within the corporate
limits of the city; provided that, areas annexed to the city may be subject to
other services, rates, and charges than provided for the city by the contract
carrier until a city franchise or contract is established with the contract
carrier for the annexed area. The city shall notify the Washington utilities
and transportation commission (WUTC) of any annexation of territory as part of
the finalization of the annexation process, and shall give notice that the city
plans to exercise its rights under Washington state law to cancel any franchise
or permit granted in the annexed territory for the collection of garbage. The
city shall exercise its authority to enter into an agreement with the holder of
any such franchise or permit as required by Washington state law.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter are adopted for the safety, health, and
general welfare of the public. There is hereby established a universal and
compulsory system for the collection and disposal of garbage and a universal
system for the collection of residential recyclable material and yard debris. A
contract carrier shall provide such collection and disposal under written
agreement with the city. All persons occupying, in control of, or responsible
for single-family residences, multi-family residences, and commercial customers
shall be entitled and required to utilize the services of the city's contract
carrier at the minimum service level. Garbage collection service is mandatory
for all single-family residences, multi-family residences, and commercial
customers. It is the intention of this chapter to meet state and Pierce County
solid waste comprehensive plan goals. Recycling and waste reduction is a
primary objective of this chapter. (Ord. 915B, 11-30-2011)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in the present tense in this chapter include the future tense, in
the singular include the plural, in the plural include the singular, and in the
masculine include the feminine gender. The following words, terms, and phrases,
when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASHES: The solid waste products of coal, wood, and other fuels used for heating
and cooling all public and private establishments and all residences.
BIOMEDICAL WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as that term is defined at
Revised Code Of Washington 70.95K.010 as now or hereafter amended.
BULKY GOODS: Discarded large items of solid waste such as appliances,
furniture, small auto parts, and other similar waste materials with weights and
volumes greater than those allowed in waste collection bins, carts, or other
containers.
CITY: The city of Orting.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES OR COMMERCIAL: Any premises or portion thereof that is not
residential in use and character, including retail, service, office,
industrial, agricultural, manufacturing, governmental agencies and all other
users of commercial type garbage collection services.
CONTAINER: A customer provided garbage can or a contract carrier provided
detachable container, drop box container, recyclable cart, recyclable
container, or yard debris container, or other contract carrier or city approved
cart or container for the storage and disposal of garbage, recyclable material,
or yard debris.
CONTRACT CARRIER: The solid waste collection company who, under contract with
the city, collects and transports solid waste for disposal by motor vehicle for
compensation within the jurisdictional limits of the city.
CURB OR CURBSIDE: On the single-family residence property, within five feet
(5') of the public street without blocking sidewalks, driveways, or on street
parking. If extraordinary circumstances preclude such a location, curbside
shall be considered a placement suitable to the resident, convenient to the
contract carrier's equipment, and mutually agreed to by the city and contract
carrier.
CUSTOMER: A person who occupies, has control of, is responsible for, or owns an
occupied single-family residence or an occupied multi-family residence, or
commercial premises or unit thereof.
DETACHABLE CONTAINER: A watertight metal or plastic container equipped with a
tightfitting cover, capable of being mechanically unloaded into a collection
vehicle, and that is not less than one cubic yard nor greater than eight (8)
cubic yards in capacity.
DISPOSAL SITE: The location where any final treatment, utilization, processing,
or deposit of solid waste occurs.
DROP BOX CONTAINER: An all metal container with ten (10) cubic yards or more of
capacity that is loaded onto a specialized collection vehicle, transported to a
disposal or recycling site, emptied and transported back to the customer's
site.
FIRE CHIEF: The person appointed or acting as the fire chief for the fire
protection district or authority serving the city, or his or her designee.
FOOD WASTE: Vegetable and other food scraps, including meat, dairy products,
grease and bones; paper which has been contaminated with food, fat, or grease;
and compostable paper including paper towels, paper plates, tissue, and waxed
paper, but shall exclude any items which cannot be accepted for processing by
the third party compost processing facility.
GARBAGE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes,
including, but not limited to, rubbish, ashes, swill, and discarded commodities
that are placed by customers in appropriate bins, bags, cans, or other
receptacles for collection. The term "garbage" shall not include special
wastes, construction/demolition materials segregated from other wastes, or
source separated recyclables and yard debris. When the phrase "refuse" is used
as a qualifying phrase or otherwise, it means "garbage".
GARBAGE CAN: A container that is a watertight galvanized sheet metal or plastic
container not exceeding four (4) cubic feet or thirty two (32) gallons in
capacity; fitted with two (2) sturdy handles, on each side; and fitted with a
tight cover equipped with a handle. All containers shall be rodent, bird, and
insect resistant and kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any substance that is:
   A.   Defined as hazardous by 40 CFR part 261 and regulated as hazardous
waste by the United States environmental protection agency under subtitle C of
the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA) of 1976, 42 USC 6901 et seq.,
as amended by the hazardous and solid waste amendments (HSWA) of 1984; the
toxic substances control act, 15 USC 2601 et seq.; or any other federal statute
or regulation governing the treatment, storage, handling or disposal of waste
imposing special handling or disposal requirements similar to those required by
subtitle C of RCRA; or
   B.   Defined as dangerous or extremely hazardous by chapter 173-303
Washington administrative code and regulated as dangerous waste or extremely
hazardous waste by the Washington state department of ecology under the state
hazardous waste management act, chapter 70.105 Revised Code Of Washington, or
any other Washington state statute or regulation governing the treatment,
storage, handling or disposal of wastes and imposing special handling
requirements similar to those required by chapter 70.105 Revised Code Of
Washington; or
   C.   Any substance that after the effective date of the contract with the
contract carrier comes within the scope of this definition as determined by the
city. Likewise, any substance that after the effective date of the contract
with the contract carrier ceases to fall within this definition as determined
by the city shall not be deemed to be hazardous waste.
HEALTH OFFICER: The county health officer, or authorized representative.
LANDFILL: A disposal facility or part of a facility at which solid waste is
placed in or on land and which is not a land treatment facility.
MINIMUM SERVICE LEVEL: An occupied single-family residential, multi-family
residential, or commercial premises garbage collection service at service
levels in accordance with the franchise agreement or contract with the contract
carrier.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE OR MULTI-FAMILY: A multiple-unit residence with three
(3) or more units in a complex served by a common garbage storage container.
Mobile home parks with common garbage storage containers are considered multi-
family residences.
OCCUPIED: All single-family residences, each separate dwelling unit of a multi-
family residence, and each separate commercial premises unit having active city
utility accounts.
PERSON: An individual, firm, association, partnership, copartnership, limited
liability company, political subdivision, government agency, municipality,
industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever.
PRIVATE CARRIER: A person who, in his or her own vehicle, transports solid
waste purely as an incidental adjunct to some other established private
business owned or operated by that person in good faith. A person who
transports solid waste from residential sources in a vehicle designed or used
primarily for the transport of solid waste is not a private carrier.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE: Solid waste which contains material capable of being readily
decomposed by microorganisms.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS OR RECYCLABLES: Those solid wastes that are source
separated for recycling or reuse, such as papers, metals, and glass, and that
are identified as recyclable material pursuant to the Pierce County
comprehensive solid waste plan.
RECYCLING CART: A contract carrier provided wheeled cart suitable for
collection, storage, and curbside placement of recyclable material at multi-
family residences and commercial customer locations.
RECYCLING CONTAINER(S): A contract carrier provided container suitable for on
site collection, storage, and placement of recyclable material at multi-family
residence and commercial customer locations.
RESIDENCE AND RESIDENTIAL: Living space(s) individually rented, leased, or
owned.
SEWAGE SLUDGE: A semisolid substance consisting of settled sewage solids
combined with varying amounts of water and dissolved materials, generated from
a wastewater treatment system, that does not meet the requirements of chapter
70.95J Revised Code Of Washington.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A one-unit house, one unit of a duplex, one unit of a
multi-family residence, or a single mobile home, each of which is billed for
individual garbage collection located on a public street or private road.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION: Shall have its usual and ordinary meaning, but does not
include collecting or transporting recyclable materials from a drop box or
recycling buy back center, or collecting or transporting recyclable materials
by or on behalf of a commercial or industrial generator of recyclable materials
to a recycler for use or reclamation.
SOLID WASTE OR WASTES: Garbage, recyclables, and yard debris.
SOURCE SEPARATED: The separation of different kinds of solid waste at the place
where the waste originates.
SWILL: Shall mean and includes every refuse accumulation of food waste, liquid
or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing
of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables except coffee grounds.
YARD DEBRIS: Plant material commonly created in the course of maintaining yards
and gardens, and through horticulture, gardening, landscaping, or similar
activities, and food waste. Yard debris includes, but is not limited to, grass
clippings, leaves, branches, brush, weeds, flowers, roots, windfall fruit,
vegetable garden debris, holiday trees, and tree prunings no greater than three
feet (3') long and/or four inches (4") in diameter. Yard debris does not
include sod, dirt, rocks, bricks, and limbs or tree trunks greater than three
feet (3') long and/or four inches (4") in diameter.
YARD DEBRIS CART: A contract carrier provided wheeled cart provided to
subscribing single-family residences, multi-family residences, and commercial
customers for the purpose of containing and collecting yard debris. (Ord. 915B,
11-30-2011)
5-2-3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
   A.   Universal Service: The contract carrier shall, under written agreement
with the city, provide for collection and disposal of solid waste for all
customers in the city. All single-family residences, multi-family residences,
and commercial premises customers shall be entitled to utilize the solid waste
collection services of the contract carrier, subject to the contract carrier
services obligations set forth in the above described written agreement.
   B.   Mandatory Garbage Collection: Garbage collection service is mandatory
for all occupied single-family residences, multi- family residences, and
commercial premises customers. Each customer shall be required to maintain the
minimum service level with the contract carrier. Failure by a customer to
initiate, upon occupancy, or otherwise maintain minimum service levels for
garbage collection service shall constitute a class 4 civil infraction for each
collection period for which minimum service levels are not maintained and shall
be punishable by a maximum fine of up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
violation.
   C.   Compulsory; Payment In Advance: The charges for garbage collection and
disposal shall be compulsory for all customers and shall be applied whether or
not the collection service is utilized. The solid waste collection charges
shall be payable in advance and billed by the contract carrier to the customer.
   D.   Wilful Failure: Wilful failure by a customer to initiate or maintain
minimum service levels for garbage collection service shall constitute a class
1 civil infraction for each collection period for which minimum service levels
are not maintained and shall be punishable by a maximum fine of up to two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation.
Wilful failure shall include, but is not limited to, a failure by a customer to
promptly initiate or to thereafter maintain minimum service levels for garbage
collection service upon notice being given to the customer by the city, the
contract carrier, or a person authorized to enforce this chapter, of the
compulsory garbage collection service requirement under this chapter.
"Promptly" shall mean within the time period set forth in the notice, and if
not set forth in the notice, within thirty (30) days following receipt of the
notice. Notice shall be given in writing, and shall be deemed to be given when
delivered by personal service upon the customer, by posting notice in a
conspicuous place upon the premises, by mailing using certified or registered
mail, or three (3) days following deposit in the United States mail in a
properly addressed envelope with postage prepaid.
   E.   Failure To Timely Pay: Failure by a customer to timely pay amounts due
and owing for solid waste collection services shall constitute a class 4 civil
infraction and shall be punishable by a maximum fine of up to twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for each violation. For purposes of this section, a payment
shall not be considered timely if it is not received within thirty (30) days
following the due date. A payment is considered to be received on the earlier
of three (3) days following deposit in the United States mail in a properly
addressed envelope with postage prepaid, placement in a contract carrier
authorized receptacle for the payment of charges/fees, or actual receipt by the
contract carrier.
   F.   Owners: A tenant and the owner of the property occupied by the tenant
may sign a city tenant release form for solid waste service. Pursuant to such
agreement, the tenant shall then be responsible for and pay directly to
contract carrier all amounts due and owing for solid waste collection services
at the property occupied by tenant. Owners are responsible for payment if the
tenant does not pay.
   G.   Rates Designated By Council: All rates and fees to be charged by the
contract carrier for its solid waste collection services shall be fixed by
contract, and shall be included in and be a part of any agreements or contracts
between the city and the contract carrier.
   H.   Other Remedies: The penalties provided for herein shall be in addition
to and shall not supersede or affect the remedies that the city may have
pursuant to this code or at law, in contract, or in equity, and shall not
supersede or affect the remedies the contract carrier may have at law, in
contract, or in equity for late payment and collection of debt. (Ord. 915B, 11-
30-2011)
5-2-4: PROMULGATION OF RULES, RATES AND DUTIES OF SANITARY DEPARTMENT:
The city shall have the power from time to time to set forth and determine
rules, regulations, rates, and changes in rates, and the duties and
responsibilities for the collection of solid waste, as may be necessary in the
discretion of the city council for the proper execution of this chapter. The
city administrator is hereby authorized and directed to administer the
collection and disposal of all solid waste in the city, and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The city administrator is authorized to prepare any
implementing regulations necessary for the development and implementation of a
solid waste collection program with recycling and yard debris disposal rates
embedded to encourage participation by residential generators of solid waste.
(Ord. 915B, 11-30-2011)
5-2-5: DEPOSIT IN RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to store, transport, haul, or
dispose of garbage except as authorized in this chapter. Occasional hauling by
single-family residential customers of garbage to an approved solid waste
disposal site is allowed. Such customers shall still be required to pay the
applicable charge for garbage collection services. This section shall not apply
to the hauling by customers of recyclable material or yard debris to an
approved recycling or yard debris disposal site.
   B.   City Or Contract Carrier Supplied Containers: All customers may be
required by the city to use containers owned by the city or its contract
carrier. No privately owned containers shall be utilized after delivery to a
customer of the city owned or contract carrier owned containers.
   C.   Receptacles Required: It shall be the duty of every person occupying,
in control of, or responsible for any occupied, single-family residence, multi-
family residence, or commercial premises located in the city, where garbage is
created or accumulates, to cause the same to be kept in approved containers.
   D.   Containers At Curbside: Except as may be otherwise directed by the
contract carrier, containers shall be placed at curbside on a public street or
private road on the scheduled collection day, and shall be removed to their
proper storage location as soon as possible after collection.
   E.   Recyclables; Yard Debris: Recyclables may be accumulated, for
collection by the contract carrier, in recycling carts or recycling containers,
or in such other collection containers approved by the city's contract carrier.
Yard debris may initially be accumulated for collection by the contract carrier
in a yard debris cart and, once such cart is full, in such other collection
container approved by the city's contract carrier for overflow volumes.
   F.   Duty Of Owner; Multi-Family: It is the duty of the owner of any
occupied multi-family residence to furnish or to see that his/her tenants have
adequate solid waste collection service and are adequately supplied with
contract carrier provided or approved customer provided drop box containers or
other contract carrier approved collection containers.
   G.   Duty Of Owner; Commercial Premises: It is the duty of the property
owner of a commercial premises to see that his/her tenants have adequate solid
waste collection service and are adequately supplied with a contract carrier
provided or approved customer provided detachable container or drop box
container or other contract carrier approved collection container.
   H.   Overloading: Containers shall not be overloaded beyond the point where
covers can be securely replaced.
   I.   Bulky Goods: Bulky goods shall not be placed in containers.
   J.   Maintenance Of Containers: Contract carrier provided containers for the
collection of solid waste, recyclables, and yard debris shall remain on the
property of the contract carrier, unless otherwise provided for under the
service agreement, and shall be provided for the health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the customer. The containers shall not be damaged,
destroyed, or removed from the customer's premises by any person.
   K.   Public Nuisance: Every customer shall have the duty to ensure that
solid waste does not accumulate on or around his or her premises in a manner
that causes such solid waste to become a public nuisance both as to the amount
of such solid waste or the odor emanating from such solid waste. Each container
used for the accumulation of solid waste shall be kept clean inside and out,
and the area around the containers shall be kept in a neat and sanitary
condition. The contract carrier shall provide written notification to the city
administrator and the customer concerning any violations of this provision.
   L.   Use Of Another Person's Container: It shall be unlawful to dispose of
garbage by placing such garbage into a container which another person owns or
pays for the use of without that person's express consent. (Ord. 915B, 11-30-
2011)
5-2-6: BIOMEDICAL AND HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to bury, burn, dump, collect, remove, or
in any manner dispose of biomedical waste upon any street, alley, public place,
or private property within the city, other than as provided in this chapter. It
is unlawful for any person to place any biomedical waste in a container for
collection as solid waste by the city. Such wastes shall be delivered by the
person generating such waste to an appropriate and authorized handler of such
wastes for proper disposal in accordance with applicable state law. Any person
found to have violated this provision shall be subject to both civil penalties
and/or criminal prosecution under any and all federal, state, or local laws
that may apply or may be hereafter adopted. In addition to any such penalties,
a violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 civil infraction and
shall be punishable by a maximum fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each violation.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to bury, burn, dump, collect, remove, or
in any manner dispose of hazardous waste upon any street, alley, public place,
or private property within the city, other than as provided in this chapter. It
is unlawful for any person to place any hazardous wastes in a container for
collection as solid waste by the city. Such wastes shall be delivered by the
person generating such waste to an appropriate and authorized handler of such
wastes for proper disposal in accordance with applicable state law. Any person
found to have violated this provision shall be subject to both civil penalties
and/or criminal prosecution under any and all federal, state, or local laws
that may apply or may be hereafter adopted. In addition to any such penalties,
a violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 civil infraction and
shall be punishable by a maximum fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each violation. (Ord. 915B, 11-30-2011)
5-2-7: OUTDOOR DUMPING AND BURNING:
   A.   Compliance With Chapter: It is unlawful for any person to bury, burn,
dump, collect, remove, or in any manner dispose of solid waste upon any street,
alley, public place or private property within the city, other than as provided
for in this chapter.
   B.   Composting Allowed: Yard debris, ashes, and other organic debris may be
composted on private premises provided the compost site is maintained so as not
to create odors, expose food waste, allow debris to become scattered, or
increase the risk from pests or rodents. Composting any waste that creates a
public nuisance or health hazard is prohibited.
   C.   Compliance With State Statute: Any outdoor burning must be in
compliance with all state laws, including Revised Code Of Washington 70.94 and
applicable administrative regulations adopted thereunder, together with any
amendments thereto which are hereby adopted by reference.
   D.   Burning Restrictions; Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to
burn any type of solid waste materials approved by the state for burning,
including brush, grass, leaves, weeds and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs,
and gardens, upon any street, alley, or public place, and any burning of such
materials in outside fireplaces, private incinerators, or in open fires on
private property may be done only upon first obtaining a permit from the fire
chief. (Ord. 915B, 11-30-2011)
5-2-8: WASTE RECYCLING; SEPARATION OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Mandatory Recycling: In order to support waste recycling programs, the
city reserves the right to and may require the separation of recyclable
material and the deposit thereof in separate cans or receptacles, and may
further prescribe the methods of disposal thereof.
   B.   Ownership Of Recyclable Material: Once recyclable material or yard
debris has been set out for collection on the curbside, or at such other
location agreed to by a contract carrier pursuant to a service agreement with
the city, ownership of such recyclable material and yard debris passes to the
contract carrier under the terms of the current service agreement with the
city. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the contract carrier to
remove or collect any such recyclables, garbage, and/or yard debris once they
are set out for collection. However, any person may collect recyclable and/or
yard debris materials delivered to such person at a location where it is legal
to accept such materials. In addition, any person may collect commercial source
separated materials from his or her own containers, or uncontainerized
commercial source separated materials from his or her customers. (Ord. 915B,
11-30-2011)
5-2-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter may be enforced pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter and title 1, chapter 13 of this code by any city
commissioned police officer or any code enforcement officer of the city
designated by the city administrator to enforce the provisions hereof.
   B.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of an approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13 and 4 of this code.
   C.   Class 4 Infraction: Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which a penalty has not been specified shall be deemed to have committed a
class 4 civil infraction and shall be subject to a maximum penalty of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each violation.
   D.   Class 1 Infraction: Any person violating any of the following
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a class 1 civil
infraction and shall be subject to a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00):
      Sections
5-2-6 and
5-2-7 of this chapter
   E.   Separate Offense: Each separate calendar day during which a violation
of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense or violation.
(Ord. 915B, 11-30-2011)
CHAPTER 3
RODENT PREVENTION
SECTION:
5-3-1: Storage And Keeping Of Food Products
5-3-2: Basement And Walls
5-3-3: Improvements; Duty Of Owner
5-3-4: Elimination Of Rats
5-3-5: Right Of Entry
5-3-6: Violation; Penalty
5-3-1: STORAGE AND KEEPING OF FOOD PRODUCTS:
   A.   Compliance With Chapter: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
store or expose for sale any food products or other goods, or to occupy or
maintain any building, storeroom or warehouse or to reside in any residence
without complying with the provisions of this chapter. (1973 Code § 8.24.010)
   B.   Protection From Rats: All food products or other goods, whether kept
for sale or for any other purpose, shall be so protected as to prevent rats
from gaining access thereto or coming in contact therewith. (1973 Code §
8.24.050)
5-3-2: BASEMENT AND WALLS:
All basements and walls of all buildings, storerooms, warehouses and residences
within the city shall be so constructed or repaired by the use of screens,
nettings, cement or other material or materials approved by the city and in
conformance with present building codes, so as to prevent rats from gaining
entrance to or harboring beneath the same. (1973 Code § 8.24.020)
5-3-3: IMPROVEMENTS; DUTY OF OWNER:
All improvements within the city shall be forthwith placed in a clean and
sanitary condition so as to render the improvement free from rats. It shall be
the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant thereof to take all necessary steps
to that end. (1973 Code § 8.24.030)
5-3-4: ELIMINATION OF RATS:
The city shall have the right to require the owner of all improvements within
the city to take appropriate steps to eliminate any rats which have gained
access to said improvements. (1973 Code § 8.24.040)
5-3-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY 1 :
The city shall at all reasonable times have and be granted access to any
premises for the purpose of determining whether the owner has complied with
this chapter. (1973 Code § 8.24.060)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-9 of this code.
5-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Misdemeanor: Every act or omission by a person responsible
for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter, any provision of a
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil regulatory order issued
pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition of an approval issued
or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   B.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of an approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this code.
   C.   Every Act A Separate Violation: Every act or omission which constitutes
an offense or violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation or offense for each and every day during any portion of which the act
or omission constituting the offense or violation is committed, continued or
permitted. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
CHAPTER 4
SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM 1
(Rep. by Ord. 874, 4-8-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11, chapter 6 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT (SEPA) 1
(Rep. by Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15, chapter 14 of this code.
CHAPTER 6
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
SECTION:
5-6-1: Hazardous Waste Management Plan Adopted
5-6-1: HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference the hazardous waste
management plan adopted by the city of Tacoma in Pierce County entitled "Tacoma
- Pierce County Local Hazardous Waste Management Plan - Supplemental Draft,
October 1990", one copy of which is on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 958, 7-
9-2014)
CHAPTER 7
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
5-7-1: RCW Chapter 70.77 Adopted As Modified
5-7-2: Permit; Application And Fee
5-7-3: Violation; Penalty
5-7-1: RCW CHAPTER 70.77 ADOPTED AS MODIFIED:
Revised Code Of Washington 70.77 is adopted in its entirety, including any
subsequent amendments thereto. Notwithstanding the above, fireworks may be
discharged within the city limits only from one minute after twelve o'clock
(12:01) A.M. to eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on July 4 of each year,
and from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on December 31 to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on
January 1 of the subsequent year. (Ord. 833, 8-9-2006, eff. 7-27-2007)
5-7-2: PERMIT; APPLICATION AND FEE:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee: Any person or entity desiring to sell fireworks
or to perform any activities as set forth in Revised Code Of Washington
70.77.255 shall apply in writing to the fire chief of fire district 18, or its
successor, for a permit and pay a fee as set by resolution of the mayor and
city council.
   B.   Exemption From Fee: Said fee shall not be required of nonprofit
charitable corporations.
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: The fire chief of fire district 18, or
its successor, shall make a written recommendation to the mayor or designee and
the mayor or designee shall, in consideration of the criteria set forth in
Revised Code Of Washington chapter 70.77 et seq., have the authority in his/her
discretion to grant or deny the permit, subject to reasonable conditions, if
any, as he/she shall prescribe.
   D.   State License Required: The applicant must first have obtained a
license from the state fire marshal as provided in Revised Code Of Washington
70.77 et seq. (Ord. 909, 6-29-2011)
5-7-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Misdemeanor: Every act or omission by a person responsible
for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter, any provision of a
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil regulatory order issued
pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition of an approval issued
or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   B.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of an approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this code.
   C.   Every Act A Separate Violation: Every act or omission which constitutes
an offense or violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation or offense for each and every day during any portion of which the act
or omission constituting the offense or violation is committed, continued or
permitted. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
CHAPTER 8
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
5-8-1: Declaration Of Policy; Findings Of Special Conditions
5-8-2: Adoption Of State Laws And Regulations By Reference; Permissible Maximum
Noise Levels
5-8-3: Definitions
5-8-4: Motor Vehicle Noise; Specific Prohibitions
5-8-5: Public Nuisances And Disturbance Noises
5-8-6: Noises Exempt; Completely Or Partially
5-8-7: Noises Exempt; Daylight Hours
5-8-8: Enforcement; Complaints
5-8-9: Provisions Not Exclusive
5-8-10: Violation
5-8-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY; FINDINGS OF SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy: It is hereby declared to be the policy of the
City to minimize exposure of citizens to the harmful physiological and
psychological effects of excessive noise. It is the express intent of the City
Council to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce, the
use, value, and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose, and the quality of the
environment.
   B.   Findings Of Special Conditions: The problem of noise in the City has
been observed by the City Council and the City staff and is documented by the
complaints received and logged in the Police Department. On the basis of these
observations and complaints, the City Council finds that special conditions
exist within the City which makes necessary any and all differences between
this chapter and the regulations adopted by the Washington State Department of
Ecology. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-8-2: ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS AND REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE; PERMISSIBLE MAXIMUM
NOISE LEVELS:
The "maximum environmental noise levels" rules promulgated by the Department of
Ecology and codified in the Washington Administrative Code at title 173,
chapter 173-60, one copy of which is on file with the City Clerk, and any
subsequent amendments therefor, are adopted and made a part hereof as though
fully set forth in this chapter, and adopted as the maximum environmental noise
levels for the City. In addition, chapter 70.107 Revised Code of Washington and
chapter 173-62 WAC as existing on the date of enactment of this chapter or as
hereafter amended by the State of Washington or applicable agencies, is hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
All technical terminology used in this chapter not defined herein shall be
interpreted in conformance with American National Standards Institute
specifications section 1.4-1983 as now in force or hereinafter amended. For
purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the
meaning indicated below:
EDNA: The environmental designation for noise abatement, being an area or zone
(environment) within which maximum permissible noise levels are established.
   A.   Class A EDNA - Residential Zones: Zones designated in title 13 of this
Code, as RC Residential-Conservation, RU Residential-Urban and RMF Residential-
Multi-Family Zones.
   B.   Class B EDNA - Commercial Zones: Zones designated in title 13 of this
Code, as MUTC Mixed Use-Town Center Zones, MUTCN Mixed Use-Town Center North
Zones, OS Open Space and Recreation Zones and PF Public Facilities Zones.
   C.   Class C EDNA - Industrial Zones: Zones designated in title 13 of this
Code, as LM Light Manufacturing Zones.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from
imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities for
providing or restoring immediately necessary utility service.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled, used primarily for
transporting persons or property upon public highways, and required to be
licensed under chapter 46.16A Revised Code of Washington.
MOTORCYCLE: Any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, except farm tractors and such vehicles powered by engines of less than
five (5) horsepower.
NEW MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle manufactured after December 31, 1976, the
equitable or legal title of which has never been transferred to a person who,
in good faith, purchases the new motor vehicle for purposes other than resale.
NOISE: The intensity and duration character of sounds from any and all sources.
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE: Any self-propelled motor driven vehicle not used primarily
for transporting persons or property upon public highways nor required to be
licensed under chapter 46.16A Revised Code of Washington.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or any
other entity, public or private.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY: The survey line at ground service which separates the real
property owned, rented, or leased by one or more other persons and its vertical
extension.
PUBLIC NUISANCE NOISE: Any sound which unreasonably either annoys, injures,
interferes with, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of three
(3) or more persons residing within separate residences in the same community
or neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal. (Ord. 2015-
971, 8-26-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-1026, 4-25-2018)
5-8-4: MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Mufflers: It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon
the public highways which is not equipped with a muffler in good working order,
in constant operation, and in accordance with state regulations adopted by the
Washington state patrol.
   B.   Tire Noise: It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in
such a manner as to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching, or
other such sounds from the tires in contact with the ground because of rapid
acceleration or excessive speed around corners or other such reason provided
that noise resulting from emergency braking to avoid imminent danger shall be
exempt from this section.
   C.   Alteration Of Motor Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to change
or modify any part of a motor vehicle or install any device thereon in any
manner that permits sound to be emitted by the motor vehicle which violates
this chapter. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-8-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES AND DISTURBANCE NOISES:
   A.   Public Nuisance Noises: It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow
to be emitted a noise which has been determined to be a "public nuisance noise"
as defined herein.
   B.   Public Disturbance Noise: It is unlawful for any person to cause or any
person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound
that is a public disturbance. No sound source specifically exempted from this
chapter shall be a public nuisance noise or public disturbance noise insofar as
the particular source is exempted. The following source of sound shall be
public disturbance noises:
      1.   Frequent, repetitive, or continuous noise made by any animal which
unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, and repose of
property owners or possessors, except that such sounds made by animal shelters,
or commercial kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels licensed
under and in compliance with applicable regulations shall be exempt from this
subsection. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the owner
or other person having custody of the animal cannot, with reasonable inquiry,
be located by the investigating officer, or if the animal is a repeat violator
of this subsection, the animal shall be impounded by the animal control officer
or his designee, subject to redemption in the manner provided by sections
6-3A-8 and
6-3A-9 of this code; (Ord. 2016-990, 8-17-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
      2.   The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren
attached to a motor vehicle except as a warning of danger or specifically
permitted or required by law;
      3.   The creation of frequent, repetitive, or continuous noise in
connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding, or testing of any
motor vehicle, motorcycle, off highway vehicle, or internal combustion engine
in any residential zone so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the
peace, comfort, and repose of owners or possessors of real property;
      4.   The use of a sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or
reproducing amplified sounds from the property of a business operation which is
intended to either attract the attention of the potential customers to the
business or to communicate with employees who are at extended portions of the
business property. Any such sound amplifier, loudspeaker or pager shall not
violate the levels set forth in Washington administrative code 173-60-040,
except the provisions of Washington administrative code 173-60-040(2)(c) shall
not apply to sounds created by sound amplifiers or other device capable of
producing or reproducing amplified sounds originating from class A EDNA, class
B EDNA or class C EDNA, when such sounds are received by residential zones. No
such sound amplifier, loudspeaker, or pager shall be audible to the human ear
beyond any perimeter of the subject business property;
      5.   The making of any loud and raucous noise which unreasonably
interferes with the use of any school, church, hospital, sanatorium or nursing
or convalescent facility;
      6.   The creation by use of a musical instrument, whistle, sound
amplifier, stereo, jukebox, radio, television, or other device capable of
reproducing sound and raucous noises which emanate frequently, repetitively, or
continuously from any building, structure, or property, such as sounds
originating from a band session, tavern operation, or commercial sales lot;
      7.   Public disturbance noise from portable or motor vehicle audio
equipment:
         a.   While in park areas, residential or commercial zones, or any area
where residences, schools, human service facilities, or commercial
establishments are in obvious proximity to the source of the sound, it is
unlawful for any person to negligently cause, make, or allow to be made from
audio equipment under such person's control or ownership the following:
            (1)   Sound from a motor vehicle audio system, such as a radio,
tape player, or compact disc player, which is operated at such a volume that it
could be clearly heard by a person of normal hearing at a distance of fifty
feet (50') or more from the vehicle itself; or
            (2)   Sound from portable audio equipment, such as a radio, tape
player, or compact disc player, which is operated at such a volume that it
could be clearly heard by a person of normal hearing at a distance of fifty
feet (50') or more from the source of the sound.
         b.   This section shall not apply to persons operating portable audio
equipment within a public park pursuant to an event under a permit issued by
the city. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-8-6: NOISES EXEMPT; COMPLETELY OR PARTIALLY:
   A.   The following noises are exempt from the provisions of this chapter at
all times, provided, that nothing in these exemptions is intended to preclude
the possible reduction of noise consistent with economic feasibility:
      1.   Noise originating from aircraft in flight, and sounds which
originate at airports and are directly related to flight operations;
      2.   Noise created by safety and protective devices, such as relief
valves where noise suppression would defeat the safety relief intent of the
device;
      3.   Noise created by fire alarms, or noise created by emergency
equipment including, but not limited to, emergency standby or backup equipment
and emergency work necessary in the interests of law enforcement or of the
health, safety, or welfare of the community, and including, but not limited to,
any emergency work necessary to replace or repair essential utility services;
      4.   Noise created by auxiliary equipment on motor vehicles used for
highway maintenance;
      5.   Noise originating from officially sanctioned parades, sporting
events, and other public events including, but not limited to, events conducted
by the city of Orting and Orting public school district;
      6.   Noise created by warning devices not operated continuously for more
than thirty (30) minutes per incident;
      7.   Noise created by motor vehicles when regulated by this chapter;
      8.   Noise created by natural phenomenon and unamplified human voices;
      9.   Noise created by motor vehicles, licensed or unlicensed, when
operated off public highways except when such sounds are received in
residential zones of the city;
      10.   Noise created by existing stationary equipment used in the
conveyance of water by utilities and noise created by existing electrical
substations;
      11.   Noise created by sources in industrial districts which over the
previous three (3) years have consistently operated in excess of fifteen (15)
hours per day as a demonstrated routine or as a consequence of process
necessity;
      12.   Noise created from school marching bands while practicing for
parades on public streets.
   B.   The following sources of noise are exempt or partially exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
      1.   Noise created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface
carriers engaged in commerce by railroad;
      2.   Noise emanating from temporary construction sites except between the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., Sundays and
holidays.
      3.   The public works director and/or the building official, and/or his
or her designee, shall have the authority to prohibit, or to allow with or
without mitigating conditions, noise that emanates from construction or related
activity during evening or nighttime hours.
   C.   It is the intention of the city council to consider amendments to this
chapter controlling the sources exempted in subsection B of this section
whenever the Washington state department of ecology promulgates specific
regulations relating to the specific sources in the future. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-
26-2015)
5-8-7: NOISES EXEMPT; DAYLIGHT HOURS:
The following noises shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on
weekdays and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekends:
   A.   Noise created by powered equipment used in temporary or periodic
maintenance or repair of resident property including, but not limited to,
grounds and appurtenances such as, but not limited to, lawn mowers, powered
hand tools, and composters;
   B.   Noise created by the discharge of firearms on authorized shooting
ranges;
   C.   Noise created by the installation and repair of essential utility
services;
   D.   Noise created by blasting;
   E.   Noise created by bells, chimes, or carillon not operated for more than
five (5) minutes in any one hour. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-26-2015)
5-8-8: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Enforcement: The city police department, the enforcement officer, and
the county sheriff's office shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Complaint Only Basis: Only after a complaint has been received from an
identified person who owns, rents, or leases property that is affected by a
noise source may a civil infraction be issued; provided, that the section of
this chapter relating to motor vehicles and noise emanating therefrom shall be
subject to enforcement proceedings regardless of whether a complaint has been
received; provided further, that with the exception of motor vehicle noises,
noise created by industrial areas are to be enforced by the state of
Washington.
   C.   Separate Offenses: For enforcement purposes, each day defined as a
twenty four (24) hour period beginning at one minute past twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M. in which a violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a
separate violation. (Ord. 2016-990, 8-17-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
5-8-9: PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be accumulative and not exclusive, and
shall not affect any other claim, cause of action, or remedy, nor, unless
specifically provided, shall this chapter be deemed to repeal, amend, or modify
any law, ordinance, or regulation relating to noise, but shall be deemed
additional to existing legislation and common law on noise. (Ord. 2015-971, 8-
26-2015)
5-8-10: VIOLATION:
   A.   Violation:
      1.   Any person violating any motor vehicle performance standard of this
chapter, or who shall create, keep, maintain, or allow to occur any "noise"
related to motor vehicle performance standards, as defined herein, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
      2.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter other
than motor vehicle performance standards, or who shall create, keep, maintain,
or allow to occur any public disturbance noise or "public nuisance noise" as
defined herein, shall be subject to a civil infraction citation as provided for
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
         a.   A first violation shall be a class 3 civil infraction.
         b.   A second violation shall be a class 2 civil infraction.
         c.   Any subsequent violations shall be class 1 civil infractions.
   B.   Evidence In Proceedings: In any proceeding under this chapter, unless
specifically required by regulations adopted herein by reference, evidence of
sound level through the use of sound level meter readings shall not be
necessary to establish the commission of the violation.
   C.   Every Act A Separate Violation: Every act or omission which constitutes
an offense or violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation or offense for each and every day during any portion of which the act
or omission constituting the offense or violation is committed, continued, or
permitted. (Ord. 2016-990, 8-17-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
CHAPTER 9
UNDERAGE GATHERINGS
SECTION:
5-9-1: Definitions
5-9-2: Underage Gatherings Prohibited
5-9-3: Exemptions
5-9-4: Civil Penalty
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer that contains one-half of one
percent or more of alcohol by volume; and is fit for beverage purposes either
alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
PROPERTY: Private property, rented residential premises, or private rented
commercial spaces; including, but not limited to, a home, yard, garage,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall
or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned,
leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Includes:
   A.   The person(s) who owns, rents, leases (lessee), or otherwise has right
to control property at which an underage gathering takes place;
   B.   The person(s) in immediate control of property at which an underage
gathering takes place; or
   C.   The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts, allows,
controls, or controls access to the underage gathering.
If the property is rented or leased, the landlord or lessor is not subject to
the provisions of this chapter unless such person is a responsible person
within the category of persons described under subsection B or C of this
definition.
UNDERAGE GATHERING: A party or gathering of three (3) or more persons at a
property at which alcoholic beverages are being consumed or possessed by one or
more underage persons or one or more underage persons are exhibiting effects of
consuming alcoholic beverages.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 930, 10-
30-2012)
5-9-2: UNDERAGE GATHERINGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   An underage gathering constitutes a public nuisance, is an immediate
threat to public health and safety, and is prohibited.
   B.   As a public nuisance, the underage gathering may be summarily abated by
law enforcement by all reasonable means, singularly or in combination,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Issuance of a notice of civil infraction, as authorized by chapter
7.80 Revised Code Of Washington and title 1, chapter 4 of this code;
      2.   Public nuisance abatement procedures as set forth in chapter 1 of
this title; and
      3.   Any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 930, 10-30-2012)
5-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to any location or place that is regulated
by a permit or license issued by the Washington state liquor control board.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to underage gatherings where the only
underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages are being closely supervised in
person by their parent or guardian while such underage person is consuming the
alcoholic beverages or exhibiting the effects of consuming alcoholic beverages.
   C.   This chapter does not apply to alcoholic beverages given for medicinal
purposes to an underage person by a parent, guardian, physician, or dentist.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to alcoholic beverages given to an underage
person when such alcoholic beverage is being used in connection with religious
services and the amount consumed is the minimal amount necessary for the
religious service. (Ord. 930, 10-30-2012)
5-9-4: CIVIL PENALTY:
Upon the occurrence of an underage gathering that constitutes a public
nuisance, the responsible person or persons shall be deemed to have committed a
class 1 civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) plus statutory assessments. Upon identification of an
underage gathering constituting a public nuisance, a notice of infraction may
be issued to the responsible person or persons in accordance with title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 930, 10-30-2012)
CHAPTER 10
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
SECTION:
5-10-1: Purpose
5-10-2: Definitions
5-10-3: Violation
5-10-4: Determination Of Chronic Nuisance - Warning And Declaration
5-10-5: Correction Agreement
5-10-6: Commencement Of Action - Enforcement
5-10-7: Summary Closure
5-10-8: Retroactive Application
5-10-1: PURPOSE:
Chronic nuisance properties present significant health, safety and welfare
concerns, where the persons responsible for such properties fail to take
corrective action to abate the nuisance condition. Chronic nuisance properties
can have a tremendous negative impact upon the quality of life, safety and
health of the neighborhoods where they are located. Chronic nuisance properties
can also be a financial burden to the City due to repeated calls for service
necessitated by nuisance activities that repeatedly occur or exist on such
properties.
Accordingly, this chapter is enacted to:
   A.   Provide a remedy for nuisance activities that are particularly
disruptive to quality of life and repeatedly occur or exist at properties.
   B.   Provide a means by which the City may prevent and abate chronic
nuisances, declare what shall be a chronic nuisance, and abate the same, and to
impose fines upon parties who permit, create, continue, or suffer nuisances to
exist.
   C.   Exercise the specific power granted to the City by the State to provide
for the punishment of all practices dangerous to public health or safety, and
to make all regulations necessary for the preservation of public morality,
health, peace, and good order within its limits, and to provide for the arrest,
trial, and punishment of all persons charged with violating City ordinances.
   D.   Provide a practical process for ameliorating nuisance activities and
for holding accountable the persons ultimately responsible for such properties.
This remedy is not the exclusive remedy available under State or Local laws to
redress chronic nuisance properties, and may be used in conjunction with such
other laws. (Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meaning prescribed below:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition
which constitutes a violation of this chapter, by such means and in such a
manner and to such an extent as the applicable Chief of Police, City Department
Director, City Code enforcement officer, or designee(s) determines is necessary
in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The City of Orting Chief of Police or the Chief's designee.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY:
   A.   A property that, within any sixty-day period:
      1.   Has had three (3) or more nuisance activities, as described in this
title, occur or exist upon the property; or
      2.   Has had three (3) or more nuisance activities occur within two
hundred feet (200') of the property that involve the person in charge of the
property and/or any person associated with the person in charge of the
property; or
      3.   Has had nuisance activities either occur or exist upon the property
or within two hundred feet (200') of the property that involve the person in
charge of the property and/or any person associated with the person in charge
of the property for a combined total of three (3) or more times; or
   B.   A property that, within any three hundred sixty five (365) day period:
      1.   Has had seven (7) or more nuisance activities occur or exist upon
the property; or
      2.   Has had seven (7) or more nuisance activities occur within two
hundred feet (200') of the property that involve the person in charge of the
property and/or any person associated with the person in charge of the
property; or
      3.   Has had nuisance activities either occur or exist upon the property
or within two hundred feet (200') of the property that involve the person in
charge of the property and/or any person associated with the person in charge
of the property for a combined total of seven (7) or more times.
   C.   A property which, upon a request for execution of a search warrant, has
been the subject of a determination by a court two (2) or more times within a
twelve-month period that probable cause exists that illegal possession,
manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as
defined in Revised Code of Washington chapter 69.50 has occurred on the
property.
CITY ATTORNEY: The City of Orting City Attorney or the City Attorney's
designee.
CONTROL: The power or ability to direct or determine conditions and/or
activities located on or occurring on a property.
DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY: Any unlawful activity at a property, which consists of
the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, or giving away of any
controlled substance as defined in chapter 69.50 Revised Code of Washington,
legend drug as defined in chapter 69.41 Revised Code of Washington, or
imitation controlled substances as defined in chapter 69.52 Revised Code of
Washington or which is established as a crime under title 6 of this Code.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY:
   A.   Any nuisance as defined by State law or local ordinance occurring on,
around or near a property, including, but not limited to, violations of the
following laws and regulations:
 
Subject                    City Code
Public nuisances           Chapter 1 of this title
Garbage and refuse         Chapter 2 of this title
Noise control              Chapter 8 of this title
Animal control             Title 6, chapter 3 of this Code
Public nuisance vehicles   Title 7, chapter 2 of this Code
Buildings and construction Title 10 of this Code
 
   B.   Any criminal conduct as defined by State law or local ordinance
occurring on, around or near a property, including, but not limited to, the
following activities or behaviors:
Subject City Code Or State Statute
Subject                                 City Code Or State Statute
Stalking                                Section
                                        6-1A-5 of this Code
Harassment                              Section
                                        6-1A-5 of this Code
Disturbing the peace                    Section
                                        6-1B-1 of this Code
Disorderly conduct                      Section
                                        6-1A-8 of this Code
Assault                                 Section
                                        6-1A-5 of this Code
Domestic violence crimes                Section
                                        6-1A-5 of this Code
Reckless endangerment                   Section
                                        6-1A-5 of this Code
Prostitution                            Section
                                        6-1A-7 of this Code
Patronizing a prostitute                Section
                                        6-1A-7 of this Code
Public disturbance noises               Section
                                        5-8-5 of this title
                                        Sections
Offenses against public decency         6-1B-4 and
                                        6-1A-7 of this Code
Crimes relating to firearms and         Section
dangerous weapons violation             6-1A-12 of this Code
Dangerous animal, cruelty to animal and Title 6, chapter 3, articles A, C, E, F
other animal violations                 of this Code
Drug-related activity                   Section
                                        6-1A-6 of this Code
Possession of stolen property offenses  As defined in chapter 9A.56 RCW
Precursor drug-related offenses         As defined in chapter 69.43 RCW
Marijuana and drug paraphernalia        As defined in section
offenses                                6-1A-6 of this Code
Loitering for the purpose of engaging   As defined in section
in drug-related activity                6-1B-6 of this Code
Any attempt, solicitation or conspiracy As defined in title 6, chapter 1,
to commit any of the above activities,  article A of this Code
behaviors or conduct
 
   C.   Activities, behavior or conduct that is contrary to any of the
following City of Orting regulatory codes:
Code City Code Or State Statute
Code                           City Code Or State Statute
License Code                   Title 3, chapter 2 of this Code
Animal Control Code            Title 6, chapter 3 of this Code
Public health and safety       This title
Zoning Code                    Title 13 of this Code
Building and Fire Code         Title 10, chapters 1 through 7 of this Code
Noise Control Code             Chapter 8 of this title
Washington State Clean Air Act Chapter 70.94 RCW
 
   D.   Nuisance-related activities as defined in chapters 1, 2, and 3 of this
title and title 7, chapter 2 of this Code.
   E.   Gang-related activity as defined in this Code or Revised Code of
Washington 59.18.030.
   F.   For purposes of this chapter, "nuisance activity" shall not include
conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and had no
control over the criminal act.
OMC: The Orting Municipal Code, as in effect at the date of enactment of the
ordinance codified in this section or as thereafter amended.
OWNER: One (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or
any part of the legal title to property, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the property, including
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.
PERSON: An individual, group of individuals, corporation, government or
governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association,
two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal
or commercial entity.
PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH THE PERSON IN CHARGE OF THE PROPERTY: A person on the
property or within two hundred feet (200') of the property as a guest or
invitee of the person in charge of the property.
PERSON IN CHARGE OF A PROPERTY: Any person in actual or constructive possession
of a property, including but not limited to an owner, lessee, tenant or
occupant with control of the property.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE: Unless otherwise defined, any of the following: any person
who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to this
chapter; an occupant in control of the property or structure which is subject
to this chapter; a developer, builder, or business operator or owner who is
developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure
which is subject to this chapter; a mortgagee that has filed an action in
foreclosure on the property that is subject to the regulation, based on breach
or default of the mortgage agreement, until title to the property is
transferred to a third party; a mortgagee of property that is subject to the
regulation and has not been occupied by the owner, the owner's tenant, or a
person having the owner's permission to occupy the premises for a period of at
least ninety (90) days; and/or any person who has control over the property and
created, caused, participated in, or has allowed a violation to occur.
PROPERTY: Any land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to
land, including but not limited to any business or residence, grounds, vacant
lots, facilities, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or
structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business
equipment, whether or not permanent, or permanent BMPs.
RCW: The Revised Code of Washington, as in effect at the date of enactment of
the ordinance codified in this section or as thereafter amended.
(Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
5-10-3: VIOLATION:
   A.   Any property within the City that is a chronic nuisance property is in
violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement procedures, remedies
and penalties described in this chapter, and to the enforcement procedures,
remedies and penalties set forth in title 1, chapters 4 and 13 of this Code.
   B.   Owners and other persons in charge who permit property to be a chronic
nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its
remedies; and
   C.   Whenever the City issues a violation citation to more than one (1)
person because of a violation of this chapter, those persons shall be jointly
and severally liable. (Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017)
5-10-4: DETERMINATION OF CHRONIC NUISANCE - WARNING AND DECLARATION:
   A.   When the Chief of Police (or their designee), or City Administrator (or
their designee), or City Code enforcement officer (or their designee), receives
specific facts and circumstances documenting the existence of a chronic
nuisance property, the Chief of Police (or their designee) or City
Administrator (or their designee), or City Code enforcement officer (or their
designee), may independently review such reports to determine whether the
property is a chronic nuisance property as defined in this chapter.
   B.   If, following the review described in subsection A of this section, the
Chief of Police (or their designee) or City Administrator (or their designee),
or City Code enforcement officer (or their designee), determines that the
property is a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of Police (or their
designee) or City Administrator (or their designee), or City Code enforcement
officer (or their designee) shall issue a warning to the person in charge of
the property, in writing, stating that the property is a chronic nuisance
property and demanding that the person in charge of the property cease and
desist from allowing nuisance activities, as defined in this chapter, to
continue.
      1.   The warning shall contain substantially the following information:
         a.   The name and address of the person to whom the letter is issued;
         b.   The location of the property by address or other description
sufficient for identification of the property;
         c.   A concise description of the documented nuisance activities upon
which the determination was based;
         d.   A warning that there is potential civil and/or criminal liability
for continuing to allow nuisance activities, as defined in this chapter, to
occur upon and/or within two hundred feet (200') of the property;
         e.   The name and telephone number of the City representative who is
responsible for handling inquiries from the person in charge of the property or
others with an interest in the property; and
         f.   A demand the owner and other persons in charge respond to City
representative within seven (7) days of service of the notice to discuss a
course of action to correct the nuisance.
      2.   The warning shall be served by means of personal service, or by
mailing a copy of the notice to the person in charge of the property at his/her
last known address, certified mail, return receipt requested, or by posting a
copy of the notice and demand conspicuously upon the property.
      3.   The warning must be served within sixty (60) days of the occurrence
of the last nuisance activity which qualified the property as a chronic
nuisance property under the definitions of this chapter.
      4.   Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under
penalty of perjury by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and
date of service and the manner by which service was made.
      5.   When a warning is issued pursuant to this section to a person in
charge, other than an owner or an owner's agent, who has permitted a property
to become a chronic nuisance property, a copy of such warning shall also be
sent by first class mail or personally served on the owner of the property, and
a copy shall be sent by certified mail.
   C.   An owner who receives a copy of a warning pursuant to this chapter
describing a chronic nuisance property permitted by a person in charge other
than the owner or the owner's agent, shall promptly take all reasonable steps
requested in writing by the City to assist in abatement of the nuisance
property. Such reasonable steps may include the owner taking all acts and
pursuing all remedies, including pursuing eviction of the person in charge,
that are: 1) available to the owner pursuant to any lease or other agreement,
and 2) consistent with State and Local laws, including but not limited to
Revised Code of Washington 59.18.580, and the Victim Protection Limitation on
Landlord's Rental Decisions.
   D.   If the owner or person in charge or person responsible timely responds
as required by the warning issued pursuant to this chapter, and agrees to a
course of action to abate the nuisance activities, a written correction
agreement between the owner or person in charge and the City shall be executed.
If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of nuisance
activities to the satisfaction of the City within thirty (30) days of issuance
of the warning, or within such longer period as permitted by the Chief of
Police, City Administrator or Code enforcement officer, or their designee, in
writing the City may issue a Declaration of Chronic Nuisance Property pursuant
to this chapter.
   E.   If the City receives no response to the warning within the time
prescribed, the Chief of Police (or their designee) or City Administrator (or
their designee), or City Code enforcement officer (or their designee), shall
issue a Declaration of Chronic Nuisance Property, declaring the property to be
a chronic nuisance property, and shall post such declaration at the property
and issue the person(s) responsible a civil infraction, punishable by a maximum
penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The matter shall be referred to
the Office of the City Attorney for further action, pursuant to this chapter.
   F.   It is a defense to an action for chronic nuisance property that the
person responsible, at all material times, could not, in the exercise of
reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic
nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care
and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the
property is chronic nuisance property. (Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017)
5-10-5: CORRECTION AGREEMENT:
   A.   A correction agreement is a contract between the City and the person in
charge of the chronic nuisance property in which such person agrees to promptly
take all lawful and reasonable actions, which shall be set forth in the
agreement to abate the nuisance activities within a specified time and
according to specified conditions. The agreement shall be signed by the person
in charge and, if different, the owner. The agreement shall include the
following:
      1.   The name and address of the persons in charge of the property;
      2.   The street address or a description sufficient for identification of
the property, building, structure, or land upon or within which the nuisance is
occurring;
      3.   A description of the nuisance activities;
      4.   The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by
which correction must be completed;
      5.   An agreement by the person in charge that the City may inspect the
property as may be necessary to determine compliance with the correction
agreement;
      6.   An agreement by the person in charge that the City may abate the
nuisance and recover its costs and expenses and monetary penalties pursuant to
this chapter from the person in charge for the nuisance if the terms of the
correction agreement are not met; and
      7.   When a person in charge, other than an owner or an owner's agent,
has permitted a property to be a chronic nuisance property, an agreement by the
owner to promptly take all acts and pursue all remedies requested by the City.
(Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017)
5-10-6: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION - ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the City Attorney or
their designee, on behalf of the City, is authorized to take appropriate action
to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Said enforcement
action may include, but is not limited to, any of the following remedies:
      1.   Violation Citation: Issuance of a violation citation under section
1-4-1 of this Code. A violation citation issued for a violation of the
provisions of this chapter may include in its corrective action suspension or
revocation of any license issued under title 3, chapter 2 of this Code, and the
Violations Hearing Examiner is hereby granted specific authority to so order
license suspension or revocation; or
      2.   Application To Court: Application to any court of competent
jurisdiction for injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent continuing nuisance activities at the property and/or restraining
any person from violating any of the provisions of this chapter and compelling
compliance with the provisions herein.
      3.   Abatement Costs: All costs of abatement, including incidental
expenses, shall be billed to the person or persons to whom the violation
citation was issued and shall become due and payable thirty (30) days
thereafter. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited
to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney's fees
incurred by the City; costs incurred in documenting the violation; the actual
expenses and costs to the City in the preparation of notices, specifications
and contracts, and in inspecting the work; and the cost of any required
printing and mailing.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the
City from pursuing immediate relief from nuisance activities at a property by
any other means available by law, including but not limited to emergency relief
under subsection
5-1-7C of this title and an order of the Fire Code official under the Orting
Fire Code. Penalty and enforcement provisions provided in this chapter shall
not be deemed exclusive and the City may pursue any remedy or relief it deems
appropriate.
   C.   The failure to prosecute and/or convict an individual for the violation
(s) constituting the nuisance activities is not a defense to an action under
this chapter.
   D.   Once the matter is referred to the City Attorney, the City Attorney
shall immediately review and make a determination to initiate legal action
authorized under this chapter or State Statute, or may seek alternative forms
of abatement of the nuisance activity. The City Attorney shall obtain City
Council approval through a resolution to initiate legal action on the chronic
nuisance property and seek civil penalties and costs in Pierce County Superior
Court for the abatement of the nuisance.
   E.   In determining whether a property shall be deemed a chronic nuisance
property and subject to the court's jurisdiction, the City shall have the
initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the
property is a chronic nuisance property. The City may submit official police
reports and other affidavits outlining the information that led to arrest(s),
and other chronic nuisance activity occurring or existing at the property. The
failure to prosecute an individual or the fact no one has been convicted of a
crime is not a defense to a chronic nuisance action.
   F.   Once the Superior Court determines the property to be a chronic
nuisance under this chapter, the court may impose a civil penalty against any
or all of the persons responsible for the property, and may order any other
relief deemed appropriate. A civil penalty may be assessed for up to one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the nuisance activity continues
to occur following the date of the original warning, as described in this
chapter. In assessing the civil penalty, the court may consider the following
factors, citing to those found applicable:
      1.   The actions taken by the person responsible to mitigate or correct
the nuisance activity;
      2.   The repeated or continuous nature of the nuisance activity;
      3.   The statements of the neighbors or those affected by the nuisance
activity; and
      4.   Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
   G.   The Superior Court which determined the property to be a chronic
nuisance property shall also assess costs against the person responsible in the
amount it costs the City to abate, or attempt to abate, the nuisance activity.
   H.   If the Superior Court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the Superior Court shall order the property closed and secured
against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period up to one (1)
year, and may impose a civil penalty and costs.
   I.   Once a determination has been made by the Superior Court that the
chronic nuisance property shall be subject to closure the court may authorize
the City to physically secure the premises and initiate such closure. Costs for
such closure shall be submitted to the court for review. Any civil penalty and/
or costs awarded to the City may be filed with the City Treasurer who shall
cause the same to be filed as a lien on the property with the County Treasurer.
The City shall file a formal lis pendens notice when an action for abatement is
filed in the Superior Court.
   J.   The Superior Court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of
closure or abatement of the property. (Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017)
5-10-7: SUMMARY CLOSURE:
Nothing in this chapter prohibits the City from taking any emergency action for
the summary closure of such property when it is necessary to avoid an immediate
threat to public welfare and safety. The City may take summary action to close
the property without complying with the notification provisions of section
5-10-4 of this chapter, but shall provide such notice as is reasonable under
the circumstances. (Ord. 2017-1011, 3-14-2017)
5-10-8: RETROACTIVE APPLICATION:
Actions performed prior to the effective date of this chapter may render a
person liable under this chapter if those actions contribute or have
contributed to the maintenance of a chronic nuisance property. (Ord. 2017-1011,
3-14-2017)
CHAPTER 11
FORECLOSURE PROPERTY REGISTRATION PROGRAM
SECTION:
5-11-1: Purpose
5-11-2: Definitions
5-11-3: Registry Established; Procedures
5-11-4: Maintenance And Monitoring Of Registered Properties
5-11-5: Penalty
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Orting, through the adoption of
this chapter, to establish a Foreclosure Property Registration Program in order
to protect the community from the deterioration, crime, and decline in value in
neighborhoods caused by properties in various stages of the foreclosure
process, and to identify, regulate, limit, and reduce the number of those
properties within the City of Orting. It is the policy and intent of the City
to establish a requirement that the lender or other responsible party(ies) of
properties that are in the foreclosure process register those properties with
the City, as set forth in this chapter, in order to protect the neighborhoods
from the negative impacts of absentee ownership and lack of adequate
maintenance and security for properties in the foreclosure process. (Ord. 2018-
1034, 9-26-2018)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS: Refers to the City's Code
Enforcement Officer (defined at section
1-13-2 of this Code) or his or her designee, the City Administrator or his or
her designee, or the building official or his or her designee.
EVIDENCE OF FORECLOSURE STATUS: Means any condition that on its own or combined
with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the property is a foreclosure property. Such conditions include, but are not
limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected
utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or debris; statements by neighbors,
passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is in
foreclosure; the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in
violation of applicable Building Code; and for residential properties, the
absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters; the
absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential
habitation.
FORECLOSURE: Means the legal processes described in title 61, Revised Code of
Washington, in which a mortgagee or other lien holder terminates a property
owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to
the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject
to the lien. For purposes of this section, the foreclosure process is not
concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lien holder, or their
designee, by certificate of title or other means, is sold to a non-related,
bona fide purchaser in an arms'-length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
FORECLOSURE PROPERTY: Means a property that is: a) under a current notice of
default and/or notice of trustee's sale; b) the subject of a pending Tax
Assessor's lien sale; c) the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was
retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; d)
a property title to which has been transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale; or e) subject to a contract forfeiture. Property acquired by
a government agency at a tax foreclosure sale under chapter 84.64 Revised Code
of Washington is not "foreclosure property" within the meaning of this section.
For purposes of this section, a property remains a foreclosure property until
it is sold at an arms'-length transaction to a non-related bona fide purchaser
or until the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default has been
cured.
LENDER: Means any person who makes, extends, holds, or services a real estate
loan agreement and includes, but is not limited to, mortgagees; beneficiaries
under deeds of trust; underwriters under deeds of trust; vendors under
conditional land sales contracts; trustees and a successor in interest to any
mortgagee, beneficiary, vendor or trustee and any other lien holder on the
property. The term also includes any mortgagee, beneficiary or trustee that
accepts a deed in lieu of foreclosure.
OWNER: Means any individual or group of natural persons, partnership,
association, corporation or other entity having legal or beneficial title in
real property including any borrower.
PROPERTY: Means any unimproved or improved, residential or commercial real
property, or portion thereof, situated in the City, and includes the buildings
or structures located on the property regardless of condition.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or
fiduciary having legal or equitable title to or any interest in any real
property, including but not limited to an owner, and lender, as defined in this
chapter, as well as individual property manager, property management company,
or similar person or entity, responsible for and having the authority to make
decisions and required expenditures concerning, the maintenance and security of
a foreclosure property and the abatement of nuisance conditions at the
property.
VACANT: Means a subject property that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 2018-1034,
9-26-2018)
5-11-3: REGISTRY ESTABLISHED; PROCEDURES:
The City shall establish and maintain a Foreclosure Property Registry to
implement the terms of this chapter. The registry shall be maintained by the
Building Department, in conjunction with the Code Enforcement Department, who
shall develop procedures to implement this section which are consistent with
and do not conflict with this chapter, this Code, or Washington law.
   A.   Registration Of Foreclosure Properties:
      1.   Inspection Required: Any lender who holds a security interest on a
property located within the City of Orting which is under a current notice of
default, is under a current notice of trustee's sale, is the subject of a
pending Tax Assessor's lien sale, has been the subject of a foreclosure where
the title was retained by the beneficiary of the deed of trust involved in the
foreclosure, or was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale must
perform an inspection of the property to determine whether the property is
vacant within fourteen (14) days of the notice of default or other applicable
proceedings to begin the foreclosure process. The Enforcement Officer can also
inspect the property and trigger the registration process. If the property is
found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is deemed abandoned and
shall be registered with the City in accordance with this chapter.
      2.   Registration Required: Any lender(s) or other responsible party(ies)
of a foreclosure property as defined in this chapter shall register that
property with the City of Orting within ten (10) days of the property becoming
a foreclosure property within the meaning of this chapter by submitting an
application pursuant to this chapter. All registrations are valid for one year.
Once registered, the lender(s) or other responsible party(ies) shall renew the
registration of the foreclosure property with the City every twelve (12)
months, until the property is no longer a foreclosure property within the
meaning of this chapter. A separate registration is required for each property.
      3.   Application For Registry: The content of the registration
application shall include:
         a.   Proof of ownership, or financial interest, such as a lien or
loan;
         b.   The name, address, phone number, and email address for the owner,
lender, and responsible party and twenty four (24) hour contact phone number of
the respective entity; and
         c.   Documentation which adequately demonstrates the property is
foreclosed, pending foreclosure, or subject to foreclosure, trustee's sale, Tax
Assessor's lien sale or other legal proceedings. The adequacy of the
documentation provided shall be at the City's discretion.
      4.   Notice Of Change: The lender, owner, or responsible party shall
notify the City within ten (10) days of the date of any change in the
information contained in the registration. Lenders, owners, or responsible
parties who have existing foreclosure properties upon enactment of this chapter
shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the effective date to register the
property with City. A separate registration is required for each property.
      5.   Registration Fee: Upon application for the registry, the lender,
owner, or responsible party shall remit an initial registration fee to the
City, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Removal From Registry: A property may only be removed from the
foreclosure property registry upon the lender's, owner's, or responsible
party's written certification that: 1) the mortgage or lien on the property has
been satisfied or legally discharged, 2) the property is no longer in mortgage
default, or 3) the foreclosure property has been sold to a non-related party in
a bona-fide, arms' length transaction. The following shall not be a valid basis
for removal from the registry: a lender's statement that it no longer desires
to pursue foreclosure; evidence of dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of
final judgment and/or certificate of title, or similar documentation, such as
deed in lieu of foreclosure.
   C.   Transfer Of Ownership: If the mortgage on a registered foreclosure
property is transferred, the transferee shall be subject to the requirements of
this section and shall, within five (5) days of the transfer of the mortgage,
register the property as a new registration in accordance with this section.
Any previously unpaid registration fees are the responsibility of the
transferee and are due and payable upon the new registration.
   D.   Sale Of Foreclosure Property: If the mortgagee sells a foreclosure
property in an arms'-length transaction to a non- related person or entity, the
transferee is subject to the terms of this section and shall register the
property as a new registration under this section within five (5) days of the
sale. Any previously unpaid registration fees shall be the responsibility of
the new owner. For purposes of this chapter, a transfer to another entity which
is under common ownership with the lender, as determined in the sole discretion
of the City, is not an arms' length transaction. (Ord. 2018-1034, 9-26-2018)
5-11-4: MAINTENANCE AND MONITORING OF REGISTERED PROPERTIES:
   A.   Minimum Property Inspection And Maintenance Requirements: While a
foreclosure property is registered, the lender or responsible party shall be
required to inspect the foreclosure property monthly, or more frequently as
necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance, and shall:
      1.   Maintain and keep foreclosure property free of conditions including,
but not limited to: weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris,
building materials and junk vehicles, accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, notices (except those required by Federal, State, or local law), and
discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, or
large and small appliances;
      2.   Graffiti, tagging, or similar markings shall be removed or painted
over with an exterior grade paint that matches and/or coordinates with the
color of the exterior of the structure;
      3.   Secure ponds, pools and hot tubs and ensure that they do not become
a public nuisance;
      4.   Secure the foreclosure property to prevent access by unauthorized
persons, including, but not limited to, the following: the closure and locking
of windows, doors (walk- through, sliding and garage), gates, and any other
opening of such size that it may allow a child or any other person to access
the interior of the property and/or structure(s). Securing also includes
boarding as applicable. Preferred material for boarding shall be painted with
an exterior grade paint that matches and/or coordinates with the color of the
exterior of the structure, or is of a material that mimics glazed windows and
intact doors;
      5.   Post the property with no trespassing signs and current emergency
contact information for the agent; and
      6.   Take any other action necessary to prevent giving the appearance
that the property is abandoned.
   B.   City Monitoring Of Registered Properties: Upon registration, the City
will provide regular monitoring of foreclosure properties including, but not
limited to, periodic site visitation. The City's monitoring of foreclosure
properties does not relieve the lender or other responsible party from
monitoring and maintaining the property as required by this chapter. As part of
the foreclosure property registration, the owner, lender, or responsible party,
or other person having legal authority for the property shall authorize the
City to enter onto the property for monitoring purposes. (Ord. 2018-1034, 9-26-
2018)
5-11-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement under the
procedures set out in title 1, chapter 13 of this Code, and the person(s)
responsible for the violation(s) shall incur a civil monetary penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day of continued non-compliance. Payment of
a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person(s)
responsible for the violation of the duty to correct the violation. Enforcement
action taken by this City in accordance with this chapter may be appealed in
accordance with the procedures set out in title 1, chapters 13 and 12 of this
Code. (Ord. 2018-1034, 9-26-2018)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
CRIMES AND OFFENSES; STATUTES ADOPTED
ARTICLE A. STATUTES ADOPTED 1
SECTION:
6-1A-1: Preliminary Article
6-1A-2: Revised Code Of Washington Construction
6-1A-3: General Provisions
6-1A-4: Offenses By Or Against Public Officers And Government
6-1A-5: Offenses Against The Person
6-1A-6: Offenses Against Public Health And Safety
6-1A-7: Offenses Against Public Decency
6-1A-8: Offenses Against Public Peace
6-1A-9: Offenses Against Property
6-1A-10: Consumer Protection
6-1A-11: Offenses By Or Against Minors
6-1A-12: Weapons
6-1A-13: Miscellaneous Crimes
6-1A-14: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also article B of this chapter for text regarding miscellaneous
  offenses.
6-1A-1: PRELIMINARY ARTICLE:
The following provisions of the Revised Code Of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
 
9A.04.100 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt
9A.04.110 Definitions (1973 Code § 9.03.010)
 
6-1A-2: REVISED CODE OF WASHINGTON CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Adopted By Reference: In adopting the state's statutes by reference,
only those crimes and offenses within the jurisdiction of a municipality are
intended to be adopted and in those sections adopted which deal with both
felonies and misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors, only the language applicable
to misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors is to be applied (including to the extent
that an anticipatory offense would be a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor). By
adopting state statutes, the city intends to assume jurisdiction over and
become the jurisdictional authority for the enforcement and prosecution of
misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor crimes. Whenever the word "state" shall
appear in any statute adopted by reference in this chapter, the word "city"
shall be substituted; provided, however, the term "city" shall not be
substituted for the term "state" in those circumstances that set forth
administrative or licensing duties of the state and its subdivisions. Whenever
a state statute specifically adopted in this chapter refers to another state
statute not specifically adopted in this chapter, the statute referred to shall
be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically
adopted in this chapter. When issuing a citation, information, or complaint for
the violation of any section of the Revised Code Of Washington adopted by this
chapter, it shall be sufficient for a commissioned officer or prosecutor to
cite to and refer to the Revised Code Of Washington section number.
   B.   Misdemeanors: With the exception of the Revised Code Of Washington
sections set forth in subsection D of this section or other Revised Code Of
Washington sections that are otherwise specifically disavowed in this code, all
Revised Code Of Washington sections that constitute misdemeanors and gross
misdemeanors and the Revised Code Of Washington sections necessary for the
investigation, arrest, prosecution, sentencing, confinement, and enforcement of
misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors are hereby adopted by reference, as well as
any future changes, amendments, recodifications, additions, or deletions to
those sections, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth
herein in full. The fact that sections of this code adopt by reference specific
sections of the Revised Code Of Washington shall not affect this section.
Sections of the code that specifically recite that sections of the Revised Code
Of Washington are not adopted or do not apply shall control over this section.
   C.   Class C Felony Crimes: All class C felony crimes set forth in the
Revised Code Of Washington are hereby adopted by reference, as well as any
future changes, amendments, recodifications, additions, or deletions to those
sections, for the purposes of charging a gross misdemeanor for a violation of
any of the crimes set forth in Revised Code Of Washington chapter 9A.28. The
adoption of class C felonies shall be subject to the provisions of subsections
A and B of this section.
   D.   Sections Not Adopted: The following Revised Code Of Washington sections
are specifically not adopted:
      1.   Revised Code Of Washington 9A.16.110, Defending against violent
crime - reimbursement.
   E.   Severability: If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, or
provision of this title, or its application to any person or circumstance, is
held invalid, the remainder of this title, or the application of the chapter,
section, subsection, sentence, or provision to other persons or circumstances,
is not affected, and to this end, the chapters, sections, subsections,
sentences and provisions of this title are declared to be severable.
   F.   Public Duty: The provisions of this title are intended to create a duty
to the public in general and not to create any duty to individuals or to any
particular class of individuals. These provisions are not for the protection of
any person or class of persons.
   G.   Restitution: Restitution may be imposed as part of a sentence and shall
be ordered by the court whenever a person is convicted of a crime which results
in injury to any person or damage to or loss of property, unless extraordinary
circumstances exist that make restitution inappropriate in the court's judgment
and the court sets forth such circumstances in the record. In addition,
restitution shall be ordered to pay for an injury, loss, or damage if the
defendant pleads guilty to a lesser offense or fewer offenses and agrees with
the prosecutor's recommendation that the defendant be required to pay
restitution to a victim of an offense or offenses that are not prosecuted
pursuant to a plea agreement. The court shall identify in the judgment and
sentence the victim or victims entitled to restitution and what amount is due
each victim.
      1.   Restitution shall be ordered by the court whenever a person is
convicted of any charge of hit and run, whether involving persons, property, or
attended vehicles under FWRC 8.05.010 or Revised Code Of Washington chapter
46.52. This restitution shall include:
         a.   Damages for injury, property loss and/or lost wages attributable
to leaving the scene of the accident or collision in all cases; and
         b.   Damages for injury, property loss and/or lost wages where there
is a preponderance of evidence that the convicted person was at fault in the
underlying accident or collision.
      2.   When restitution is ordered, the court shall determine the amount of
restitution due at the sentencing hearing or within one hundred eighty (180)
days. The court may continue the hearing beyond the one hundred eighty (180)
days for good cause. Restitution ordered by a court pursuant to a criminal
conviction shall be based on easily ascertainable damages for injury to or loss
of property, actual expenses incurred for treatment for injury to persons, and
lost wages resulting from injury. Restitution shall not include reimbursement
for damages for mental anguish, pain and suffering, or other intangible losses,
but may include the costs of counseling reasonably related to the offense. The
amount of restitution shall not exceed double the amount of the offender's gain
or the victim's loss from the commission of the crime.
      3.   The city or victim may enforce the court ordered restitution in the
same manner as a judgment in a civil action. This section does not limit civil
remedies or defenses available to the victim, survivors of the victim, or
defendant. Restitution collected through civil enforcement must be paid through
the registry of the court and must be distributed proportionately according to
each victim's loss when there is more than one victim.
   H.   Violation Of Probation Order: It is a misdemeanor for any person who
has been convicted of a criminal offense, and has been placed, and remains, on
probation in connection with a suspended or deferred sentence by a court, to
knowingly violate any provision of a court's probation order.
   I.   Jurisdiction: The following persons are subject to punishment:
      1.   A person who commits in the city any crime as defined by ordinance,
in whole or part;
      2.   A person who commits out of the city any act which, if committed
within it, would be theft and is afterward found in the city with any of the
stolen property;
      3.   A person who, being out of the city, counsels, causes, procures,
aids, or abets another to commit a crime in the city; or
      4.   A person who commits an act without the city which affects persons
or property within the city which, if committed within the city, would be a
crime. (Ord. 905, 3-30-2011)
6-1A-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following provisions of the Revised Code Of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Criminal Attempt; Solicitation; Conspiracy:
 
9A.28.020 Criminal attempt
9A.28.030 Criminal solicitation
9A.28.040 Criminal conspiracy (1973 Code §§ 9.04.010, 9.04.015, 9.04.020)
   B.   Culpability; Complicity; Liability Of Corporations:
 
9A.08.010 Culpability
9A.08.020 Complicity
9A.08.030 Liability of corporations (1973 Code §§ 9.04.030, 9.04.040, 9.04.045)
   C.   Citizen Immunity; Omissions; Sending Letter:
 
9.01.055 Citizen immunity if aiding an officer
9.01.110 Omissions, when not punishable
9.01.130 Sending letter, when complete (1973 Code §§ 9.04.050, 9.04.060,
         9.04.070)
   D.   Insanity: 9A.12.010. (1973 Code § 9.04.080)
   E.   Defenses:
 
9A.16.010 Definitions
9A.16.020 Use of force - when lawful
9A.16.060 Duress
9A.16.070 Entrapment
9A.16.080 Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for
          investigation, "reasonable grounds" as defense
9A.16.090 Intoxication
9A.16.100 Use of force on children - policy - actions presumed unreasonable (1973 Code §
          9.04.090)
   F.   Criminal Procedure:
 
10.31.100 Powers of arrest and mandatory arrest provisions (Ord. 689, 5-29-
          1997)
 
6-1A-4: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT:
The following provisions of the Revised Code Of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Crimes Relating To Official Proceedings:
Committal Of Witness; Detention Of Documents: 9.72.090. (1973 Code § 9.06.030)
Contempt Of Court:
7.21.010  Definitions
7.21.020  Sanctions - who may impose
7.21.030  Remedial sanctions - payment for losses
7.21.040  Punitive sanctions - fines
7.21.050  Sanctions - summary imposition - procedures
7.21.060  Administrative actions or proceedings - petition to court for
          imposition of sanctions
7.21.070  Appellate review (1973 Code § 9.06.050)
Juries, Crimes Relating To:
9.51.010  Misconduct of officer drawing jury
9.51.020  Soliciting jury duty
9.51.030  Misconduct of officer in charge of jury (1973 Code § 9.06.010)
Misconduct In Signing Petition: 9.44.080. (1973 Code § 9.06.040)
Perjury And Interference With Official Proceedings:
9A.72.010 Definitions
9A.72.040 False swearing
9A.72.050 Perjury and false swearing - inconsistent statements - degree of
          crime
9A.72.060 Perjury and false swearing - retraction
9A.72.070 Perjury and false swearing - irregularities no defense
9A.72.080 Statement of what one does not know to be true
9A.72.140 Jury tampering
9A.72.150 Tampering with physical evidence (1973 Code § 9.06.020)
   B.   Defrauding A Public Utility:
 
9A.61.010 Definitions
9A.61.020 Defrauding a public utility
9A.61.050 Defrauding a public utility in the third degree
9A.61.060 Restitution and costs (1973 Code § 9.07.010)
   C.   Obstructing Governmental Operations:
 
9A.76.010 Definitions
9A.76.020 Obstructing a public servant
9A.76.030 Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer
9A.76.040 Resisting arrest
9A.76.100 Compounding
9A.76.160 Introducing contraband in the third degree
9A.76.170 Bail jumping (1973 Code § 9.08.010)
   D.   Offenses Relating to Schools, School Personnel:
28A.635.010 Abusing or insulting teachers, liability for - penalty
28A.635.020 Wilfully disobeying school administration personnel or refusing to
            leave public property, violations, when - penalty
28A.635.030 Disturbing school, school activities or meetings - penalty
28A.635.040 Examination questions - disclosing - penalty
28A.635.050 Certain corrupt practices of school officials - penalty
            Defacing or injuring school property - liability of pupil, parent
28A.635.060 or guardian - voluntary work program as alternative - rights
            protected
28A.635.070 Property, failure of officials or employees to account for -
            mutilation by - penalties
28A.635.090 Interfering by force or violence with any administrator, teacher,
            classified employee or student unlawful
28A.635.100 Intimidation of any administrator, teacher, classified employee or
            student by threat of force or violence unlawful
28A.635.110 Violations under RCW 28A.635.090 and RCW 28A.635.100 - disciplinary
            authority exception (1973 Code § 9.09.010; amd. 1996 Code)
   E.   Escape:
Escaped Prisoner Recaptured: 9.31.090. (1973 Code § 9.10.020)
Rendering Criminal Assistance; Escape:
9A.76.050 Rendering criminal assistance, definition of term
9A.76.060 Relative defined
9A.76.070 Rendering criminal assistance - in the first degree
9A.76.080 Rendering criminal assistance - in the second degree
9A.76.090 Rendering criminal assistance - in the third degree
9A.76.130 Escape in the third degree (1973 Code § 9.10.010)
   F.   Abuse Of Conduct:
 
Official Misconduct: 9A.80.010. (1973 Code § 9.11.010)
 
6-1A-5: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Theft And Robbery:
9A.56.010 Definitions
9A.56.020 Theft - definition, defense
9A.56.050 Theft in the third degree
9A.56.220 Theft of cable television services
9A.56.230 Unlawful sale of subscription television services
9A.56.240 Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation
9A.56.260 Connection of channel converter
9A.56.270 Shopping cart theft (1973 Code § 9.12.010)
   B.   Unlawful Issuance Of Bank Check Or Draft: 9A.56.060 (1), (2), (5).
(1973 Code § 9.14.010)
   C.   Criminal Impersonation; Certification:
 
9A.60.010 Definitions
9A.60.040 Criminal impersonation
9A.60.050 False certification (1973 Code § 9.15.010)
   D.   Sexual Offenses:
 
9A.44.010 Definitions
9A.44.020 Testimony - evidence - written motion - admissibility
9A.44.030 Defenses to prosecution under this chapter
9A.44.096 Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree (1973 Code §
          9.18.010)
   E.   Assault:
 
9A.36.041 Assault in the fourth degree
9A.36.050 Reckless endangerment in the second degree
9A.36.070 Coercion (1973 Code § 9.20.010)
9A.36.150 Interfering with report of domestic violence (Ord. 689, 5-29-1997)
   F.   Harassment:
9A.46.020 Definition - penalties
9A.46.030 Place where committed
9A.46.040 Court-ordered requirements under person charged with crime -
          violation
9A.46.050 Arraignment - no contact order
9A.46.060 Crimes included in harassment
9A.46.070 Enforcement of orders restricting contact
9A.46.080 Order restricting contact - violation
9A.46.090 Nonliability of police officer
9A.46.100 "Convicted", time when (1973 Code § 9.21.010)
9A.46.110 Stalking (Ord. 689, 5-29-1997)
 
6-1A-6: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverage Control:
66.04.010  Definitions
66.04.0115 "Public place" not to include certain parks and public areas
66.12.0105 Wine or beer manufactured for home use
66.20.180  Card of identification presented on request of licensee
66.20.190  Identification card holder may be required to sign certification
           card - contents - procedure - statement
66.20.200  Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certificate
           card - penalty
66.24.481  Public place or club - license or permit required - penalty
66.28.090  Licensed premises or banquet permit premises open to inspection -
           failure to allow - violation
66.32.010  Possession of contraband liquor
66.32.020  Search warrant - search and seizure
66.32.030  Service of warrant - receipt for seized property
66.32.040  Forfeiture of liquor directed if kept unlawfully
66.32.050  Hearing
66.32.060  Claimants may appeal
66.32.070  Judgment of forfeiture - disposition of proceeds of property sold
66.32.080  Forfeiture action no bar to criminal prosecution
66.32.090  Seized liquor to be reported to board
66.44.010  Local officers to enforce law - authority of board - liquor
           enforcement officers
66.44.040  Sufficiency of description of offenses in complaints, information,
           process, etc.
66.44.050  Description of offenses in words of statutes - proof required
66.44.060  Proof of unlawful sale establishes prima facie intent
66.44.070  Certified analysis is prima facie evidence of alcoholic content
66.44.080  Service of process on corporation
66.44.090  Acting without a license
66.44.100  Opening or consuming liquor in public place - penalty
66.44.120  Unlawful use of seal
66.44.130  Sales of liquor by drink or bottle
66.44.140  Unlawful sale, transportation of spirituous liquor without stamp or
           seal - unlawful operation, possession of still or mash
66.44.150  Buying liquor illegally
66.44.160  Illegal possession, transportation of alcoholic beverage
66.44.170  Illegal possession, transportation of liquor with intent to sell -
           prima facie evidence, what is
66.44.175  Violation of law
66.44.180  General penalties - jurisdiction for violations
66.44.200  Sales to persons apparently under the influence of liquor
66.44.210  Obtaining liquor for ineligible person
66.44.240  Drinking in public conveyance - penalty against carrier - exception
66.44.250  Drinking in public conveyance - penalty against individual,
           restricted application
66.44.270  Furnishing liquor to minors - possession, use
66.44.280  Minor applying for permit
66.44.290  Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor
66.44.291  Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor - penalty against
           persons between ages of eighteen and twenty, inclusive
66.44.300  Treating minor, etc. in public place where liquor sold
66.44.310  Minors frequenting off-limits area - misrepresentation of age -
           penalty - classification of licenses
           Musicians, disc jockeys, sound or lighting technicians, persons
66.44.316  performing janitorial services, and employees of amusement device
           companies, eighteen years and over permitted to enter and remain
           upon licensed premises during employment
66.44.320  Sale of liquor to minors a violation
66.44.325  Unlawful transfer to a minor of an identification of age
66.44.328  Preparation or acquisition and supply to persons under twenty one of
           facsimile of official identification card - penalty
66.44.340  Employees eighteen years and over allowed to sell and handle beer
           and wine for class E and/or F licensed employers
66.44.350  Employees eighteen years and over to carry liquor, clean up, etc.
           for class A, C, D and/or H licensed employers
66.44.365  Juvenile driving privileges - alcohol or drug violations
66.44.370  Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title (1973 Code §
           9.23.010)
   B.   Dangerous Drugs:
Inhaling Toxic Fumes
9.47A.010    Definition
9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation - exception
9.47A.030    Possession of certain substances prohibited, when
9.47A.040    Sale of certain substances prohibited, when (1973 Code § 9.24.050)
Legend Drugs; Prescription Drugs
69.41.010    Definitions
69.41.030    Sale, delivery or possession of legend drug without prescription
             or order prohibited - exceptions
69.41.050    Labeling requirements
69.41.070(3) Violation of RCW 69.41.030
69.41.070(5) Violation of RCW 69.41.050 (1973 Code § 9.24.010)
Washington Uniform Controlled Substance Act
69.50.101    Definitions
69.50.202    Nomenclature
69.50.204    Schedule I
69.50.206    Schedule II
69.50.208    Schedule III
69.50.210    Schedule IV
69.50.212    Schedule V
69.50.302    Registration requirements
69.50.307    Order forms
69.50.308    Prescriptions
69.50.309    Containers
69.50.401(e) Possession of forty grams or less - misdemeanor
69.50.404    Penalties under other laws
69.50.407    Conspiracy
69.50.412    Prohibited acts: E - penalties
69.50.500    Power of enforcement personnel
69.50.505    Seizure and forfeiture
69.50.506    Burden of proof; liabilities
69.50.509    Search and seizure of controlled substances (1973 Code § 9.24.020)
   C.   False Reporting:
False Report Of Abuse:
26.44.060 (4). (1973 Code § 9.27.020)
False Reporting:
9A.84.040. (1973 Code § 9.27.010)
 
6-1A-7: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY:
   A.   Prostitution Offenses:
      1.   Prostitution: A person is guilty of prostitution if such person
engages or agrees or offers to engage in sexual conduct with another person in
return for a fee.
      2.   Permitting Prostitution: A person is guilty of permitting
prostitution if, having possession or control of premises which he knows are
being used for prostitution purposes, he fails without lawful excuse to make
reasonable effort to halt or abate such use.
      3.   Patronizing A Prostitute: A person is guilty of patronizing a
prostitute if:
         a.   Pursuant to a prior understanding, he or she pays a fee to
another person as compensation for such person or a third person having engaged
in sexual conduct with him or her; or
         b.   He or she pays or agrees to pay a fee to another person pursuant
to an understanding that in return therefor such person will engage in sexual
conduct with him or her; or
         c.   He or she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual
conduct with him or her in return for a fee.
      4.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, "sexual conduct" means
"sexual intercourse" or "sexual contact", both as defined in section
6-1B-4 of this chapter.
      5.   Sex Of Parties Immaterial; No Defense: In any prosecution under this
section, the sex of the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the sexual
conduct engaged in, contemplated, or solicited is immaterial, and it is no
defense that:
         a.   Such persons were of the same sex; or
         b.   The person who received, agreed to receive, or solicited a fee
was a male and the person who paid or agreed or offered to pay such fee was
female.
      6.   Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
   B.   Obscenity And Pornography: The following provisions of the Revised Code
of Washington are hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set forth
herein, including any subsequent amendments thereto:
         Obscene literature, shows, etc. - exemptions; with the exception that
9.68.015 the reference therein to chapter 260, laws of 1959 shall mean and
         refer to this section 7B of chapter 1A of title 6 of the Orting
         municipal code;
9.68.030 Indecent articles, etc;
9.68.050 "Erotic material" - definitions;
9.68.080 Unlawful acts;
         Exceptions to provisions of RCW 9.68.050 through 9.68.120; with the
9.68.100 exception that the reference therein to provisions of RCW 9.68.050
         through 9.68.120 shall mean and refer to the provisions of this
         section 7B of chapter 1A of title 6 of the Orting municipal code;
         Motion picture operator or projectionist exempt, when; with the
9.68.110 exception that the reference therein to provisions of RCW 9.68.050
         through 9.68.120 shall mean and refer to the provisions of this
         section 7B of chapter 1A of title 6 of the Orting municipal code;
         Provisions of RCW 9.68.050 through 9.68.120 exclusive; with the
9.68.120 exception that the reference therein to provisions of RCW 9.68.050
         through 9.68.120 shall mean and refer to the provisions of this
         section 7B of chapter 1A of title 6 of the Orting municipal code; and
9.68.130 "Sexually explicit material" - defined - unlawful display (Ord. 869,
         11-25-2008)
 
6-1A-8: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Failure To Disperse: 9A.84.020. (1973 Code § 9.45.010)
   B.   Disorderly Conduct: 9A.84.030. (1973 Code § 9.46.010)
   C.   Interference, Obstruction Of Any Court, Building Or Residence:
9.27.015. (1973 Code § 9.49.010)
   D.   Restraining Orders; Refusal To Comply: 26.09.300. (1973 Code §
9.51.010)
   E.   Domestic Violence Restraining Orders: 10.99. (Ord. 640, 4-14-1994)
   F.   Telephone Harassment: 9.61.230. (Ord. 689, 5-29-1997)
6-1A-9: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Operating Engine Or Boiler Without Spark Arrester: 9.40.040. (1973 Code
§ 9.53.010)
   B.   Vehicle Prowling: 9A.52.100 (1973 Code § 9.54.010)
   C.   Mischief To And Destruction Of Property:
 
9A.48.010 Definitions
9A.48.050 Reckless burning in the second degree
9A.48.060 Reckless burning - defense
9A.48.090 Malicious mischief in the third degree
9A.48.100 Malicious mischief - "physical damage" defined (1973 Code § 9.56.010; amd.
          Ord. 689, 5-29-1997)
   D.   Injuring Or Tampering With Fire Alarm Apparatus; Sounding False Alarm
Of Fire: 9.40.100. (1973 Code § 9.57.010)
   E.   Burglary And Trespass:
9A.52.010 Definitions
9A.52.040 Inference of intent
9A.52.050 Other crime in committing burglary punishable
9A.52.060 Making or having burglar tools
9A.52.070 Criminal trespass in the first degree
9A.52.080 Criminal trespass in the second degree
9A.52.090 Criminal trespass - defenses
9A.52.120 Computer trespass in the second degree
9A.52.130 Computer trespass - commission of other crime (1973 Code § 9.58.010)
   F.   Stolen Property:
 
Obscuring Identity Of A Machine: 9A.56.180. (1973 Code § 9.60.020)
Possessing Stolen Property
9A.56.140 Possession of stolen property - definition - access devices,
          presumption
9A.56.170 Possessing stolen property in the third degree (1973 Code § 9.60.010)
 
6-1A-10: CONSUMER PROTECTION:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Frauds And Swindles:
9.45.060  Encumbered, leased or rented personal property - construction
9.45.062  Failure to deliver leased personal property - requisites for prosecution -
          construction
9.45.070  Mock auctions
9.45.080  Fraudulent removal of property
9.45.090  Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance
9.45.100  Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors
9.26A.110 Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service - penalty
9.26A.120 Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle
9.26A.130 Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin (1973 Code §
          9.69.010; amd. 1996 Code)
   B.   False Advertisement: 9.04.010. (1973 Code § 9.71.010)
   C.   Telephone Company Credit Cards: 9.26A.090. (1973 Code § 9.73.010)
6-1A-11: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
   A.   Sexual Exploitation Of Children:
 
9.68A.011 Definitions
9.68A.070 Possession of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit
          conduct
9.68A.080 Possessors of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit
          conduct - report required
9.68A.090 Communication with minor for immoral purposes
9.68A.110 Certain defenses barred, permitted
9.68A.120 Seizure and forfeiture of property (1973 Code § 9.75.010)
   B.   Selling Or Giving Tobacco To Minor: 26.28.080. (1973 Code § 9.78.020)
   C.   Duty Of Witness Of Offense Against Child: 9.69.100. (1973 Code §
9.80.010)
   D.   Custodial Interference:
 
9A.40.070 Custodial interference in the second degree
9A.40.080 Custodial interference - assessment of costs - defense - consent
          defense, restricted (1973 Code § 9.83.010)
 
6-1A-12: WEAPONS:
The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
Firearms And Dangerous Weapons:
9.41.010 Definitions
9.41.050 Carrying firearms
9.41.060 Exception to restriction on carrying firearms
9.41.080 Delivery to ineligible forbidden
9.41.098 Forfeiture of firearms - disposition - confiscation
9.41.140 Alteration of identifying marks - exceptions
9.41.230 Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons
9.41.240 Possession of pistol by person from 18 to 21
9.41.250 Dangerous weapons - penalty
9.41.260 Dangerous exhibitions
9.41.270 Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm, carrying,
         exhibiting, displaying or drawing unlawful - exceptions
9.41.280 Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities - penalty -
         exceptions
9.41.300 Weapons prohibited in certain places - local laws and ordinances -
         exceptions - penalty
9.41.810 Penalty (1973 Code § 9.84.010; amd. 1996 Code)
 
6-1A-13: MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES:
The following provisions of the Revised Code Of Washington are hereby adopted
including any subsequent amendments thereto:
 
9.91.010    Denial of civil rights - terms defined
9.91.020    Operating railroad, steamboat, vehicle, etc., while intoxicated
9.91.025    Unlawful bus conduct
9.91.130    Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle
9.91.150(2) Tree spiking - to injure saws or wood processing equipment
70.54.090   Attachment of objects to utility poles - penalty (Ord. 892, 11-24-
            2010)
 
6-1A-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this article and/or article B of this
chapter is deemed guilty of committing a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor, as
defined in state law, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1973 Code § 9.94.010; amd. 1996 Code)
ARTICLE B. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 1
SECTION:
6-1B-1: Disturbing The Peace
6-1B-2: Provoking Assault
6-1B-3: Encouraging Fighting Or Quarreling
6-1B-4: Indecent Language Or Conduct
6-1B-5: Obscene, Threatening Or Harassing Telephone Calls
6-1B-6: Loitering
6-1B-7: Drug Related Offenses
6-1B-8: Bunco; Swindling
6-1B-9: Fortune Telling And Related Acts
6-1B-10: Offenses Relating To Children
6-1B-11: Expectoration
6-1B-12: Defrauding Innkeeper
6-1B-13: Lodging Without Permission
6-1B-14: Distribution Of Handbills And Signs
6-1B-15: Deposits Of Waste And Debris
6-1B-16: Silly String And Stink Bombs Prohibited
6-1B-17: Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited
6-1B-18: Hunting, Prohibited
 
Notes
1 1. See also article A of this chapter for State Statutes adopted by reference
  regarding offenses.
6-1B-1: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
Any person who by noisy, riotous or tumultuous conduct disturbs the peace and
quiet of the City or of any meeting or assemblage therein is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.48.010)
6-1B-2: PROVOKING ASSAULT:
Any person who by word, sign or gesture wilfully provokes, or attempts to
provoke another person to commit an assault or breach of the peace is guilty of
a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.50.010)
6-1B-3: ENCOURAGING FIGHTING OR QUARRELING:
Any person fighting or quarreling or encouraging others to fight in any public
place is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.52.010)
6-1B-4: INDECENT LANGUAGE OR CONDUCT:
   A.   Indecent Conduct: A person is guilty of indecent conduct if:
      1.   Such person intentionally performs any indecent act and such act
occurs in a public place under circumstances where such act could reasonably be
expected to be observed by any member of the public, or
      2.   Such person, having ownership or control over a public place,
knowingly allows an indecent act to occur in such public place under
circumstances where such act could reasonably be expected to be observed by any
member of the public. For purposes of this section, knowingly means knows or
reasonably should know.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings as set forth herein:
EXPOSURE OR DISPLAY OF THE GENITALS OR BREASTS: An exposure or display of one's
genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or female breast with a less than fully
opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the areola or nipple,
or the showing or display of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state; provided that, this provision is not intended to apply to:
      1.   A person who is prepubescent;
      2.   A person who has taken steps to create an envelope of privacy upon
their own property and the nudity occurs within that envelope; and
      3.   A woman who is breastfeeding a baby or expressing breast milk,
whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the
feeding.
INDECENT ACT: Any one or more of the following:
      1.   An exposure or display of the genitals or breast;
      2.   The touching, caressing, or fondling of the genitals, buttocks, or
female breast; or
      3.   Sexual intercourse; or
      4.   Masturbation.
LEWD: Shall have and include all those meanings which are assigned to it under
the common law.
OBSCENE: Any matter which:
      1.   The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would
find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and
      2.   Explicitly depicts or describes patently offensive representations
or descriptions of:
         a.   Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated;
or
         b.   Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory
functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area; or
         c.   Violent or destructive sexual acts, including, but not limited
to, human or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape or torture; and
      3.   Which, when considered as a whole, and in the context in which it is
used, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view, and includes streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not) buildings open to the general public, including those
which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways, openings,
and entrances to those buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them
and permanent BMPs.
SEXUAL CONTACT: Any touching of the sexual or intimate parts of a person done
for the purpose of gratifying sexual desire of either party.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE: Has its ordinary meaning and occurs upon any penetration,
however slight; and also means any penetration of the vagina or anus, however
slight, by an object, when committed on one person by another, whether such
persons are of the same or opposite sex, except when such penetration is
accomplished for medically recognized treatment or diagnostic purposes; and
also means any act of sexual contact between persons involving the sex organs
of one person and the mouth or anus of another, whether such persons are of the
same or opposite sex.
   C.   Places Where Alcoholic Beverages Are Sold: The owner, manager, or
operator of premises open to the public, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold,
served, or consumed, is guilty of permitting indecent conduct if he or she
intentionally permits or causes any indecent act on said premises.
   D.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works which are not
obscene;
      2.   Comedic, vocal, instrumental, or political performances which are
not obscene;
      3.   Classes, seminars and lectures held for serious scientific or
educational purposes;
      4.   Exhibitions, performances or dances which are not obscene; or
      5.   Unlawful display of sexually explicit material prohibited pursuant
to subsection
 6-1A-7B of this chapter or chapter 9.68 Revised Code of Washington.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment; provided that, such violation shall be a gross misdemeanor on
the first offense if the person exposes or displays himself or herself in
violation of subsection A of this section to a person under the age of fourteen
(14) years.
(Ord. 869, 11-25-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
6-1B-5: OBSCENE, THREATENING OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS:
Any person who, with intent to harass, intimidate, torment or embarrass any
other person, makes a telephone call to such other person:
   A.   Using any lewd, lascivious, profane, indecent, or obscene words or
language, or suggesting the commission of any lewd or lascivious act;
   B.   Anonymously, repeatedly or at an extremely inconvenient hour, whether
or not conversation ensues; or
   C.   Threatening to inflict injury on the person or property of the person
called or any member of his or her family; or
   D.   Without purpose of legitimate communication; and any person who
knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose as
prohibited herein, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.38.010)
6-1B-6: LOITERING:
   A.   Prohibition; Misdemeanor: Any person who loiters or prowls in a place,
at a time, or in a manner, and under circumstances that manifest an unlawful
purpose or warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity
is guilty of a misdemeanor. Circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such unlawful purpose is manifested or such alarm is
warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: flight by the actor
upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refusal to identify himself,
or manifestly endeavoring to conceal himself or any object. (1973 Code §
9.44.010)
   B.   Explanation Before Arrest: No arrest shall be made under this section
nor shall any person be convicted of violating this section unless such person
is first afforded, if practical under the circumstances, an opportunity to
dispel any alarm or suspicion of unlawful purpose which would otherwise be
warranted by identifying himself and explaining his presence and conduct. (1973
Code § 9.44.020)
   C.   Defense Of Violator: No person shall be convicted of violating this
section if it appears at a trial that the explanation given by him of his
presence and conduct was true and if believed by the arresting officer at the
time would have dispelled the alarm or suspicion of unlawful purpose. (1973
Code § 9.44.030)
6-1B-7: DRUG RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Purchase Of Drugs: It is unlawful, except as provided pursuant to
Revised Code of Washington title 69 as now or hereafter amended, for any person
to purchase any controlled substance as defined or scheduled in Revised Code of
Washington chapter 69.50 or any imitation controlled substance as defined in
Revised Code of Washington chapter 69.52. (1973 Code § 9.24.030)
   B.   Being Under Influence Of Drugs Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person to be under the influence of any drug or other controlled substance as
defined or scheduled in Revised Code of Washington chapter 69.50 as now or
hereafter amended. For the purpose of this section, an individual is "under the
influence" of a drug or other controlled substance when any of his normal
faculties are substantially affected or impaired as a result of the use of such
drug or other controlled substance. (1973 Code § 9.24.040)
   C.   Sale Or Display Of Drug Paraphernalia: The distribution or possession
for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display, in any place of business, any
devices, contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia which are primarily
designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion, or consumption
of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than
prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is a
public nuisance and may be abated by injunction. This remedy shall be in
addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions
applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this section. (1973
Code § 9.25.050)
   D.   Provisions Cumulative: The provisions of this section are intended as
cumulative and selective, and shall not be construed as repealing any other
ordinance involving the same subject matter. (1973 Code § 9.24.060)
6-1B-8: BUNCO; SWINDLING:
Any person engaged in buncoing or in the operation of a swindling game or
device for the purpose of swindling or defrauding others is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.70.010)
6-1B-9: FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED ACTS:
Any person who asks or receives any compensation, gratuity, or reward for
practicing fortune telling, tea leaf reading, palmistry or clairvoyance is
guilty of a misdemeanor. Asking or receiving any compensation, gratuity or
reward includes the receipt by the defendant of anything of value either before
or after the act of fortune telling, tea leaf reading, palmistry or
clairvoyance for whatever alleged or stated purpose. (1973 Code § 9.71.010)
6-1B-10: OFFENSES RELATING TO CHILDREN:
   A.   Leaving Children Unattended In Parked Vehicle: Every person having the
care and custody, whether temporary or permanent, of minor children under the
age of twelve (12) years, who leave such children in a parked automobile
unattended by an adult while such person enters a tavern or other premises
where vinous, spirituous, or malt liquors are dispensed for consumption on the
premises is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.75.010)
   B.   Contributing To Delinquency Of Minor: Any person who by act or omission
encourages, causes or contributes to the delinquency of any child under the age
of eighteen (18) years is guilty of a misdemeanor. A "delinquent child" is one
who from any cause is in danger of growing up to lead an idle, dissolute or
immoral life. (1973 Code § 9.78.010)
   C.   Loitering On School Grounds: Every person, except a person enrolled as
a student in, or parents or guardian of such students or person employed by
such school or institution, who without a lawful purpose therefor wilfully
loiters about the building or buildings of any public or private school or
institution of higher learning or the public premises adjacent thereto is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.82.010)
6-1B-11: EXPECTORATION:
No person shall expectorate on the floor of any public building, any public
conveyance or on any sidewalk in the city. (1973 Code § 9.28.010)
6-1B-12: DEFRAUDING INNKEEPER:
Any person who, with intent to defraud, obtains any food, lodging,
accommodations or other services in or from any hotel, motel, apartment house,
restaurant, cafe, boarding or lodging house or other business such as, but not
limited to, a taxicab company, without paying therefor is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.16.010)
6-1B-13: LODGING WITHOUT PERMISSION:
Any person who lodges in any place or upon any property without the permission
of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 9.62.010)
6-1B-14: DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS AND SIGNS:
It is unlawful for any person to scatter, place, throw, cast, leave or post any
circular, handbill, dodger, pamphlet or poster, except official documents or
notices posted or placed in accordance with law, in or upon any private
property without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof, or on
any telegraph, telephone or light pole, within the corporate limits of the
city. (1973 Code § 9.68.010)
6-1B-15: DEPOSITS OF WASTE AND DEBRIS:
   A.   Vehicle Loads Spilling; Exceptions: No vehicle shall be driven or moved
on any public highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to
prevent any of its load from dripping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom, except that sand may be dripped for the purpose of securing
traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in the
cleaning or maintaining of such roadway by public authority having
jurisdiction. (1973 Code § 9.64.010)
   B.   Glass Or Other Objects Obstructing Streets; Removal Required: Any
person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have fallen or
escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise
endanger travel upon such public highway, shall immediately cause the public
highway to be cleaned of all such glass or objects. (1973 Code § 9.64.020)
   C.   Deposits On Public Ways Or Property Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person to throw or drop any glass object, debris or any waste upon the right of
way of any public highway, or upon any public or private property within the
limits of the city or any property owned or maintained by the city, except the
city dump. (1973 Code § 9.64.030)
6-1B-16: SILLY STRING AND STINK BOMBS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions:
SILLY STRING: An aerosol can from which string shaped, foam like material may
be sprayed.
STINK BOMBS: A device when used emits a foul and noxious odor.
   B.   Prohibited Use, Possession Or Sale: No person shall use, possess, offer
for sale or sell products commonly known as silly string or stink bombs within
the city.
   C.   Exemption: This section shall not apply to prohibited products in
transit or storage in interstate commerce.
   D.   Enforcement: The chief of police or his designee shall be responsible
for the enforcement of this section. He is authorized to take any and all
actions reasonably necessary for its enforcement including, but not limited to,
inspection of any vendors or sale premises to verify compliance.
   E.   Nuisance Declared: The sale, possession or use of prohibited products
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be enjoined by suit filed in Pierce
County Superior Court.
   F.   Penalty: A person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
civil infraction and may be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 712, 8-
27-1998)
6-1B-17: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prohibit the discharge of
firearms within the City, pursuant to the authority delegated to the City in
Revised Code of Washington 9.41.300.
   B.   Definitions: The City hereby adopts the provisions of Revised Code of
Washington 9.41.010 by reference herein and as hereafter amended.
   C.   Prohibition; Gross Misdemeanor: Any person who discharges a firearm
within the City of Orting is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
   D.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   The discharge of a firearm for the lawful defense of person, family,
or property, as would otherwise be allowable under the laws of the State of
Washington.
      2.   The discharge of a firearm by a law enforcement officer, employee of
United States Department of Agriculture, or by an animal control officer,
acting within the scope of employment.
      3.   The discharge of a firearm for the purposes of target practicing in
a duly licensed shooting gallery or at a target range maintained and operated
by a law enforcement agency or by an organized rifle or gun club affiliated
with a national shooting organization. (Ord. 2017-1008, 3-8-2017)
6-1B-18: HUNTING, PROHIBITED:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prohibit hunting within the
City.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms are
defined and understood to mean the following:
TO HUNT (And Its Derivatives): Means an effort to kill, injure, harass,
harvest, or capture a wild animal or wild bird.
WILD ANIMALS: Means those species of the class Mammalia whose members exist in
Washington in a wild state. The term "wild animal" does not include feral
domestic mammals or old world rats and mice of the family Muridae of the order
Rodentia.
WILD BIRDS: Means those species of the class Aves whose members exist in
Washington in a wild state.
   C.   Hunting Prohibited: It is unlawful to hunt, or attempt to hunt, any
wild animal or wild bird on property within the City of Orting; provided, that
this section shall not apply to the following persons or activities:
      1.   The hunting of animals by law enforcement officers or Game
Department personnel while engaged in the performance of their official duties;
      2.   The nonlethal trapping or capturing of animals or birds by means
designed to ensure the safety and well-being of the animals; and
      3.   The hunting of animals on private property with the express
permission of the owner or owners and not closer than five hundred feet (500')
from any dwelling or access way on adjacent public or private property.
      4.   The operation of qualified "farm kill" businesses licensed by the
Washington State Department of Agriculture, and are engaged in the performance
of their official business.
   D.   Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalties stated in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2017-1007, 3-8-2017)
ARTICLE C. RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE COSTS
SECTION:
6-1C-1: Definitions
6-1C-2: Emergency Response Caused By Person's Intoxication; Recovery Of Costs
From Convicted Person
6-1C-3: Administration; Collection
6-1C-4: Reimbursement
6-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
EMERGENCY: An incident that requires a normal police, coroner, fire, rescue,
emergency medical services, or utility response as a result of a violation of
one of the statutes enumerated in section
6-1C-2 of this article.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE: A public agency's use of emergency services during an
"emergency" or disaster as defined in this section.
EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE: Reasonable costs incurred by a public agency
in reasonably making an appropriate emergency response to the incident, but
shall only include those costs directly arising from the response to the
particular incident. Reasonable costs shall include the costs of providing
police, coroner, firefighting, rescue, emergency medical services, or utility
response at the scene of the incident, as well as the salaries of the personnel
responding to the incident.
PUBLIC AGENCY: The state, and a city, county, municipal corporation, district,
town, or public authority located, in the whole or in part, within this state
which provides or may provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or
other emergency services. (Ord. 966, 6-24-2015)
6-1C-2: EMERGENCY RESPONSE CAUSED BY PERSON'S INTOXICATION; RECOVERY OF COSTS
FROM CONVICTED PERSON:
   A.   A person whose intoxication causes an incident resulting in an
appropriate emergency response, and who, in connection with the incident, has
been found guilty of or has had their prosecution deferred for: 1) driving
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug, Revised Code Of
Washington 46.61.502; 2) operating an aircraft under the influence of
intoxicants or drugs, Revised Code Of Washington 47.68.220; 3) use of a vessel
while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, Revised Code Of Washington
79A.60.040; 4) vehicular homicide while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or any drug, Revised Code Of Washington 46.61.520(1)(a); or 5) vehicular
assault while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug, Revised
Code Of Washington 46.61.522(1)(b), is liable for the expense of an emergency
response by a public agency to the incident.
   B.   The expense of an emergency response is a charge against the person
liable for expenses under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that
person and is collectible by the public agency incurring those costs in the
same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or
implied. Following a conviction of an offense listed in this section, and prior
to sentencing, the prosecution may present to the court information setting
forth the expenses incurred by the public agency for its emergency response to
the incident. Upon a finding by the court that the expenses are reasonable, the
court shall order the defendant to reimburse the public agency. The cost
reimbursement shall be included in the sentencing order as an additional
monetary obligation of the defendant and may not be substituted for any other
fine or cost required or allowed by statute. The court may establish a payment
schedule for the payment of the cost reimbursement, separate from any payment
schedule imposed for other fines and costs.
   C.   In no event shall a person's liability under this section for the
expense of an emergency response exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for a particular incident.
   D.   If more than one public agency makes a claim for payment from an
individual for an emergency response to a single incident under the provisions
of this section, and the sum of the claims exceeds the amount recovered, the
division of the amount recovered shall be determined by an interlocal agreement
consistent with the requirements of chapter 39.34 Revised Code Of Washington.
(Ord. 966, 6-24-2015)
6-1C-3: ADMINISTRATION; COLLECTION:
Any "public agency" of the city of Orting as defined under section
6-1C-1 of this article may submit to the city prosecutor a notice of liability
for the expense of an emergency response. The notice shall set forth the name
of the responsible person, the date of emergency response, the date of the
conviction or deferred prosecution, and the amount owing to the city. The
notice shall be sent certified mail with a return receipt and shall be deemed
delivered three (3) days after mailing. Any fees not collected within sixty
(60) days of the date of issuance of the notice of liability for the expense of
emergency response shall be referred to a collection agency. The cost of
collection shall be added to the bill. The amounts collected, after payment of
the collection agency fee, shall be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. 966,
6-24-2015)
6-1C-4: REIMBURSEMENT:
The Orting police department is authorized to seek reimbursement, whenever
allowed by law, for any services rendered to another public agency as part of
cooperative law enforcement efforts to enforce laws prohibiting impaired
driving. Reimbursement of costs shall be calculated by the Orting police chief,
and billed and collected in the manner as may be applicable for the emergency
response cost recovery program in the jurisdiction where assistance was
provided. (Ord. 966, 6-24-2015)
ARTICLE D. ENDANGERMENT WITH A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
SECTION:
6-1D-1: Definitions
6-1D-2: Endangerment with a Controlled Substance
6-1D-3: Penalty for Violations
6-1D-4: Preemption
6-1D-5: Severability
6-1D-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall apply:
   A.    “Cannabis” shall mean the same as the term is defined in RCW
69.50.101.
   B.   “Child” shall mean the same as the term is defined in RCW 9A.42.010.
   C.   “Controlled substance” shall mean the same as the term is defined in
RCW 69.50.101.
   D.   “Dependent person” shall mean the same as the term is defined in RCW
9A.42.010. (Ord. 2024-1134, 10-30-2024)
6-1D-2: ENDANGERMENT WITH A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE:
   A.   A person is guilty of the crime of endangerment with a controlled
substance if the person knowingly or recklessly permits a child or dependent
person to ingest, inhale, absorb, or have contact with a controlled substance
other than cannabis, unless the controlled substance was obtained directly
from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while
acting in the course of his or her professional practice.
   B.   Administering or providing a controlled substance to a child or
dependent person in the course of delivering health care services is not a
violation of this Section. (Ord. 2024-1134, 10-30-2024)
6-1D-3: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise specified, any person who violates this Article is guilty of a
gross misdemeanor punishable by up to 364 days in jail and a $5,000 fine. The
Prosecuting Attorney is encouraged to consider referring such cases for
assessment, treatment, and other services including referral to alternative
resolution courts following the formal filing of charges. (Ord. 2024-1134, 10-
30-2024)
6-1D-4: PREEMPTION:
In the event the Washington State Legislature passes a law preempting this
Article, this Article shall cease to have effect on the same date the statute
comes into effect. Any violation of this Article that occurs prior to the
preempting statute coming into effect may be prosecuted and punished pursuant
to this Article. (Ord. 2024-1134, 10-30-2024)
6-1D-5: SEVERABILITY:
if any provision of this Article or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Article or the application
of the provisions to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord.
2024-1134, 10-30-2024)
CHAPTER 2
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-2-1: Age And Hour Restrictions; Exceptions
6-2-2: Parental Responsibility
6-2-3: Detain Violators; Notify Parent Or Guardian
6-2-4: Violation; Penalty
6-2-1: AGE AND HOUR RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter,
idle, wander or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys,
parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings,
places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any other unsupervised
places between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and five thirty
o'clock (5:30) A.M. the following day; provided, however, that the provisions
of this Section do not apply when such child is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the
child, or when such child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such
child, or when such child is returning directly home from any school function,
work, recreational activity or properly supervised recreation. (1973 Code §
9.74.010)
6-2-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care,
and custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years, to permit such
child to loiter, idle, wander or play, in or upon the public streets, highways,
roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and
public buildings, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots, or any
other unsupervised places between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.
and five thirty (5:30) A.M. the following day; provided, however, that the
provisions of this Section do not apply when such child is accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of
such child, or when such child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or
her parent, or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
such child, or when such child is returning directly home from any school
function, work, recreational activity or properly supervised recreation. (1973
Code § 9.74.020)
6-2-3: DETAIN VIOLATORS; NOTIFY PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
It shall be the duty of any police officer finding any child upon the streets
of the City under the age of eighteen (18) years in violation of Section
6-2-1 to detain such child, for which purpose such child may be taken to any
lawful place of custody for juveniles of the City, and it shall be his further
duty to notify the parents or either of them, the guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of such child, that the child is so
detained; or, in case it is impractical to detain such child at such lawful
place of custody for juveniles, it shall be the duty of such officer to take
such child to the place of residence of the parent or either of them, the
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such child, and
to there notify the parents or either of them, the guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of such child, that such child was
unlawfully upon the streets of the City. (1973 Code § 9.74.030)
6-2-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation By Child: Any child under the age of eighteen (18) years
violating the provisions of Section
6-2-1 shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure,
and if remanded for police court prosecution, upon conviction shall be punished
as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1973 Code § 9.74.040)
   B.   Violation By Parent: Any parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years, and who
violates Section
6-2-1 shall be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code; provided, however, that for good cause shown, the court
within its discretion, shall have and is hereby granted the power to suspend
any fine or imprisonment or part thereof provided for in this Section. (1973
Code § 9.74.050)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-3A-1: Definitions
6-3A-2: Authorized Agents May Perform Duties
6-3A-3: Licenses Required
6-3A-4: Authority To Pursue
6-3A-5: Notice Of Impounding Animal
6-3A-6: Hindering An Officer
6-3A-7: Interference With Impounding
6-3A-8: Redemption Of Dogs
6-3A-9: Redemption Of Livestock
6-3A-10: Redemption Of Animals Other Than Dogs And Livestock
6-3A-11: Adoption Fees
6-3A-12: Mandatory Spay/Neuter For Impounded Dogs And Cats; Deposit; Refund;
Exceptions
6-3A-13: Conditions Of Release
6-3A-14: Injured Or Diseased Animals
6-3A-15: Upon Injury Or Death To An Animal
6-3A-16: Improper Handling/Storage Of Poisonous Substances
6-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter (except article B of this chapter), the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
ADEQUATE CARE: Providing the following to animals:
   A.   Food or feed appropriate to the species for which it is intended. Both
food and water must be in sufficient quantity, quality, and form appropriate to
sustain the animals and should be in containers designed and situated to allow
the animal easy access; and
   B.   A shelter that keeps the animals in a healthful, sanitary, warm, dry,
and safe condition, and allows the animal to turn around freely, sit, stand,
and lie without restriction, and by application does not cause injury,
disfigurement, or physical impairment to the animal.
   C.   Adequate veterinary medical care.
ADULT: Any animal seven (7) months of age or over.
ALTERED: To permanently render incapable of reproduction (i.e., spayed or
neutered).
ANIMAL: Any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile or amphibian including "livestock"
and "poultry" as defined herein.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY OR ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY: Pierce County animal
control.
ANIMAL SHELTER: That animal control facility authorized by Pierce County and
the city of Orting.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner or keeper of the animal, and not under
restraint by leash or chain or not otherwise controlled by a competent person.
AUDITOR: Pierce County auditor.
CAT: Means and includes female, spayed female, male and neutered male cats.
CITY: The city of Orting.
COMPETENT ADULT: A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is able to
sufficiently care for, control, and restrain his/her animal, and who has the
capacity to exercise sound judgment regarding the rights and safety of others.
COUNTY: Pierce County.
COURT: Orting municipal court, Pierce County district court or the Pierce
County superior court, which courts shall have concurrent jurisdiction
hereunder.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal that:
   A.   Inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being without provocation;
or
   B.   Inflicts severe injury on or kills an animal without provocation; or
   C.   Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having
received notice of such and the animal again bites, attacks, or endangers the
safety of humans or other animals.
Provocation exception: An animal is a dangerous animal when it enters onto
private property without the consent of the owner or occupant and inflicts a
severe injury on or kills a human or animal regardless of provocation.
If two (2) or more animals participate in an attack that results in a severe
injury or death to a human being or animal, then all such animals may be deemed
to be a dangerous animal.
DOG: Means and includes female, spayed female, male and neutered male dogs.
GROSS MISDEMEANOR: A type of crime classification that, while not a felony, is
ranked as a serious misdemeanor. The maximum penalty for a gross misdemeanor is
three hundred sixty four (364) days in jail and/or a five thousand dollar
($5,000.00) fine, pursuant to subsection
 1-4-1B of this code.
HEARING EXAMINER OR EXAMINER: The city of Orting hearing examiner.
HUMANE TRAP: A live animal box enclosure trap designed to capture and hold an
animal without injury.
IMPOUND: To receive into the custody of the animal control authority, or into
the custody of the auditor or designee.
JUVENILE: Any animal from weaning to seven (7) months of age.
LICENSING OFFICER:
   A.   The Pierce County auditor, or
   B.   Any officer, agency or organization appointed or empowered by the city
to register and license dogs and/or cats.
LIVESTOCK: All cattle, sheep, goats, or animals of the Bovidae family; all
horses, mules, other hoof animals, or animals of the Equidae family; all pigs,
swine, or animals of the Suidae family; llamas; and ostriches, rhea, and emu.
MISDEMEANOR: A crime classification with a maximum penalty of ninety (90) days
in jail and/or a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, pursuant to subsection
1-4-1A of this code.
MUZZLE: A muzzle made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any
person or animal.
OWNER: Any person, firm, or corporation owning, having an interest in, or
having control or custody or possession of any animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal that, without provocation:
   A.   Bites a human or animal; or
   B.   Chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack; or
   C.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
Provocation exception: An animal is a potentially dangerous animal when it
enters onto private property without the consent of the owner or occupant and
bites a human or animal or chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion
or apparent attitude of attack regardless of provocation.
If two (2) or more animals participate in an attack that results in a bite
being inflicted upon a human or animal, then all such animals may be deemed to
be a potentially dangerous animal.
POULTRY: Domestic fowl normally raised for eggs or meat, and includes chickens,
turkeys, ducks and geese.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: While on the owner's property, the animal shall be confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to
prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. Such pen or structure shall have a locking door with a padlock,
secure sides, a concrete floor, and a secure top attached to the sides, and
shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. The structure
must comply with all applicable provisions of local building and zoning codes.
PROVOKE OR PROVOCATION: To intentionally torment, agitate, or harass an animal
prior to the attack, chase, or menacing behavior. "Provoke" or "provocation"
does not include actions taken to defend oneself, other humans, animals, or
property.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury which results in broken bones or disfiguring
lacerations.
UNCONFINED: Not securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked
pen or structure upon the premises of the person owning, harboring or having
the care of the animal.
VICIOUS: Chasing or approaching a person or animal in a menacing or apparent
attitude of attack or the known propensity to do any act which might endanger
the safety of any person, animal, or property of another.
WARNING SIGN: A clearly visible and conspicuously displayed sign containing
words and a symbol (to inform children or others incapable of reading) warning
that there is a dangerous animal on the property. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-2: AUTHORIZED AGENTS MAY PERFORM DUTIES:
Wherever a power is granted to or a duty imposed upon the Pierce County sheriff
or city of Orting police chief, the power may be exercised or the duty may be
performed by a deputy of the sheriff or police chief, or by an authorized agent
of Pierce County or the city of Orting, deputized by the sheriff or the police
chief.
   A.   The animal control authority shall be a division of the Pierce County
auditor. The duly elected auditor of Pierce County shall be the director of the
animal control authority.
   B.   The animal control authority is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this code and the laws of the state of Washington as they pertain to animals.
   C.   All animal control officers must be special deputies commissioned by
the Pierce County sheriff. (Ord. 2016-992, 8-31-2016)
6-3A-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
Licenses required are for regulation and control. This entire article shall be
deemed an exercise of the power of the state of Washington, the county of
Pierce and the city of Orting, to license for regulation and/or control and all
its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of either or
both such purposes. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-4: AUTHORITY TO PURSUE:
Those employees or agents of the county and city charged with the duty of
seizing animals running at large may pursue such animals onto county owned
property, city owned property, vacant property, and unenclosed private
property, and seize, remove, and impound the same. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-5: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING ANIMAL:
Upon the impoundment of any animal under the provisions of this article, the
animal control agency shall immediately notify the owner, if the owner is
known, of the impounding of such animal, and of the terms upon which said
animal can be redeemed. The impounding authority shall retain said animal for
forty eight (48) hours following actual notice to the owner. The notifying of
any person over the age of eighteen (18) who resides at the owner's domicile
shall constitute actual notice to the owner. If the owner of said animal so
impounded is unknown, then said animal control agency shall make a reasonable
effort to locate and notify the owner of said animal. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-
2016)
6-3A-6: HINDERING AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, delay, or impede any
officer who is enforcing the provisions of this article as herein provided. A
violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-7: INTERFERENCE WITH IMPOUNDING:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully prevent or hinder the impounding of
any animal, or to by force or otherwise remove any animal from the animal
shelter without authority of the person in charge of the animal shelter, or
without payment of all lawful charges against such animal, or to wilfully
resist or obstruct any officer in the performance of any official duty. A
violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-8: REDEMPTION OF DOGS:
The owner of any dog impounded under this chapter may redeem said dog within
forty eight (48) hours from time of impounding by paying to the animal control
agency the appropriate redemption fee and providing proof of such animal's
current pet license at the time of redemption. The first time a dog is
impounded within a one year period, the redemption fee is twenty five dollars
($25.00); for the second impound within a one year period the redemption fee is
fifty dollars ($50.00); for the third and subsequent impounds within a one year
period the redemption fee is seventy five dollars ($75.00). If a dog is wearing
a current pet license at the time of the first impound, no redemption fee will
be collected. In addition to the redemption fee, the redeemer shall pay all
charges associated with the care and keeping of such dog, including the first
and last days the dog is retained by the impounding authority. This boarding
charge will be collected for the first time impound whether the animal is
wearing a pet license or not. If an impounded dog is not redeemed by the owner
within forty eight (48) hours, then any person may redeem it within the next
forty eight (48) hours by complying with the above provision. In case such dog
is not redeemed within ninety six (96) hours, it may be humanely destroyed or
otherwise disposed of within the discretion of the animal control agency. (Ord.
2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-9: REDEMPTION OF LIVESTOCK:
The owner of livestock impounded under this chapter may redeem said livestock
within forty eight (48) hours from time of impounding by paying to the
impounding authority a redemption fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per
animal for small livestock (i.e., goats, sheep, swine, ostriches, rhea, emu,
etc.) and a redemption fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per animal for
larger livestock (i.e., cattle, horses, mules, llamas, etc.). In addition, the
cost of a private livestock hauler, if one is used, is to be paid at the time
of redemption. In addition to the redemption fee, the redeemer shall pay all
charges associated with the caring and keeping of such animal, including the
first and last days that the animal is cared for by the impounding authority.
The livestock may be cared for by a private boarding facility, in which case
that facility's boarding fees and all associated costs shall be paid at the
time of redemption. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-10: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND LIVESTOCK:
The owner of any animal other than a dog or livestock impounded under the
provisions of this chapter may redeem it within forty eight (48) hours from the
time of impounding by paying to the animal control agency the appropriate
redemption fee and providing proof of such animal's current pet license (if
applicable) at the time of redemption. In addition to the redemption fee, the
redeemer shall pay all charges for the care and keeping of such animal, equal
to the current total daily rate, including the first and last days, that the
animal is retained by the impounding authority. If such animal is not redeemed
by the owner within forty eight (48) hours, it may be humanely destroyed or
otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal control agency; provided,
however, that any animal so impounded less than two (2) months of age, at the
discretion of the animal control agency, may be humanely destroyed or otherwise
disposed of at any time after impounding. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-11: ADOPTION FEES:
Pierce County animal control is authorized to set and facilitate the collection
of adoption fees as necessary for animals in the possession of animal control.
Fees shall pay for the adoption process including assessment site visits,
veterinary services, farrier services, other necessary services, and processing
costs as appropriate. Fees may be collected directly by the county or by a
contract vendor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-12: MANDATORY SPAY/NEUTER FOR IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; DEPOSIT; REFUND;
EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Mandatory Spay/Neuter: Any unaltered dog or cat that is impounded more
than once in any twelve (12) month period may not be redeemed by any person
until the animal is spayed or neutered. The alteration shall be accomplished by
the shelter or by transport of the animal by animal control personnel to any
duly licensed veterinarian in Pierce County. In all cases, the veterinarian
fees shall be paid at the time of redemption by the animal's owner.
   B.   Exceptions: The alteration shall not be required upon a showing of
proof of alteration from a licensed veterinarian. The alteration shall not be
required if the owner or other person redeeming the animal provides a written
statement from a licensed veterinarian stating that the spay or neuter
procedure would be harmful to the animal. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-13: CONDITIONS OF RELEASE:
The animal control agency is authorized to refuse to release to its owner any
animal which has been impounded more than once in a twelve (12) month period
unless satisfied that the owner has taken steps that the violation will not
occur again. The agency may impose reasonable conditions which must be
satisfied by the owner before release of the animal, including conditions
assuring that the animal will be confined. Any violation of the conditions of
release is unlawful and shall constitute a class 3 civil infraction pursuant to
section
1-4-2 of this code. (Ord. 2016-992, 8-31-2016)
6-3A-14: INJURED OR DISEASED ANIMALS:
Any animal suffering from serious injury or disease may be humanely destroyed
by the animal control agency; provided, that the animal control agency shall
immediately notify the owner, if the owner is known, and if the owner is
unknown, make a reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner. (Ord. 2016-
986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-15: UPON INJURY OR DEATH TO AN ANIMAL:
The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to a domestic animal or livestock, shall immediately stop the vehicle at or as
near to the scene of the accident as possible, and return thereto, and shall
give to the owner or other competent person having custody of the animal, the
name and address of the operator of the vehicle and the registration number of
the vehicle involved in the accident. If the owner or other competent person is
not the person at the scene of the accident, the operator shall take reasonable
steps to locate the owner or custodian of said animal and shall supply the
information herein above required. If the animal is injured to the extent that
it requires immediate medical attention and there is no owner or custodian
present to look after it, the operator of said vehicle shall immediately report
the situation to the appropriate law enforcement agency. A violation of this
section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3A-16: IMPROPER HANDLING/STORAGE OF POISONOUS SUBSTANCES:
No person shall place or expose or cause to be placed or exposed in any yard or
lot of vacant or enclosed land, or on any exposed place or public place, or on
any street, alley, or highway, or other place where the same may be taken
internally by a child, person, or by any animal, any poisonous substance which,
if taken internally may cause death or serious sickness. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the killing by poison of any animal in a lawful and
humane manner by its owner or by a duly authorized agent of such owner or by a
person acting pursuant to instructions from a duly constituted public
authority. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-
2016)
ARTICLE B. LIVESTOCK; OTHER ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-3B-1: Introduction; Intent
6-3B-2: Definitions
6-3B-3: Cattle
6-3B-4: Hogs
6-3B-5: Poultry; Fowl; Rabbits
6-3B-6: Horses
6-3B-7: Bees
6-3B-8: Public Rights Of Way And Private Property
6-3B-9: Provisions Not Applicable To Certain Farms
6-3B-10: Violation; Penalty
6-3B-11: Provisions Not Exclusive
6-3B-1: INTRODUCTION; INTENT:
The city of Orting finds there is a need to accommodate farming activity
commonly referred to as urban agriculture. This can include a range of
activities, such as production of food on a single-family residential lot for a
family's personal use, urban vegetable gardens on common property for community
use, or a small commercial farm activity located in areas zoned for this use.
This article is outside the scope of interlocal agreement between Pierce County
and the city of Orting, dated September 1, 2016, relating to animal control
services and animal licensing. Pierce County is not responsible for the
enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated herein.
While agricultural activity has often been considered inconsistent with smart
growth principles of accommodating density in urban areas, the two (2) do not
need to be mutually exclusive. Urban agricultural activity for personal use on
individual single-family lots, or on common property for community agricultural
use, or in the form of small commercial urban farms, can add to the urban
fabric and create a richer context for urban neighborhoods. These beneficial
uses can be accommodated without sacrificing the objectives of the state growth
management act (GMA) and designated urban areas.
Urban agricultural activities managed in a responsible way, with sensitivity to
urban density and land use compatibility issues, can benefit the individuals
participating in the activity and the community at large by providing fresh
produce, additional food choices, economic development opportunity, a more
sustainable lifestyle and urban neighborhoods with more variety and interest.
This section has been developed with the purpose of providing Orting citizens
an opportunity to participate and benefit from these activities. (Ord. 2016-
994, 8-31-2016)
6-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Terms Defined: As used in this article, unless the context indicates
otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADEQUATE CARE: Providing the following to animals:
      1.   Food or feed appropriate to the species for which it is intended.
Both food and water must be in sufficient quantity, quality, and form
appropriate to sustain the animals and should be in containers designed and
situated to allow the animal easy access; and
      2.   A shelter that keeps the animals in a healthful, sanitary, warm,
dry, and safe condition, and allows the animal to turn around freely, sit,
stand, and lie without restriction, and by application does not cause injury,
disfigurement, or physical impairment to the animal.
      3.   Adequate veterinary medical care.
   ANIMAL: Any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile or amphibian including
"livestock" and "poultry" as defined herein.
   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city of Orting city administrator and/or his
designees directed to enforce the animal control laws of the city.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
      1.   Any individual employed, contracted with or appointed by the animal
control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this article
or any other law relating to the licensure, control or seizure and impoundment
of animals;
      2.   Any state or local law enforcement officer or code enforcement
officer; or
      3.   Any other official whose duties in whole or in part include the
seizure and impoundment of any animal.
   AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner, whether licensed, permitted or not,
and not under control of the owner or any other person to whom the animal may
be entrusted by the owner, either by leash or cord, halter, rein, rope, or by
carrier. For the purpose of this article, the animal is presumed not to have
been under control and to be at large if the person purporting to exercise
control is unable to immediately cause the animal to come under control by
restraint or giving the appropriate voice command; or when an at large animal
interferes with pedestrian or vehicular movement or causes affront or alarm to
a person or if injury, damage has been caused by the animal or trespass has
occurred.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): The use of best management practices, such
as pasture rotation, manure management, stream and pond buffering, planting
trees, etc., to help land and animals to remain healthy. These practices help
to keep pasture grasses in better condition, prevent soil erosion and
compaction, reduce dust and keep the air cooler in hot weather. These are
benefits that also carry over to the community as a whole. Federally regulated
stormwater best management practice policies and procedures (BMPs) are in place
(title 9, chapter 5 of this code) in addition to wetlands BMPs (section
11-4-1 of this code). All activities permitted in this code, including
facilities and farms, should comply with or exceed the BMP requirements.
Regulations cover water quality, quantity and prevention of soil erosion
related to stormwater runoff and wetlands. The City reserves the right to
develop and initiate other BMPs as may be required through other regulations,
including air quality related to dust, etc.
   HARBORS, KEEPS, AND POSSESSES, OR MAINTAINS: Providing care, shelter,
protection, refuge, food, or nourishment in such manner as to influence the
behavior of the animal; or treating the animal as living at one's property.
   HIVE: A structure intended for the housing of one bee colony.
   LAWFUL FENCE: A fence structure used to keep animals in or out of an area.
The fence must be forty eight inches (48") high, plus or minus four inches
(±4"). Fences can be made from a variety of materials such as, but not limited
to, stone, wood, vinyl, wire, or pipe. Wire fences utilizing barbed, smooth,
woven or high tension wires must be securely fastened to substantial posts set
firmly in the ground as nearly equidistant as possible but not more than twenty
four feet (24') apart. If the posts are set more than sixteen feet (16') apart,
the wires shall be supported by stays placed no more than eight feet (8') from
each other or from the posts. Lawful fences shall be strong and as well
calculated as the fence described in Revised Code of Washington 16.60.010. For
the purposes of this article, lawful fence shall apply to agricultural
enterprises over two (2) acres within the City.
   LIVESTOCK: All cattle, sheep, goats, or animals of the Bovidae family; all
horses, mules, other hoof animals, or animals of the Equidae family; all pigs,
swine, or animals of the Suidae family; llamas; and ostriches, rhea, and emu.
   OFFICER OR OFFICIAL: Any person designated by the City Council to carry out
the provisions of this article.
   OWN: To possess, own, keep, harbor, maintain, have an interest in or have
control or custody of.
   OWNER: Any person, firm, association, partnership, organization, department,
company or corporation that owns livestock.
   POULTRY: Domestic fowl normally raised for eggs or meat, and includes
chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE: The animal(s) shall be securely confined to the owner's
property while grazing or foraging with a secure pen or structure designed to
prevent the animal(s) from escaping during fence maintenance and provide
protection from the elements for the animal. The structure must comply with all
applicable provisions of local Building and Zoning Codes.
   PROPERLY FENCED AREA: A barrier, railing, or other upright structure,
typically of wood, wire or electric netting, enclosing an area of ground to
mark a boundary, control access or prevent escape. For the purposes of this
article, properly fenced area shall apply to Residential-Urban (RU) single-
family dwellings within the City.
   STOCKING RATIO: That formula as promulgated by the natural resources
conservation service to determine the correct balance of cattle herd size and
available forage to determine animals per acre:
      Acres of pasture needed = (animals) x (average animal weight) x (.04) x
(grazing days) / (average yield per acre).
      Conversely:
         Total number of animals = (total acreage) x (average yield per acre) /
(.04) x (average animal weight) x (grazing days).
         Average yield is based on type of grass grown on pasture and the
potential weight of bales of hay produced yearly per acre.
   WARNING SIGN: A clearly visible and conspicuously displayed sign containing
words and a symbol (to inform children or others incapable of reading) warning
that there is a dangerous animal on the property or other cautionary message as
appropriate as detailed in specific chapters within this title. (Ord. 2016-989,
8-17-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-1026, 4-25-2018)
6-3B-3: CATTLE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, possess or maintain
within the City any cow or cattle within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential building on an adjacent parcel of property.
   B.   Minimum property size required to harbor, keep, possess or maintain
within the City any cow or cattle shall be two (2) acres and then the stocking
ratio shall be 1.5 cow/calf pair per acre of grazing land.
   C.   Should a property qualify to maintain cattle it is the owner's
responsibility to ensure that permitted animals:
      1.   Do not create a "public nuisance", as defined in title 5, chapter 1
of this Code.
      2.   Receive "adequate care", as defined in this article.
      3.   Are not allowed to roam at large.
      4.   Are securely enclosed and contained in a "lawful fence", as defined
in this article.
      5.   Are available for inspection by the appropriate animal control
authority, animal control officer or any contracted provider qualified or
licensed by the State of Washington to inspect subject animals. (Ord. 2016-989,
8-17-2016)
6-3B-4: HOGS:
It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, possess or maintain in the City
any hog or hogs, pigs, swine, or animals of the Suidae family within three
hundred feet (300') of a residential building on an adjacent parcel of
property. (Ord. 2016-989, 8-17-2016)
6-3B-5: POULTRY; FOWL; RABBITS:
   A.   Poultry Permitted: Chickens and/or ducks may be maintained within the
City.
      1.   Owner Responsibility: It is the owner's responsibility to ensure the
permitted animals:
         a.   Do not create a "public nuisance", as defined in title 5, chapter
1 of this code.
         b.   Receive "adequate care", as defined in this article.
         c.   Are not allowed to roam at large.
      2.   Prohibited Poultry/Fowl: Roosters, geese, turkeys, peacocks and
exotic species are prohibited.
      3.   Chickens And/Or Ducks:
         a.   The maximum number of hens permitted accessory to a single-
family residential home on an urban lot shall be in combinations with any
ducks, one per one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of
five (5).
         b.   Chickens shall be kept in a properly fenced area while on the
owner's property. Chickens shall be confined during nighttime hours in a
securely enclosed pen or structure suitable to prevent the entry of predators
and unattended young children, and designed to prevent the animal from escaping
as well as provide protection from the elements for the chickens. The structure
must comply with all applicable provisions of local building codes. Chickens
shall be allowed to free range during daytime hours provided the area is
solidly fenced and chickens cannot escape from owner's property and/or enter
public or other private property. Daytime hours shall be considered as seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Nighttime hours shall be those
hours not considered daytime hours.
         c.   The maximum number of ducks (including males) permitted accessory
to a single-family residential home on an urban lot shall be, in combinations
with any chickens, one per one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area, up to
a maximum of five (5).
         d.   Ducks shall be kept in a properly fenced area while on the
owner's property. Ducks shall be confined during nighttime hours in a securely
enclosed pen or structure suitable to prevent the entry of predators and
unattended young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping as
well as provide protection from the elements for the ducks. The structure must
comply with all applicable provisions of local building codes. Ducks shall be
allowed to free range during daytime hours provided the area is solidly fenced
and ducks cannot escape from owner's property and/or enter public or other
private property. Daytime hours shall be considered as seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Nighttime hours shall be those hours not
considered daytime hours.
         e.   In no case shall maximum number of chickens and ducks, in
combination, exceed five (5) total animals.
   B.   Rabbits Permitted: Rabbits may be maintained within the city.
      1.   It is the owner's responsibility to ensure that permitted rabbits
meet the following criteria:
         a.   Rabbits must be kept in accordance with recommendations of the
American Rabbit Breeders Association (ARBA) and a minimum three and one-half
(31/2) square feet of hutch space per rabbit.
         b.   The maximum number of rabbits permitted accessory to a single-
family residential home on an urban lot shall be one per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of lot area not to exceed five (5) total permanently residing
animals.
         c.   As rabbits are known for their breeding, kits must be sold or
culled by the age of twelve (12) weeks ensuring permanently residing rabbit
population does not exceed five (5).
         d.   Rabbits are not allowed to free range.
   C.   Structures: Structures (hutches, sheds, etc.) housing domestic poultry
and rabbits must be located five feet (5') away from property lines and
designed to prevent rodents and foul odors by incorporating portable pens,
raised flooring and/or other techniques that have similar results.
   D.   Registration: Any poultry and/or rabbits kept within the city shall be
registered at city hall. Registration shall be for the "hutch" independent of
the number of poultry or rabbits legally kept within the city. This
registration shall be renewable yearly. (Ord. 2016-989, 8-17-2016)
6-3B-6: HORSES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, possess or maintain in
the city any horses within twenty five feet (25') of a boundary or residential
building on an adjacent parcel of property or on any property less than one
acre in size. Horses may roam throughout the property with lawful fencing.
   B.   Minimum property size required to harbor, keep, possess or maintain
within the city any horse shall be one acre and the maximum number of horse
allowed shall be one horse (or mare/foal pair) per acre of usable grazing land.
   C.   Should a property qualify to maintain horses it is the owner's
responsibility to ensure that qualified horses:
      1.   Do not create a "public nuisance", as defined in title 5, chapter 1
of this code.
      2.   Receive "adequate care", as defined in this article.
      3.   Are not allowed to roam at large.
      4.   Are securely enclosed and contained in a "lawful fence", as defined
in this article.
      5.   Are kept utilizing best management practices, as defined in this
article, to help to keep pasture grasses in better condition, prevent soil
erosion and compaction, reduce mud, dust and keep the air cooler in hot
weather.
      6.   Are available for inspection by the appropriate animal control
authority, animal control officer or any contracted provider qualified or
licensed by the state of Washington to inspect subject animals. (Ord. 2016-989,
8-17-2016)
6-3B-7: BEES:
Honey, mason or similar bees used for honey or pollination purposes.
   A.   Honeybees:
      1.   Parcel And Apiary Size Requirements: It shall be unlawful to keep
more than the following number of hives on any parcel within the city, based
upon the size of the parcel on which the hive is situated:
TABLE 6-3B-7A1
Parcel Size Number Of Hives Allowed
Parcel Size                             Number Of Hives Allowed
0 to 5,999 sq. ft.                      0
6,000 to 10,000 sq. ft.                 2
10,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.                4
20,001 to 43,560 sq. ft. (0.46 acre to  10
1 acre)
43,561 to 65,340 sq. ft. (1 acre to 1.5 20
acres)
1.5 to 5.0 acres                        25 in urban areas
5.01 to 10.0 acres                      40 in urban areas
                                        60 as a rural or mountain honey
10.01 acres and greater                 foraging site, or 60 or more as a 30
                                        day collection site for truck access in
                                        spring and fall
      2.   Hive Placement Requirements:
         a.   Hives shall be at least twenty five feet (25') from a property
line, with the hive(s) entrance(s) facing away from or parallel to the nearest
property line ensuring flight path of bees does not create a nuisance.
         b.   Hives may be less than twenty five feet (25') from a property
line if placed behind a six foot (6') high fence, which shall extend at least
twenty five feet (25') beyond the hive(s) in both directions. The fence shall
direct bee flight into the air at least six feet (6') before the bees cross the
property line. The fence or obstruction may occur on the adjoining property;
provided, that bee flight is not directed in the vicinity of recreational decks
or entrances to housing or buildings on adjoining properties. In lieu of a
fence, the hive(s) may be placed at least eight feet (8') above adjacent ground
level, and comply with the remaining placement requirements.
         c.   A hive(s) adjacent to public roads shall comply with placement
requirements in such a manner as to direct bee flight at least twenty feet
(20') into the air over the road surface. In lieu of this requirement, a hive
(s) shall be placed at least one hundred feet (100') from the road right(s) of
way, with the entrance(s) parallel thereto.
      3.   Hive, Apiary Management Requirements:
         a.   Hive(s) shall be registered with the department of agriculture
and comply with chapter 15.60 Revised Code Of Washington and rules adopted
thereunder; and
         b.   All hives shall consist of movable frames and combs, unless
exempted by the department of agriculture as an educational exhibit; and
         c.   Hives shall be managed for swarm prevention and gentleness; and
         d.   Hives shall be requeened at least biannually to prevent swarming.
Annual requeening is strongly recommended; and
         e.   Hives shall be requeened if bee behavior is likely to cause a
nuisance; and
         f.   A consistent source of water shall be provided at the apiary
unless it occurs naturally within three hundred (300) yards. The water may be
"sweetened" with mineral salt or chlorine to enhance its attractiveness. This
requirement is intended to discourage bee visitation at swimming pools, hose
bibs, animal watering sources, birdbaths or where people congregate; and
         g.   Apiaries shall be managed and kept in a clean and orderly manner
and appearance to prevent a nuisance; and
         h.   Warning sign. An apiary(ies) shall be identified by placing a
sign so it is visible to passersby. Sign lettering shall be a minimum of two
inches (2") in height and shall include the name, state issued identification
number, and telephone number of the owner. Signs shall be placed in a manner to
make them conspicuous to anyone approaching the apiary. In lieu of signing, a
hive may be identified by displaying the identification number and telephone
number of the owner in at least two inch (2") characters on the sides and tops
of some colonies in each apiary. The characters shall be in a color which
contrasts with the color of the hive(s), and be conspicuous to anyone
approaching the apiary. An apiary(ies) located at the owner's residence is
exempt from marking requirements.
   B.   Mason Bees Or Similar Pollinating Varieties:
      1.   Available information states, unlike garden variety honeybees, mason
bees are nonsocial creatures that nest in holes rather than in a hive with a
queen. Orchard bees work alone, but like to nest in groups when possible; there
is no cooperation concerning the nest's construction or the rearing of the
brood, and therefore, no aggression issues. Orchard bees gain their name from
the way that the females protect their eggs: They will form an egg chamber in
the deepest part of their hole and seal it with mud, repeating the process
until the hole is full of eggs. Known for being solitary hard workers, orchard
bees only live for about eight to ten (8 - 10) weeks in the spring, typically
from mid- March until the end of May or early June (the fittest season for
pollinating fruit trees and berries!). The bees will then hibernate for about
ten (10) months and later emerge with great energy for more pollination duty.
         a.   Nesting boxes shall be provided, preferably on south facing
garage, house, or garden shed walls with food being available within about
three hundred feet (300') of the nest. A "mud pie" or other small area of open
ground should be provided for female egg laying with the soil moist, but not
soupy and not directly under the nest (young emerging bees could fall in).
         b.   Area housing bee varieties other than honeybees must be a minimum
of ten feet (10') from adjacent properties and limited in size appropriate for
pollination of the owner's lot.
   C.   Nuisance: Bees shall be considered a nuisance when any of the following
occurs:
      1.   Colonies of bees are defensive or exhibit objectionable behavior, or
interfere with the normal use of property, or the enjoyment of persons, animals
or property adjacent to an apiary(ies); or
      2.   Colonies of bees swarm; or
      3.   Hives of bees do not conform to this code; or
      4.   The hive(s) becomes deceased, as defined by the department of
agriculture; or
      5.   The hive(s) becomes abandoned.
   D.   Violations: Reported or visible violations may be corrected by order of
the city within which they occur according to established procedures as
described in this article, or by the department of agriculture. The city may
request the services of the department of agriculture to investigate violations
or to determine and suggest appropriate corrective measures. Penalties may be
levied by the city according to local ordinance or procedures, or by the
department of agriculture. (Ord. 2016-989, 8-17-2016)
6-3B-8: PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY AND PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Rights Of Way: It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any
livestock, poultry or rabbit to graze or stray upon any portion of the right of
way of any public street, or public park within the corporate limits of the
city.
      1.   Any livestock, poultry or rabbits found at large on public property
may be seized and impounded.
      2.   Owner or person in control of at large livestock, poultry or rabbits
shall pay all costs associated with the care and keeping of said animals during
impound and in event of disposal shall be responsible for those associated
costs.
   B.   Private Property: It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any
livestock, poultry or rabbit to graze or stray on any private property in the
city unless the owner of such livestock, poultry or rabbit has permission so to
do from the person, or persons, in charge of all the premises frequented by
such livestock, poultry or rabbit when so permitted to graze or stray.
   C.   Adoption: Chapter 16.04 Revised Code Of Washington (trespassing
animals), as existing on the date of enactment hereof or as hereafter amended
by the state of Washington or applicable agencies, is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
   D.   Permission: Should any livestock, poultry or rabbit be found on other's
private property without permission, whether the livestock, poultry or rabbit
is present with or without the animal owner's knowledge, the owner of the
trespassed property may:
      1.   Contact the trespassing animal's owner and demand removal at the
trespassing animal owner's expense; or
      2.   Arrange for removal by a contracted third party at the trespassing
animal owner's expense; or
      3.   Seize and hold trespassing animal as described in Revised Code Of
Washington 16.04 thereby making use of remedies as provided in Revised Code Of
Washington 16.04. (Ord. 2016-989, 8-17-2016)
6-3B-9: PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN FARMS:
   A.   This article shall not apply to any existing farm or equine stable
within or partly within the limits of the city, a "farm" being defined for the
purposes of this article as an agricultural enterprise of not less than two (2)
acres provided that:
      1.   Best management practices, as defined in this article, are in place
at the time of enactment hereof, and any subsequent additions or amendments by
the city at future dates are complied with. These BMPs should include, but not
be limited to:
         a.   Practices promoting pasture rotation, manure management, stream
and pond buffering, planting trees, etc., thereby helping land and animals to
remain healthy.
         b.   Practices helping to keep pasture grasses in better condition,
prevent accumulation of mud, prevent soil erosion and compaction, reduce dust
and keep the air cooler in hot weather.
         c.   Practices supporting and maintaining water quality and quantity,
prevention of soil erosion related to stormwater runoff and protections of
wetlands.
      2.   Lawful fences, as defined in this article, are constructed and
maintained so as to keep livestock confined to the property's boundaries.
      3.   Deficiencies found concerning BMPs at the time of enactment of this
chapter will be given twenty four (24) months to cure and bring into
compliance.
      4.   "Adequate care" is provided, as defined in this article.
      5.   Stocking ratios for cattle, as defined in this article, are
maintained. (Ord. 2016-989, 8-17-2016)
6-3B-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating the provisions of subsection
6-3B-3A, section
6-3B-4, and subsection
6-3B-6A of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Any person violating the provisions of subsections
6-3B-3B, and C, section
6-3B-5, subsections 6-3B-6B and C, and sections
6-3B-7 and
6-3B-9 of this article, shall be guilty of a civil infraction with maximum
penalties as follows:
      1.   First offense within a one year period: Class 3 civil infraction
($120.00).
      2.   Second offense within a one year period: Class 2 civil infraction
($300.00).
      3.   Third offense within a one year period: Class 1 civil infraction
($600.00).
      4.   Fourth offense within a one year period: Misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-
997, 10-26-2016)
6-3B-11: PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this article shall be accumulative and not exclusive, and
shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy, nor, unless
specifically provided, shall this article be deemed to repeal, amend, or modify
any law, ordinance, or regulation relating to livestock and other animals, but
shall be deemed additional to existing legislation and common law on noise.
(Ord. 2016-989, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE C. PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-3C-1: Exclusions
6-3C-2: Infractions
6-3C-3: Misdemeanors
6-3C-4: Gross Misdemeanors
6-3C-5: Penalties
6-3C-1: EXCLUSIONS:
Nothing in this chapter applies to accepted husbandry practices used in the
commercial raising or slaughtering of livestock or poultry, or products
thereof, or to the use of animals in the normal and usual course of rodeo
events. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3C-2: INFRACTIONS:
The following are declared to be class 3 civil infractions:
   A.   Animals At Large: It is unlawful for the owner or person having control
or custody of any animal to cause or permit such animal to leave the premises
where the owner resides, unless the animal is under physical restraint adequate
to the size and nature of the animal. Exceptions to this restriction are pets
engaged in formal training, hunt or competition, or animals lawfully within a
designated off leash park, or service dogs engaged in activity for which they
are trained or in service. Any such animal may be seized and impounded. A
violation of this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   B.   Agitating An Animal: It is unlawful to intentionally agitate, harass,
or provoke an animal. A violation of this subsection is a class 3 civil
infraction.
   C.   Animal Bites: It is unlawful to own an animal that bites a person while
such person is on public property or lawfully on private property. A violation
of this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   D.   Animals Chasing Livestock: It is unlawful for the owner or person
having control or custody of any animal to cause or permit such animal to chase
another owner's livestock when not engaged in the specific work of herding said
livestock as approved and permitted by the owner of the livestock. A violation
of this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   E.   Animals Chasing Vehicles On Public Roads: It is unlawful for the owner
or person having control or custody of any animal to cause or permit such
animal to chase, run after, or jump at vehicles lawfully using the public road,
street, avenues, alleys, and ways. Any such animal may be seized and impounded.
A violation of this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   F.   Animals Jumping And/Or Threatening Pedestrians: It is unlawful for the
owner or person having control or custody of any animal to cause or permit such
animal to frequently or habitually snarl at, growl at, jump upon, or threaten
persons upon the public sidewalks, roads, streets, alleys, or public places.
Any such animal may be seized and impounded. A violation of this subsection is
a class 3 civil infraction.
   G.   Confinement Of Female Dogs And Cats In Heat: Every female dog and cat
in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner
that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with a male of the
species, except for planned breeding. It is unlawful for any person having
control or custody of a dog or cat in heat to cause or permit such animal to be
unconfined. Any dog or cat not so confined when in heat, whether or not such
dog or cat is licensed, may be seized and impounded, and will be subject to
mandatory spaying in accordance with the process in section
6-3A-12 of this chapter. A violation of this subsection is a class 3 civil
infraction.
   H.   Failure To License: A violation of article D of this chapter is a class
3 civil infraction.
   I.   Damaging Property: It is unlawful for the owner or person having
control of any animal to cause or permit their animal to leave the premises of
the owner and thereafter cause damage to anything of value which does not
exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), including another pet or livestock.
A violation of this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   J.   Failure To Provide Adequate Care: It is unlawful for any owner or
person having control or custody of any animal to fail to provide "adequate
care" as defined in sections
6-3A-1 and
6-3B-2 of this chapter under circumstances not amounting to animal cruelty as
defined in Revised Code Of Washington 16.52.205 or 16.52.207. A violation of
this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction. (Circumstances that amount to
animal cruelty as defined in Revised Code Of Washington 16.52.205 and 16.52.207
are addressed pursuant to those provisions.)
   K.   Confinement Of An Animal In A Motor Vehicle: It is unlawful for an
owner or person to confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a matter that
places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged
period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection
from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of such
animal, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer who has probable
cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have the authority
to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances,
after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner. A violation of this
subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   L.   Public Disturbance Noise And Public Nuisance Noise Made By An Animal:
Any public disturbance noise made by an animal and public nuisance noise made
by an animal is unlawful and shall be enforced under the provisions of section
5-8-1 et seq., of this code. Violations and penalties are defined in section
5-8-10 of this code.
   M.   Sale Or Transfer Of Animals In Public Places Prohibited: It is unlawful
to sell, barter or otherwise transfer for the purpose of changing ownership any
animal in an area open to the public unless such activity is licensed pursuant
to title 4, chapter 6, article C of this code. A violation of this subsection
is a class 3 civil infraction.
   N.   Failure To Provide Humane Restraint: Any animal, excluding livestock
and poultry, that is restrained by a tether must be restrained in compliance
with this section. All tethers must meet the following requirements:
      1.   Chains must be adequate to restrain the animal, but appropriate size
and weight for the animal.
      2.   The use of chains, pinch/prong collars, or choke chains as collars
is prohibited. This subsection does not apply to pinch/prong collars or choke
chains used for training purposes when a person is present at all times and is
actively engaged in training the animal.
      3.   A tether must be connected to a collar or harness on a swivel or in
a manner that prevents entanglement.
      4.   The tether must not cause injury, disfigurement or physical
impairment to the animal.
      5.   A tether must allow access to food, water and shelter while
restrained.
      6.   A tether must not allow the animal to leave the owner's property.
      7.   If there are multiple animals, each animal must be restrained with a
separate tether in a manner that prevents entanglement.
A violation of this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction.
   O.   Operating A Facility Without A License (First Offense): It is unlawful
for any person to own, maintain, or have six (6) or more dogs and/or cats, or
operate a commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/cattery, foster
shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor, private kennel/
cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop, within the unincorporated
areas of Pierce County without an applicable license as provided for and
defined by title 4, chapter 6, article C of this code. The first violation of
this subsection is a class 3 civil infraction. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3C-3: MISDEMEANORS:
The following are declared to be misdemeanors:
   A.   Abandonment Of Animal: It is unlawful for the owner or person having
control or custody of any animal to place such animal under circumstances which
manifest or constitute a wilful intent to abandon it, or to abandon an animal
by leaving it on the street, road, or highway, or in any public place or on
private property without the property owner's permission. A violation of this
subsection is a misdemeanor.
   B.   Animals Injuring Private And Public Property: It is unlawful for the
owner or person having control of any animal to cause or permit their animal to
leave the premises of the owner and thereafter cause damage to anything of
value which exceeds two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), including another pet
or livestock. Any such animal may be seized and impounded. A violation of this
subsection is a misdemeanor.
   C.   Duties Upon Injury Or Death To An Animal: A violation of section
6-3A-15 of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
   D.   Hindering An Officer: A violation of section
6-3A-6 of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
   E.   Interference With Impounding: A violation of section
6-3A-7 of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
   F.   Improper Handling/Storage Of Poisonous Substances: A violation of
section
6-3A-16 of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
   G.   Selling Ill Or Injured Animals: It is unlawful for any person to sell
an animal knowing it to be ill or injured. A violation of this subsection is a
misdemeanor.
   H.   Refusal To Quarantine: It is unlawful for any person to refuse to
quarantine or permit the quarantine of an animal when and as required by
section
6-3F-4 of this chapter. A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor.
   I.   Operating A Facility Without A License (Second Or Subsequent Offense):
It is unlawful for any person to own, maintain, or have six (6) or more dogs
and/or cats, or operate a commercial kennel or cattery, boarding kennel/
cattery, foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel/cattery, grooming parlor,
private kennel/cattery, short term boarding facility, or pet shop, within the
city without an applicable license as provided for and defined by title 4,
chapter 6, article C of this code. The first violation of this subsection is a
class 3 civil infraction. A second or subsequent violation of this subsection
is a misdemeanor.
   J.   Potentially Dangerous Wild Animals: A violation of article I of this
chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3C-4: GROSS MISDEMEANORS:
The following are declared to be gross misdemeanors:
   A.   Animals Injuring Humans Or Animals: It is unlawful for the owner or
person having control or custody of any animal to cause or permit such animal
to cause injury to a human or animal which is acting in a lawful manner. Any
such animal may be seized and impounded. A violation of this subsection is a
gross misdemeanor.
   B.   Habitual Violator: Any owner receiving two (2) or more convictions,
singularly or in combination, of crimes relating to animals within a ten (10)
year period, or any combination of two (2) findings of potentially dangerous
and/or dangerous animals within ten (10) years, or any four (4) infractions,
singularly or in combination, pursuant to this article found to be committed by
the district court within a five (5) year period may be designated as a
"habitual violator" by the animal control authority and shall be prohibited
from owning animals for a period of not less than ten (10) years. A violation
of this prohibition is a gross misdemeanor.
   C.   Penalty For Failure To Control Or Comply With Restrictions: A violation
of any of the provisions of article E of this chapter is a gross misdemeanor.
   D.   Use Of An Animal In Illegal Activity: No person shall keep, maintain,
control, or retain custody of any animal in conjunction with or for the
purpose, whether in whole or in part, of aiding, abetting, or conducting any
illegal activity or committing any crime within the city. Any such animal may
be seized and impounded. A violation of this subsection is a gross misdemeanor.
   E.   Possession Of A Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animal Where
Prohibited: It is unlawful to bring an animal into the city that has been
declared to be dangerous or vicious by any other agency, animal control
authority, hearing examiner, municipality or court. The owner of such animal
shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor under circumstances evidencing that the
animal was intentionally brought into the city by the owner or at the request
or acquiescence of the owner.
   F.   Relocation Of Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animal Without Proper
Notice: When an animal has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by
an animal control authority, the owner of the animal shall be guilty of a gross
misdemeanor if such animal is thereafter found to have been moved to a location
other than as registered with the animal control authority without notice as
indicated in section
6-3E-5 of this chapter.
   G.   Animals Declared Potentially Dangerous In Other Jurisdictions: When an
animal has been declared potentially dangerous by any other agency, animal
control authority, hearing examiner, municipality or court, the owner of such
animal shall obtain a permit in accordance with section
6-3E-4 of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the declaration or, if an
appeal has been filed, a final decision in the other jurisdiction. During the
entire appeal process, the owner shall not allow or permit the animal to go
beyond the premises of the owner unless such animal is securely leashed and
under the control of a competent adult and humanely muzzled or otherwise
securely restrained. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a gross
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3C-5: PENALTIES:
Unless specifically designated in this article as a misdemeanor or gross
misdemeanor, any violation of this chapter is unlawful and shall constitute a
class 3 civil infraction pursuant to section
1-4-2 of this code. Such penalty is in addition to any other remedies or
penalties specifically provided in this chapter. For each act herein prohibited
of a continuing nature, each day shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord.
2016-986, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE D. LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
6-3D-1: License Required
6-3D-2: Purchase Of License
6-3D-3: Fees
6-3D-4: Late Payment Penalty
6-3D-5: License Not Transferable
6-3D-6: License Violation; Civil Infraction
6-3D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Any adult dog or cat which is off the premises of its owner must be
licensed and have a current license tag attached to the collar or harness which
is worn by the dog or cat. If any dog and/or cat which is required to be
licensed is found without a current license tag, it may be seized and impounded
by the animal control agency, Pierce County sheriff or city of Orting police
chief, provided, such seizure and impoundment will not preclude the issuance of
a civil infraction. Hunting dogs, during a controlled hunt, need not wear a
license tag.
   B.   No more than five (5) dogs and/or cats may be individually licensed at
a residence in the city. Dogs and cats are exempt from the above licensing
provisions when they are in the custody of a recognized animal rescue group. In
order to qualify as a recognized rescue group, proof of registration with the
internal revenue service pursuant to IRC 501(c)(3) must be submitted to the
Pierce County licensing authority by the group. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3D-2: PURCHASE OF LICENSE:
All dog or cat licenses shall be obtained by paying the required license fee in
the amounts and within the time limits as provided in this chapter to the
licensing officer, or to the licensing officer's designated licensing agent.
The license shall remain in force for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of issuance. There is no prorating of any license fee. The applicant shall
be furnished with such license and a metal tag with the words "Pierce County".
The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which will be worn by the dog
or cat at all times. (Ord. 2016-992, 8-31-2016)
6-3D-3: FEES:
The license fees for the ownership, keeping, or having control of dogs and/or
cats in the city shall be as follows:
A. Adult dogs:                             
   Altered                              $20.00
   Unaltered                            55.00
B. Adult cats:                             
   Altered                              12.00
   Unaltered                            55.00
C. "Temporary tag" dogs/cats (30 days)    0.00
D. Duplicate license tag for a dog or cat 5.00
E. Reduced rates for senior citizens, 62 years of age or older, and individuals
   with a permanent disability:
  1. Dogs:                                
   Altered                              $10.00
   Unaltered                            30.00
  2. Cats:                                
   Altered                              5.00
   Unaltered                            30.00
 
In order to receive the fee advantage for altered dogs and cats, an individual
must provide either proof of alteration from a licensed veterinarian or a
written statement from a licensed veterinarian that the spay/neuter procedure
would be harmful to the animal.
Individuals with a permanent disability, residing in the city, qualify for the
reduced fee specified in subsection E of this section, provided that the dogs
and cats are not used for a commercial purpose. To qualify for this reduced
fee, individuals with a permanent disability must provide proof of permanent
disability to the licensing officer, or the licensing officer's designated
licensing agent, in the form of a U.S. department of veterans affairs
identification card or documentation showing at least thirty percent (30%)
permanent disability, a Washington department of licensing parking placard
issued for permanent disability under Revised Code Of Washington chapter 46.19,
or any other means that the licensing agency, licensing officer, or the
licensing officer's designated licensing agent deems an appropriate proof of
permanent disability.
The licensing officer is authorized to establish agents for the purpose of
selling pet licenses on its behalf. The agents shall be allowed to collect a
service charge of four dollars ($4.00) for each new pet license or renewal
transaction. This service fee may be negotiated at a different rate if included
in a contract for shelter and adoption services. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3D-4: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who fails to obtain a license within thirty (30) days after
the license expiration date but before sixty (60) days of the expiration date
shall pay a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) per license. Any person who fails
to obtain a license within sixty (60) days of the license expiration date shall
pay a penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00) per license.
   B.   No late payment penalty shall be charged on new license applications
if:
      1.   The owner submits proof of purchase or acquisition of the animal
within the preceding thirty (30) days; or
      2.   The owner has moved into the city within the preceding thirty (30)
days; or
      3.   The animal is currently or has been within the preceding thirty (30)
days, under the age which requires a license; or
      4.   The owner purchases the license(s) voluntarily, prior to in person
or field contact by animal control personnel; or
      5.   The owner submits other proof deemed acceptable in the animal
control authority's administrative policy. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3D-5: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Dog or cat licenses as provided for in this chapter shall be nontransferable. A
person may not use a license for another dog or cat that he/she owns, if the
dog or cat for which it was issued is no longer owned by such person. It is
unlawful for any person to give, sell, exchange, or otherwise transfer a dog or
cat license to another person, even if it is to be used for the same dog or cat
for which it was originally issued. Dog or cat license fees are nonrefundable.
(Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3D-6: LICENSE VIOLATION; CIVIL INFRACTION:
Any violation of section
6-3D-1,
6-3D-2, or
6-3D-5 of this article is unlawful and shall constitute a class 3 civil
infraction pursuant to section
1-4-2 of this code. Provided, that if the person presents evidence of a valid
license to the city of Orting municipal court, the citation shall be dismissed
without cost, except that the court may assess court administration costs of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) at the time of dismissal. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-
2016)
ARTICLE E. DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-3E-1: Declaration Of Animals As Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous; Procedure
6-3E-2: Appeal Of Declaration
6-3E-3: Permits, Fees, And Conditions For Dangerous Animals
6-3E-4: Permits, Fees, And Conditions For Potentially Dangerous Animals
6-3E-5: Notification Of Status Of A Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animal
6-3E-6: Impoundment Of Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animals
6-3E-7: Criminal Penalty For Failure To Control Or Comply With Restrictions
6-3E-8: Duty To Comply
6-3E-1: DECLARATION OF ANIMALS AS DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS;
PROCEDURE:
   A.   Findings: The animal control authority may declare an animal as
dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal control officer has a
reasonable belief that the animal's conduct falls within the definition of a
"dangerous animal" or "potentially dangerous animal" as set forth in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter and the exclusions contained in this article do not
apply. The finding must be based upon:
      1.   The written or verbal complaint of a citizen who is willing to
testify that the animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within
the definitions of a dangerous or "potentially dangerous animal"; or
      2.   Animal bite reports filed with the animal control authority; or
      3.   Actions of the animal witnessed by any animal control officer or law
enforcement officer; or
      4.   Other substantial evidence.
   B.   Exclusions: An animal shall not be declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous if the threat, injury, or bite alleged to have been committed by the
animal was sustained by a person who was at the time committing a wilful
trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or who was
abusing or assaulting the animal, or who was committing or attempting to commit
a crime. This exclusion does not apply to actions taken in defense of oneself,
other humans, animals, or property.
   C.   Methods: The declaration of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal
shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner by one of the following
methods:
      1.   Regular and certified mail to the owner's last known address.
Service shall be deemed complete upon the third day following the day upon
which the notice was placed in the mail. If the third day falls upon a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, then service shall be deemed complete on
the next business day; or
      2.   Personally; or
      3.   By posting the declaration in a conspicuous location at the owner's
residence.
   D.   Declaration: The declaration shall state at least:
      1.   The description of the animal.
      2.   The name and address of the owner of the animal, if known.
      3.   A brief statement of facts upon which the declaration is based.
      4.   A reference to the code section that contains a definition of a
dangerous or "potentially dangerous animal" and to this article.
      5.   The availability of an appeal in case the person objects to the
declaration, if a request is made within ten (10) calendar days. (Ord. 2016-
986, 8-17-2016)
6-3E-2: APPEAL OF DECLARATION:
   A.   The owner of the animal may contest a declaration of dangerous or
potentially dangerous animal by submitting a written appeal.
      1.   The owner must submit the written appeal at the Pierce County
auditor's office within ten (10) calendar days of service of the declaration.
      2.   Except as provided by this article, the appeal shall proceed in
accordance with the procedures set forth in section
1-12-3 of this code.
      3.   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner's address
as listed on the written appeal.
      4.   At the public hearing, the scope of evidence and the scope of review
shall be de novo.
      5.   The burden shall be on the animal control authority to prove, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the animal is a "dangerous animal" or
"potentially dangerous animal" as defined in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter and that the exclusions contained in section
6-3E-1 of this article do not apply.
      6.   The examiner shall render a decision on the appeal within thirty
(30) calendar days following the conclusion of all testimony and hearings and
closing of the record unless a longer period of time is agreed to by the
parties.
   B.   The decision of the examiner shall be considered final and conclusive
unless a writ of review is filed in superior court within twenty (20) calendar
days of the decision.
      1.   If a writ is issued, the petitioner shall be responsible for paying
the cost of preparing the administrative record and the transcript of
proceedings and shall serve copies of both upon the prosecuting attorney's
office. The prevailing party shall be entitled to recovery of these costs.
   C.   During the entire appeal process, the owner shall keep the animal
indoors or securely confined on the property where the owner resides. Secure
confinement may be accomplished by erecting an escapeproof fence, keeping the
animal in a proper enclosure as described in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter, humanely tethering the animal as described in section
6-3C-2 of this chapter, or by other means approved by the animal control
authority. It is unlawful for the owner appealing a declaration to allow or
permit the animal to go beyond the premises of the owner unless such animal is
securely leashed, under the control of a competent adult, and humanely muzzled
or otherwise securely restrained. Upon noncompliance with this subsection, the
animal control authority is authorized to impound the animal subject to the
procedures set forth in section
6-3E-6 of this article. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3E-3: PERMITS, FEES, AND CONDITIONS FOR DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Following the declaration of a dangerous animal and the exhaustion of
the appeal therefrom, the owner of a dangerous animal shall obtain a permit for
such animal from the animal control authority and shall be required to pay the
fee for such permit in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the
Pierce County auditor or the auditor's designee. In addition, the owner of a
dangerous animal shall pay an annual renewal fee for such permit in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the Pierce County auditor or the auditor's
designee. A permit will be issued to the owner of a dangerous animal upon
payment of the permit fees if the owner is able to pass an inspection within
the prescribed time frame by meeting the following inspection criteria:
      1.   A proper enclosure of the animal with a posted "warning sign" as
defined in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter;
      2.   Proof that the animal has been microchipped and microchip number is
provided;
      3.   Two (2) current, color, digital photographs in electronic format of
the animal (minimum 3 inches x 5 inches in size), for identification purposes;
      4.   Proof of current rabies vaccination;
      5.   Proof the animal has been spayed or neutered;
      6.   Proof of a policy of liability insurance (such as homeowner's
insurance) issued by an insurer qualified under title 48 Revised Code Of
Washington in the amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous animal, or proof of a surety bond issued by a surety insurer
qualified under chapter 48.28 Revised Code Of Washington in a form acceptable
to the animal control authority in the sum of at least five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) and payable to any person injured by the dangerous
animals;
      7.   Proof that the owner has obtained a "muzzle" as defined in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter. The muzzle must be available at time of inspection; and
      8.   Proof that the owner has obtained a brightly colored collar with
current license tag. The collar must be made available at the time of
inspection.
   B.   Following a declaration of dangerous animal and the exhaustion of any
appeals therefrom, it shall be unlawful for the person owning or harboring or
having care of a dangerous animal to allow and/or permit such animal to:
      1.   Remain outside of a proper enclosure while on the premises of such
person; or
      2.   Go beyond the premises of such person unless such animal is securely
leashed and humanely muzzled or otherwise securely restrained.
The animal must wear a brightly colored collar with current license tag at all
times.
   C.   Where an animal is found to be dangerous because the animal killed a
human being, after the exhaustion of appeal therefrom, the dangerous animal
shall be surrendered to the animal control authority and be humanely
euthanized. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3E-4: PERMITS, FEES, AND CONDITIONS FOR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Permits; Fees: Following the declaration of a potentially dangerous
animal and the exhaustion of the appeal therefrom, the owner of a potentially
dangerous animal shall obtain a permit for such animal from the animal control
authority and shall be required to pay the fee for such permit in the amount of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the Pierce County auditor or the
auditor's designee. In addition, the owner of a potentially dangerous animal
shall pay an annual renewal fee for such permit in the amount of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) to the Pierce County auditor or the auditor's designee.
A permit will be issued to the owner of a potentially dangerous animal upon
payment of the permit fees if the owner provides the following:
      1.   Proof that the animal has been microchipped and microchip number is
provided;
      2.   Two (2) current, color, digital photographs in electronic format of
the animal (minimum 3 inches x 5 inches in size), for identification purposes;
      3.   Proof of current rabies vaccination;
      4.   Proof the animal has been spayed or neutered; and
      5.   Proof that the owner has obtained a brightly colored collar with
current license tag.
The animal must wear the collar with current license tag at all times.
   B.   Restrictions: The animal control authority may impose any or all of the
following restrictions upon the owner of a potentially dangerous animal:
      1.   Training: The animal control authority may require the owner of a
potentially dangerous animal and the animal to attend, complete, and pay all
costs associated with an obedience training class. The animal control authority
shall preapprove any choice of class by the owner of the animal, and proof of
satisfactory completion of such training shall be provided to the animal
control authority, even if similar training has been completed by the animal in
the past.
      2.   Restraint: The animal control authority may require the owner of the
potentially dangerous animal to muzzle the animal whenever the animal goes
beyond the owner's property.
      3.   Confinement: The animal control authority may require that the owner
of a potentially dangerous animal keep the animal within a "proper enclosure"
as defined in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter while on the owner's property.
      4.   Warning: The animal control authority may require that the owner of
a potentially dangerous animal post a warning sign as described in section
6-3A-1 of this chapter.
      5.   Liability Insurance: The animal control authority may require that
the owner of a potentially dangerous animal purchase a policy of liability
insurance (such as homeowner's insurance) issued by an insurer qualified under
title 48 Revised Code Of Washington in an amount of up to two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal injuries
inflicted by the potentially dangerous animal.
   C.   Inspection: The animal control authority may inspect the owner's
premises to verify compliance with this section.
   D.   Petition To Vacate The Declaration: Where an owner has obtained a
potentially dangerous animal permit and has been in compliance with the
requirements of this section for three (3) consecutive years, the owner may
submit a written petition to vacate the potentially dangerous animal
declaration and to lift the associated ownership requirements.
      1.   The petition shall be submitted to the animal control authority.
      2.   The animal control authority will forward the petition, along with
any comments, objections, and recommendations, to the examiner.
      3.   The animal control authority may request that a public hearing be
scheduled to hear the petition.
      4.   The examiner may, in his discretion, grant the petition where the
petitioner demonstrates, by a preponderance of evidence, that the animal no
longer poses a substantial danger. Among the factors that the examiner may
consider is the age of the animal, the animal and owner's successful completion
of an obedience training class, evidence of aggressive behavior or lack
thereof, and any other relevant evidence.
      5.   The examiner shall issue a decision granting or denying the
petition. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3E-5: NOTIFICATION OF STATUS OF A DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
   A.   The owner of an animal that has been classified as a dangerous or
potentially dangerous animal shall immediately notify the animal control
authority when such animal:
      1.   Is loose or unconfined; or
      2.   Has bitten or otherwise injured a human being or attacked another
animal.
   B.   At least forty eight (48) hours prior to a dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal being sold, given away, or moved to another location, the
owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner to
the animal control authority. The owner shall provide a copy of the declaration
to the new owner.
   C.   When an animal classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous dies,
the owner of said animal shall submit proof (vet records, etc.) to the Pierce
County auditor or the auditor's designee within ten (10) calendar days. (Ord.
2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3E-6: IMPOUNDMENT OF DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
Should the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal violate the
conditions or restrictions of owning or possessing a dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal such animal may be seized and impounded upon issuance of a
warrant.
   A.   The owner may prevent the animal's destruction by, within two (2)
business days, submitting a petition for the animal's immediate return.
      1.   The owner shall submit the written petition to the animal control
authority and the petition will be forwarded to the examiner.
      2.   Except as provided in this article, the petition shall proceed in
accordance with section
1-12-3 of this code, as an appeal of an administrative official's decision.
      3.   Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the owner at the address
listed on the notice of appeal.
      4.   At the public hearing, the burden shall be on the animal control
authority to prove, by a preponderance of evidence that the owner failed to
comply with the conditions or restrictions of owning and possessing a dangerous
or potentially dangerous animal.
      5.   The examiner shall decide if the animal should be returned to the
owner, subject to conditions that will bring the owner into compliance with
this article, or be humanely euthanized.
      6.   In cases where a declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous
animal has been issued, but an appeal of the declaration is pending, the
examiner shall decide if the animal should be returned to the owner or remain
in impound pending a decision on the appeal. If the examiner decides to release
the animal back to the owner, he may impose additional ownership conditions as
necessary to protect the public while the appeal is pending.
      7.   If the examiner allows the release of the animal, the owner shall
pay all redemption, boarding, and veterinary fees and costs prior to release,
except in cases where the animal control authority failed to meet its burden of
proof.
   B.   If a decision to euthanize the animal is rendered by the examiner, the
owner may prevent the animal's destruction by, within seven (7) calendar days:
      1.   Petitioning the district court for the animal's immediate return,
subject to court imposed conditions, and
      2.   Posting a bond or security in an amount sufficient to provide for
the animal's care for a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days from the seizure
date.
      3.   A copy of the petition shall be served upon the animal control
authority and the prosecuting attorney's office the same day that the petition
is filed in district court.
      4.   The burden shall be on the animal owner to prove that the decision
of the examiner was arbitrary and capricious.
      5.   If the district court finds that the examiner's decision was
arbitrary and capricious, the bond or security shall be refunded to the poster
and the animal shall be released to the owner. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3E-7: CRIMINAL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO CONTROL OR COMPLY WITH RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall
be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person found guilty of violating this article shall pay restitution
to the animal control authority for all expenses incurred in the enforcement of
this article, including boarding/shelter, food, and veterinary expenses.
   C.   Furthermore, any dangerous or potentially dangerous animal which
attacks a human being or animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court's
judgment, such dangerous or potentially dangerous animal represents a
continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or animals. (Ord. 2016-986,
8-17-2016)
6-3E-8: DUTY TO COMPLY:
It is the duty of every animal owner to keep his or her animals under proper
supervision and control at all times. Where an animal is declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous, the duty is upon the animal owner to comply with all
provisions of this article. When an animal owner breaches these duties, the
responsibility for any resulting injury or damage shall be on the animal owner
and not the city or Pierce County. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE F. RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
6-3F-1: Definitions
6-3F-2: Duty Of Owner, Custodian And Health Officer
6-3F-3: Quarantine; Notice To Owner
6-3F-4: Quarantine; Duties Of Owner
6-3F-5: Handling Of An Animal Bitten By Rabid Animal
6-3F-6: Publication Of Notice Of Outbreak Of Rabies
6-3F-7: Procedures
6-3F-8: Violation; Penalty
6-3F-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically indicated otherwise, the following definitions shall apply
throughout this article:
ANIMAL SHELTER: The facilities for the temporary containment of animals,
operated by the Tacoma-Pierce County Humane Society.
HEALTH OFFICER: The director of the Tacoma-Pierce County health department and/
or his authorized representatives.
QUARANTINE: The detention or isolation of an animal on account of suspected
exposure or affliction with rabies.
UNVACCINATED ANIMAL: An animal which has either never been vaccinated against
rabies or whose vaccination has expired according to the current "Compendium Of
Animal Rabies Vaccines" published by the National Association Of State Public
Health Veterinarians, Inc., and which has been bitten by a known rabid animal.
VACCINATED ANIMAL: An animal which has been vaccinated in accordance with the
"Compendium Of Animal Rabies Vaccines" published by the National Association Of
State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc., and which has been bitten by a known
rabid animal. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-2: DUTY OF OWNER, CUSTODIAN AND HEALTH OFFICER:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner and/or custodian of any dog or cat
within the county to quarantine any dog or cat within the county which he has
grounds to suspect of being infected with the disease of rabies or hydrophobia.
   B.   If the health officer:
      1.   Has grounds to suspect that any dog or cat running at large in the
county is infected with rabies or hydrophobia; and
      2.   Has notice that said dog or cat's owner or custodian cannot be
determined; and
      3.   Is able to locate and confine said animal;
the health officer shall quarantine the animal as provided in this article.
   C.   The biting of a human being by a dog or cat causing penetration of the
skin by the animal's teeth is specifically declared a ground for suspecting
that such animal is so infected. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-3: QUARANTINE; NOTICE TO OWNER:
The health officer may initiate a quarantine by delivering to the owner or
custodian of such suspected animal, by either certified mail or by hand
delivering to a responsible person present on the premises, a written notice of
such quarantine which shall prescribe the duration of the quarantine period;
provided, that the period of the quarantine shall not exceed ten (10) days,
unless it is determined that the animal is infected with rabies. The delivery
of the notice of quarantine to a responsible person present upon the premises
where such animal is kept shall be considered service of a notice upon the
owner or custodian. Any such animals so quarantined shall be impounded in a
shelter or a local veterinary clinic's kennel. At the discretion of the health
officer, the animal may be quarantined upon the premises of the owner or any
other person so long as the requirements of the quarantine are strictly
fulfilled. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-4: QUARANTINE; DUTIES OF OWNER:
   A.   During the period of any quarantine, the owner or custodian of a
quarantined animal shall not allow the animal to come in contact with any other
animal or person or permit such animal to run at large outside of the premises
where quarantined or upon the premises itself, unless the premises is enclosed
by a secure fence from which the animal cannot escape. When the fence encloses
the access to the premises, the animal must be restricted to leave free access
to those persons lawfully entering the premises.
   B.   The owner or custodian shall not remove or cause the animal to be
removed from the premises without the prior consent of the health officer.
These restrictions shall continue until the animal is released from quarantine.
If any animal is found running at large after the commencement of the
quarantine period or is removed from the premises where quarantined, it shall
be impounded and unless claimed and redeemed by its owner or custodian within
two (2) days after the expiration of the quarantine period, may be destroyed by
the proper authorities.
   C.   Upon redemption of a dog, cat or other animal released from quarantine,
the owner or custodian shall pay the same impound fee and board fee for any
dog, cat or other animal quarantined, as provided for in section
6-3A-8 of this chapter; provided, however, if the animal is surrendered by the
owner or custodian, the service fee shall be waived. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-5: HANDLING OF AN ANIMAL BITTEN BY RABID ANIMAL:
When an animal is known to have been bitten by a rabid animal, the following
procedures shall be followed:
   A.   Unvaccinated Animal: An unvaccinated animal shall be immediately
destroyed; provided, that upon the election of the owner, the animal may be
kept, at its owner's expense, in strict isolation in a kennel under veterinary
supervision for a minimum period of six (6) months following the bite.
   B.   Vaccinated Animal: A vaccinated animal shall be handled as follows:
      1.   The animal shall be immediately revaccinated with an approved rabies
vaccine and confined under the supervision of a veterinarian for a period of
thirty (30) days following revaccination; or
      2.   If the animal is not immediately revaccinated, it shall be confined
in strict isolation in a kennel for six (6) months under the supervision of a
veterinarian; or
      3.   The animal shall be destroyed if the owner or custodian does not
comply with subsection B1 or B2 of this section. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-6: PUBLICATION OF NOTICE OF OUTBREAK OF RABIES:
Upon any outbreak of rabies or when rabies has been diagnosed within the
county, and when in the judgment of the health officer there is imminent danger
of the spread of the disease, the health officer shall publish a notice to that
effect in the official newspaper of the county for three (3) successive days.
For a period of six (6) weeks following the final publication of the notice,
the owner or custodian of a dog shall keep the dog securely confined at all
times by leash or in a tight enclosure from which the dog cannot escape. During
said period any dog found running at large in the city shall be impounded and
unless claimed and redeemed by its owner within two (2) days following such
impounding, may be destroyed by the proper authorities. Any person charged with
the enforcement of this chapter may destroy any dog found running at large
within the city when, after reasonable effort, he is unable to impound the dog
or after reasonable investigation, is unable to locate the owner or custodian
thereof. The health officer shall have authority to extend the six (6) week
time period for additional six (6) week periods by notice given in the manner
provided above until, in his judgment, the imminent danger of the spread of the
disease is no longer present. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-7: PROCEDURES:
The health officer is authorized and directed to develop a quarantine program
for dogs, cats, and other household pets and otherwise to develop procedures
for the enforcement of this article. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3F-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be penalized by a fine. (Ord. 2016-
986, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE G. DOG CONTROL ZONES
SECTION:
6-3G-1: Dog Control Zone Established
6-3G-2: Dogs Off Premises
6-3G-3: Violation; Civil Infraction
6-3G-1: DOG CONTROL ZONE ESTABLISHED:
The city of Orting is hereby established as a dog control zone. (Ord. 2016-986,
8-17-2016)
6-3G-2: DOGS OFF PREMISES:
Within a dog control zone, any person owning or having charge, care, custody,
or control of any dog shall keep such dog exclusively upon his own premises,
except that the dog may be off the premises if it is under control of its owner
or a competent person by a leash. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3G-3: VIOLATION; CIVIL INFRACTION:
Any violation of this article is unlawful and shall constitute a class 3 civil
infraction pursuant to section
1-4-2 of this code. Such penalty is in addition to any other remedies or
penalties specifically provided in this title. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE H. BABY CHICKS, RABBITS, AND DUCKLINGS
SECTION:
6-3H-1: Artificial Coloring Unlawful
6-3H-2: Commercial Sale Not Affected
6-3H-3: Violation; Civil Infraction
6-3H-1: ARTIFICIAL COLORING UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for
sale, barter, give away, or display living baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings or
other fowl, which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart
to them an artificial color. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3H-2: COMMERCIAL SALE NOT AFFECTED:
This article shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of natural
baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings or other fowl in proper brooder facilities by
hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling them for commercial
purposes. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3H-3: VIOLATION; CIVIL INFRACTION:
Any violation of this article is unlawful and shall constitute a class 3 civil
infraction pursuant to section
1-4-2 of this code. For each act herein prohibited of a continuing nature, each
day shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE I. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-3I-1: Animal Defined
6-3I-2: Permitted Potentially Dangerous Wild Animals
6-3I-3: Duty To Advise Purchaser/Recipient
6-3I-4: Allowing Wild Or Vicious Animals To Run At Large Prohibited
6-3I-5: Exceptions For Circuses, Zoos, And Transportation Of Wild Animals
6-3I-6: Violations; Penalty; Continuing Offenses
6-3I-1: ANIMAL DEFINED:
For purposes of this article, "animal" means all reptiles, birds,
invertebrates, mammals, amphibians, and fishes. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3I-2: PERMITTED POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS:
Persons residing in the city of Orting may keep potentially dangerous wild
animals other than those defined in and prohibited by Revised Code Of
Washington 16.30.010 if they obtain a permit as defined in section
6-3E-4 of this chapter from the licensing officer or the licensing officer's
designated agent. Such permits may be granted only upon a showing by the
applicant that adequate safeguards have been instituted and will be maintained
which effectively control any dangerous or vicious propensities of such animal,
and eliminate any danger to individuals and property, and that the keeping and
maintaining of such animal will be in the best interests of the animal and will
in no way constitute a nuisance to the occupant of any surrounding property. It
shall be the duty of the animal owner to comply with this section and to
maintain proper supervision and control over his or her animals at all times.
When a potentially dangerous wild animal causes injury or damage, the
responsibility shall be upon the animal owner and not the city or Pierce
County. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3I-3: DUTY TO ADVISE PURCHASER/RECIPIENT:
Any person offering for sale or gift any animal in the city which falls within
section
6-3I-2 of this article shall have the duty to advise the purchaser or recipient
of the wild nature of the animal and its vicious, venomous/poisonous, or
dangerous propensities and of the fact that possession of such animal is
regulated or prohibited by the city or this code. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3I-4: ALLOWING WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS TO RUN AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
No person owning or having charge, custody, control, or possession of any
animal specified in section
6-3I-2 of this article shall permit or allow the same to run at large upon any
highway, street, lane, alley, court, or any other place, public or private, or
within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger any person
lawfully entering such premises. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3I-5: EXCEPTIONS FOR CIRCUSES, ZOOS, AND TRANSPORTATION OF WILD ANIMALS:
   A.   Section
6-3I-2 of this article shall not apply to any person who has custody of any
animal described in that section in connection with the operation of any zoo or
circus or any program of medical or scientific research, provided, such person
has taken adequate measures to safeguard persons and property.
   B.   Section
6-3I-2 of this article shall not apply to any person keeping, maintaining or
having in his/her possession or under his control any animal defined in that
section when such person is transporting such animal through the city,
provided, he/she has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public, and has
notified the police chief of his/her proposed route of transportation and of
the time that such trip is to take place. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3I-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY; CONTINUING OFFENSES:
A violation of this article is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
ARTICLE J. LIVESTOCK DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-3J-1: Stock Restricted Area
6-3J-2: Violations
6-3J-1: STOCK RESTRICTED AREA:
All areas of the city of Orting are restricted areas where livestock may not
run at large. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
6-3J-2: VIOLATIONS:
The owner or other person having control or custody of any livestock at large
is in violation of section
6-3C-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-986, 8-17-2016)
TITLE 7
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Ordinance Adopted
7-1-1: ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
   A.   Adopted By Reference: The “Washington model traffic ordinance” (“MTO”),
chapter 308-330 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of
the city as if set forth in full, including all future amendments or additions
thereto as provided in chapter 46.90 RCW, and consistent with RCW 35A.12.140.
One copy of said model traffic ordinance shall be on file in the office of the
city clerk.
   B.   Sections Not Adopted: The following sections of the MTO are not adopted
by reference and are expressly deleted: WAC 308-330-255, 500, 505, 510, 515,
520, 525, 530, 535, and 540, all of which pertain to the licensing of bicycles.
   C.   In addition to the Model Traffic Ordinance (MTO) and the statutes
adopted by reference therein, the following sections of the Revised Code of
Washington (RCW) are adopted by reference as currently enacted or as amended
hereafter:
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2021-1078, 9-29-2021; Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC NUISANCE, JUNK, AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Construction Of Chapter
7-2-2: Purpose And Intent
7-2-3: Definitions
7-2-4: Enforcement Authority
7-2-5: Declaration Of Nuisance
7-2-6: Impoundment Of Unauthorized Public Nuisance Vehicle; Public Property
7-2-7: Notice Of Violation And Abatement; Private Property
7-2-8: Notice Of Appeal; Private Property
7-2-9: Hearing; Private Property
7-2-10: Order Of The Hearing Officer; Private Property
7-2-11: Appeal Of The Decision Of The Hearing Officer; Private Property
7-2-12: Removal And Disposal; Costs; Liens; Private Property
7-2-13: Entry; Private Property
7-2-14: Monetary Penalties
7-2-15: Severability
7-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
   This chapter shall implement and be supplementary to the provisions of the
Washington model traffic ordinance, chapter 46.55 RCW, and shall be construed
in a manner consistent with the provisions thereof. The use of “public nuisance
vehicles” shall include junk vehicles, discarded vehicles, and inoperable
vehicles consistent with RCW 46.55.240.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   It is the purpose and intent of the city council that this chapter will
eliminate the effects of the accumulation of damaged or inoperable vehicles on
private property or public property, including rights of way, which create
blight; depress land values; generate health hazards; damage the environment,
including numerous species of fish and wildlife; provide breeding areas for
pests, such as rodents, hornets, and mosquitoes; attract illegal dumping of
other solid waste and hazardous substances; and lead to criminal behavior
detrimentally affecting the health and safety of communities and neighborhoods
in the city of Orting.
   B.   It is the intent of the city council to:
      1.   Declare that it is a public nuisance and unlawful to accumulate,
dismantle, park, place, or store public nuisance vehicles on public or private
property in the city of Orting;
      2.   Decrease the likelihood of criminal conduct associated with the
unlawful accumulation, dismantling, parking, placing, or storage of public
nuisance vehicles;
      3.   Reduce the inherent public health and safety problems associated
with the unlawful accumulation, dismantling, parking, placing, or storage of
public nuisance vehicles;
      4.   Minimize the likelihood of injury resulting from children playing on
or around public nuisance vehicles; and
      5.   Establish procedures for the removal and abatement of public
nuisance vehicles that have been unlawfully accumulated, dismantled, parked,
placed, or stored.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, and words, and their
derivatives, shall have specific meanings, as defined in this section. Terms,
phrases, and words used in the singular shall also apply to the plural; terms,
phrases, and words used in the plural shall also apply to the singular.
APPARENTLY INOPERABLE:
   A.   That the vehicle does not appear to comply with requirements for safe
and legal operation on public streets or highways with regard to licensing,
brakes, lights, tires, safety glass, or other safety equipment; or
   B.   A vehicle that has been determined by the Pierce County health
department to be unfit for use due to contamination from methamphetamine or
other substances, which are harmful to human health or the environment; or
   C.   Other circumstances or conditions that are evidence that the vehicle is
not currently operable, including, but not limited to, a vehicle having its
passenger compartment filled with trash or debris, vegetation growing inside,
around, or on the vehicle, or other evidence that the vehicle has not been
moved for an extended period of time.
DISCARDED VEHICLES: Deposit, keep or leave or to permit to be deposited, kept
or left in any place accessible to children, or in any place viewable from a
public street or alley, any abandoned, unused, nonrunning or discarded
automobile, truck or other such vehicle, or vehicle hulk or any part thereof.
For the purposes of this subsection “abandoned, unused, nonrunning” refers to a
vehicle which is not movable under its own power and which has been in a
stationary position for more than fourteen (14) days;
EXTENSIVELY DAMAGED: Such damage including, but not limited to, any of the
following: a broken window or windshield or missing wheels, tires, motor, or
transmission.
HEARING OFFICER: The City designated hearing examiner.
LANDOWNER: The owner of the property, as shown in the records of the Pierce
County assessor.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: For purposes of this chapter, any commissioned police
officer and any person holding a limited commission to enforce this chapter or
chapter 46.55 Revised Code Of Washington.
PUBLIC NUISANCE VEHICLE: A vehicle, or the parts of a vehicle, which meets
three (3) of the following criteria:
   A.   Is extensively damaged;
   B.   Is apparently inoperable;
   C.   Is three (3) years old or older; and
   D.   Has an approximate fair market value equal to the scrap value;
provided, that the following shall be exempt from the foregoing definition:
   A.   The vehicle, or parts thereof, is completely enclosed within a
building; or
   B.   The vehicle, or parts thereof, is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the legal business of a licensed
dismantler; motor vehicle wrecker; licensed vehicle dealer; junk, salvage, or
wrecking yard; provided, that the business is in compliance with the provisions
of this code and the property is fenced, as required by Revised Code Of
Washington 46.80.130.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Any official designated by the city administrator, or city
administrator’s designee, authorized to enforce this chapter, including, but
not limited to, officials of the police department, fire department, public
works department, finance department, or the code enforcement office charged
with the enforcement of a particular portion of this chapter.
VEHICLE: Shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, motorcycles,
trucks, buses, motorized recreational vehicles, campers, travel trailers, boat
trailers, utility trailers, or other similar devices capable of moving or being
moved on the public right of way, and shall also include parts of vehicles.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-4: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   As more specifically provided herein, the city administrator, or city
administrator’s designee, or any law enforcement officer may enforce this
chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-5: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   One or more public nuisance vehicles, or parts thereof, which have been
accumulated, dismantled, parked, placed, or stored on any property, constitute
a public nuisance which shall be abated pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and through the authority given the city under the Orting city charter
and the laws and constitution of the state of Washington. It is further
declared to be the duty of every landowner in Orting to maintain their property
in a lawful manner and exercise reasonable diligence to ensure that it remains
free of public nuisance vehicles, and every successive owner of the property or
premises shall assume the duty relative to preexisting conditions for which he
or she had notice, actual, or constructive. A public nuisance vehicle is
further declared to be an “unauthorized vehicle” within the meaning of Revised
Code Of Washington 46.55.010.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-6: IMPOUNDMENT OF UNAUTHORIZED PUBLIC NUISANCE VEHICLE; PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Any Public Official discovering an unauthorized public nuisance vehicle
left on public property or within a public right of way in violation of Revised
Code Of Washington 46.55.085, impound ordinance, shall attach to the vehicle a
readily visible notification sticker. The sticker shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The date and time the sticker was attached; and
      2.   The identity of the law enforcement officer; and
      3.   A statement that if the vehicle is not removed within twenty four
(24) hours from the time the sticker is attached, the vehicle may be taken into
custody in accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 46.55.085, towing
ordinance and stored at the owner's expense; and
      4.   If the vehicle is on public property, a statement that if the
vehicle is not redeemed, as provided in Revised Code Of Washington 46.55.120,
the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with state law; and
      5.   If the vehicle is within the right of way, a statement that if the
vehicle is not redeemed, as provided in Revised Code Of Washington 46.55.120,
the registered owner will have committed the traffic infraction of littering -
abandoned vehicle and the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with state
law; and
      6.   The address and telephone number where additional information may be
obtained.
   B.   If the vehicle has current Washington state registration plates, the
law Public Official shall check the records to learn the identity of the last
owner of record. The law enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to
contact the owner by telephone in order to give the owner the information on
the notification sticker.
   C.   If the vehicle is not removed within twenty four (24) hours from the
time the notification sticker is attached, the law Public Official may take
custody of the vehicle and provide for the vehicle’s removal to a place of
safety. A vehicle that does not pose a safety hazard may remain on the roadside
for more than twenty four 24) hours if the owner or operator is unable to
remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law the Public
Official and requests assistance.
   D.   For the purposes of this section, a place of safety includes the
business location of a registered tow truck operator.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-7: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND ABATEMENT; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   A Public Official is authorized to issue a notice of violation and
abatement upon reasonable belief that a condition prohibited by this chapter
exists.
   B.   The notice of violation and abatement shall be issued to the landowner,
as shown by the records of the Pierce County assessor, and to the last
registered owner of record of the vehicle, if that person can be determined.
   C.   The notice of violation and abatement shall be served by mailing a copy
of said notice to the landowner and to the last registered owner of record of
the vehicle, if that person can be determined, by first class or certified
mail.
   D.   The notice of violation and abatement shall contain substantially the
following information if it is reasonably obtainable:
      1.   The name and address of the person to whom the notice is issued;
      2.   The location of the subject property by address or other description
sufficient for identification of the subject property;
      3.   A description of the vehicle and its location and the reasons for
which the city deems it to be a public nuisance in violation of this chapter;
      4.   A description of the corrective action necessary to eliminate the
violation;
      5.   The date by which the corrective action must be completed;
      6.   A statement that if any of the persons to whom the notice of
violation and abatement is issued wish to appeal said notice, they may submit a
written notice of appeal to the city clerk to request a hearing before the
hearing officer.
      7.   A statement that if the persons to whom the notice of violation and
abatement is issued fail to submit a notice of appeal within ten (10) calendar
days of the date of the notice or fail to voluntarily abate the nuisance within
eighteen (18) calendar days of the date of the notice, the city will abate the
nuisance by removing and disposing of the vehicle and will assess all costs of
administration and removal against the landowner.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-8: NOTICE OF APPEAL; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Any appeal of this chapter shall follow the requirements of OMC 1-13-6
(K).
   B.   The recipient of a notice of violation and abatement may appeal:
      1.   Whether the public official appropriately identified the vehicle as
a public nuisance vehicle; or
      2.   Whether the landowner should not be held responsible for the
nuisance because the landowner did not consent to the presence of the public
nuisance vehicle and has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence; or
      3.   Whether the last registered owner of record of the vehicle should
not be held responsible for the nuisance because said owner, in the transfer of
ownership of the vehicle, has complied with Revised Code Of Washington
46.12.101; or
      4.   The notice of appeal shall specify the specific ground(s) of appeal.
   C.   If a request for a hearing is received, the public official shall mail
a notice giving the time, location, and date of the hearing on the question of
abatement and removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance, by
certified mail, with a five (5) day return receipt requested, to the owner of
the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last
registered and legal owner of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition
that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-9: HEARING; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   The appeal of a notice of violation and abatement shall be heard by the
hearing officer.
   B.   The hearing officer, will conduct the hearing required by this chapter
no more than eighteen (18) calendar days after the public official issues the
notice of hearing.
   C.   The hearing will address the grounds of appeal allowed in subsection
7-2-8B of this chapter, which were stated in the notice of appeal. If the
hearing officer, determines that multiple parties share responsibility for the
nuisance, the hearing officer, will allocate the assessment of costs of
administration, removal, and disposal among the responsible parties.
   D.   An appellant may appear in person at the hearing or present a written
statement to explain the grounds for appeal, which were stated in the notice of
appeal. The hearing officer must receive the written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing.
   E.   The city shall have the burden of proof to establish by a preponderance
of the evidence that a violation has occurred and that the required corrective
action is reasonable.
   F.   The hearing officer shall determine whether the city has established,
by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred and that the
required corrective action is reasonable and shall affirm, modify, or vacate
the public official's decisions regarding the alleged violation and/or the
required corrective action. (Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017)
7-2-10: ORDER OF THE HEARING OFFICER; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   If affirming the public official's notice of violation and abatement,
the hearing officer may assess administrative costs or costs related to the
abatement of the violator's vehicle. The hearing officer may also order the
refund of hearings fees to parties deemed not responsible for the violation.
   B.   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the hearing officer order shall
not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect the
cost from the landowner. (Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017)
7-2-11: APPEAL OF THE DECISION OF THE HEARING OFFICER; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The decision of the hearing officer shall be considered final, unless a written
notice of appeal is filed with a court of competent jurisdiction no later than
ten (10) days after issuance of the order of the hearing officer. (Ord. 2017-
1004, 2-8-2017)
7-2-12: REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL; COSTS; LIENS; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Commencing eighteen (18) calendar days after the date of the notice of
violation and abatement, if no appeal had been filed, or fifteen (15) calendar
days after the issuance of an order from the hearing officer resulting in
authority to remove the vehicle, the public official shall cause the removal
and disposal of the vehicle, or part thereof, as soon as practicable. The
public official will provide notice to the Washington state patrol and the
Washington state department of licensing that the vehicle has been processed in
accordance with the laws of the state of Washington. The vehicle shall only be
disposed of as scrap.
   B.   The city may file a lien for the cost of any abatement proceedings
under this chapter and all other related costs against the real property on
which the monetary penalty was imposed or any of the work of abatement was
performed, except no lien shall attach to the real property if the landowner
was found not responsible in the order issued by the hearing officer. The lien
shall run with the land, but shall be subordinate to all previously existing
special assessment liens imposed on the same property and shall be superior to
all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it shall be in
parity. Any claim of lien shall contain sufficient information regarding the
notice of violation and abatement, a description of the property to be charged
with the lien and the owner of record, and the total amount of the lien.
   C.   In addition to a lien, the city may pursue collection of the cost of
any abatement proceedings under this chapter by any other lawful means,
including referral to a collection agency. (Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017)
7-2-13: ENTRY; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Using any lawful means, the city may enter upon the subject property and may
remove or correct the condition that is subject to abatement. The city may seek
such judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or correction
of such condition. When a law enforcement officer or public official has
probable cause to believe that a nuisance created by public nuisance vehicles
exists on any property in violation of this chapter, he or she may request
permission to enter the premises to inspect for evidence thereof if the
landowner is present. If permissive entry cannot be obtained, the law
enforcement officer or prosecuting attorney may apply to the Orting municipal
court for a warrant to enter the property, notwithstanding the inability to
locate the landowner. (Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017)
7-2-14: MONETARY PENALTIES:
   Any person allowing a public nuisance in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to the maximum monetary penalty prescribed for said infraction as set
forth in OMC
1-13-6(F), in addition to costs of removal, storage and disposition of any
vehicle, vehicle hulk or part thereof. Each day that a public nuisance is
allowed to continue in violation of this chapter, shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-2-15: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or section of this chapter shall be held to be void or
unconstitutional, all other parts, provisions, and sections of this chapter not
expressly so held to be void or unconstitutional shall continue in full force
and effect. (Ord. 2017-1004, 2-8-2017)
CHAPTER 3
HORSES
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 4
BICYCLE HELMET USE AND REGULATION
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Bicycle Helmet Required For Minors; Parental Responsibility
7-4-3: Bicycle Helmet Required At Bicycle Races And Events
7-4-4: Bicycle Helmet Required With Bicycle Leasing Or Loan
7-4-5: Helmet Sales; Safety Standards
7-4-6: Penalties; Traffic Infraction
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise:
BICYCLE: Every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or
persons may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is sixteen
inches (16") or more in diameter, or three (3) wheels, any one of which is more
than twenty inches (20") in diameter (RCW 46.04.071). The term "bicycle" shall
include any attached trailers, sidecars, and/or other device being towed by a
bicycle.
GUARDIAN: A parent, legal guardian, an adult with custody, or temporary
guardian, who maintains responsibility, whether voluntary or otherwise, for the
safety and welfare of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
HELMET: A head covering that meets or exceeds safety standards adopted by
Standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the
Snell Foundation, or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for bicycle
helmet performance as the City may adopt.
PUBLIC AREA: Public streets, bicycle paths, parks, or any right of way or
publicly owned facility under the jurisdiction of the City. (Ord. 700, 9-11-
1997)
7-4-2: BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED FOR MINORS; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Any person under the age of seventeen (17), bicycling or riding as a
bicycle passenger on or in tow of a bicycle upon any public area in the City
shall wear an approved bicycle helmet designed for safety that meets or exceeds
the standards adopted in Section
7-4-1 of this Chapter and shall have either the neck or chin strap of the
helmet fastened securely while the bicycle is in motion.
   B.   No person shall transport another person under the age of seventeen
(17) on, or in tow of, a bicycle upon any public area in the jurisdiction of
the City, unless the passenger is wearing a helmet that meets the requirements
of this Chapter.
   C.   A parent or guardian is responsible for requiring that a child under
the age of seventeen (17) years wears an approved bicycle helmet while
bicycling or riding as a passenger on a bicycle in any public area in the City,
and has the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely. (Ord. 700, 9-
11-1997)
7-4-3: BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED AT BICYCLE RACES AND EVENTS:
   A.   Any person managing a bicycle race, an organized event involving
bicycling, or a bicycle tour in the public areas of the City shall require that
all participants under the age of seventeen (17) years on or in tow of bicycles
wear approved bicycle helmets.
   B.   The person managing any such event shall include the bicycle helmet
requirement in any promotional brochures and on registration materials. (Ord.
700, 9-11-1997)
7-4-4: BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED WITH BICYCLE LEASING OR LOAN:
   A.   Any person engaging in the business of renting or loaning (e.g., “a
test drive”) any bicycle for use in any public place in the City shall supply
the persons leasing or using bicycles with approved bicycle helmets as defined
herein, along with the bicycles, unless the bicycle riders and passengers
possess approved bicycle helmets of their own, and offer proof thereof, for use
with the bicycle.
   B.   The rental papers (contract, agreement, or receipt) must advise the
person renting the bicycle of the bicycle helmet requirements of this Chapter.
   C.   It is a defense to this Section for a person wearing an unapproved
bicycle helmet that the helmet was furnished in conjunction with their lease of
a bicycle by a person engaged in the business of renting bicycles, and that the
helmet was fastened securely while bicycling.
(Ord. 700, 9-11-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-4-5: HELMET SALES; SAFETY STANDARDS:
   A.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a bicycle helmet that does not
meet or exceed the safety standards set by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Standard Z-90.4, or the Snell Foundation, or such subsequent
nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the City may
adopt.
(Ord. 700, 9-11-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-4-6: PENALTIES; TRAFFIC INFRACTION:
   A.   Violations of this chapter is an infraction, subject to penalties in
accordance with OMC
1-4-2, unless otherwise provided herein.
   B.   The Court may waive, reduce, or suspend the penalty and clear the
notice of violation as a warning for an individual who has not received a
notice of violation of this Chapter within one year, and provides proof that he
or she has acquired an approved bicycle helmet at the time of appearance in
Court.
   C.   Each child under sixteen (16) not meeting the requirements of
subsection
7-4-2(C) of this Chapter shall represent a separate violation.
   D.   Each rental and each event under Section
7-4-4 of this Chapter shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 700, 9-11-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION AND COMMERCIAL TRUCKS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Incorporation Of State Requirements Jurisdiction
7-5-4: Imposing Additional Restrictions
7-5-5: Street Use Permit Authorized
7-5-6: Weight Limitation; Violation
7-5-7: Weight Limits Established
7-5-8: Commercial Combinations Prohibited
7-5-9: Exemptions From Weight Limitations
7-5-10: Truck Route Designated
7-5-11: Notice
7-5-12: Penalty
7-5-13: Parking Commercial, Construction, Oversize Vehicles Prohibited;
Penalties
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect and preserve the existing and
future streets within the city by establishing weight limits and regulating
construction and commercial truck through hauling on city streets. (Ord. 705,
1-8-1998)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Orting or the city
administrator’s designee.
CITY STREET USE PERMIT: That permit issued by the city administrator pursuant
to section
7-5-5 of this chapter authorizing certain through hauling that exceeds the load
limitation specified by this chapter.
CITY STREETS: Every public street, road, alley, and right of way or part
thereof maintained by the city, lying inside the limits of origin, and which
has not been designated as a state highway as that term is defined in Revised
Code of Washington 46.04.560 as now or hereafter amended.
COMMERCIAL COMBINATION: Any combination consisting of a truck and trailer,
tractor and trailer, combination of three (3) vehicles, or combination
consisting of a tractor and a stinger steered semitrailer combination. "Stinger
steered", as used in this section, means the combination which has the coupling
connecting the semitrailer located to the rear of the centerline of the rear
axle of the tractor.
CONSTRUCTION AND COMMERCIAL TRUCK: Any three (3) or greater axle vehicle, and
dual axle tandem, rear tire vehicle, or vehicle with a load rating greater than
twenty four thousand (24,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR).
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR): The weight specified by the manufacturer as
the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR specified on the
vehicle safety compliance certification label or the vehicle registration shall
be prima facie evidence of the GVWR.
LOCAL DELIVERY: Construction or commercial trucks delivering or receiving
goods, material, equipment, or services within the residential and commercial
area or along residential or collector streets. Local delivery includes, but is
not limited to, moving vans, retail delivery trucks, trucks delivering goods or
services within the commercial or business district, and private residential
services such as lawn care services, construction and landscaping material
delivery, and home improvement services.
THROUGH HAULING: Vehicle travel through an area without planned stops for the
delivery, receiving or exchange of goods, materials or equipment.
TRUCK ROUTE: Those streets within the city which are specifically designated as
"truck routes" by the city council.
WEIGHT LIMIT: The total vehicle weight limitation allowed on residential and
collector streets as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 865, 6-11-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-5-3: INCORPORATION OF STATE REQUIREMENTS JURISDICTION:
Revised Code of Washington 46.44.105, enforcement procedures - penalties -
rules, as now or hereafter amended, and all sections associated with these
sections are incorporated herein and shall be included in this chapter where
applicable, except 46.44.105(8). Jurisdiction shall be with the Orting
municipal court. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-4: IMPOSING ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from imposing additional weight
and/or travel restrictions through the state environmental policy act (SEPA)
review process or other city permits. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-5: STREET USE PERMIT AUTHORIZED:
The city administrator is authorized to issue a temporary permit for
nonexempted travel based on a finding that the public purpose is served by
doing so. There shall be a fee imposed to cover the cost of administering the
permit. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-6: WEIGHT LIMITATION; VIOLATION:
No construction and/or commercial truck shall be operated on city streets
except on state highways or designated truck routes as may be allowed in this
chapter. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-7: WEIGHT LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
The weight limit for all city streets within the city shall be twenty four
thousand (24,000) GVW. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-8: COMMERCIAL COMBINATIONS PROHIBITED:
Subject to the exemptions under section
7-5-9 of this chapter, no commercial combination shall be operated on any city
street. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
The following vehicle types and usage are exempt from the weight limits
established in this chapter:
   A.   Public transportation and school buses;
   B.   Public and private emergency vehicles;
   C.   "Local delivery" as defined in section
7-5-2 of this chapter;
   D.   Public utility companies and associated contracted services, provided
that the termination for the trip is within the city limits; and including, but
not limited to, contract services, waste collection, and public and private
mail service. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-10: TRUCK ROUTE DESIGNATED:
The following streets shall be designated truck routes:
   A.   SR 162, entire length between city limits.
   B.   Calistoga Street West, city limits to Washington Avenue North and
South.
   C.   Kansas Street SW, between Harman Way South and Calistoga Street West.
   D.   Washington Avenue South, between Bridge Street South and Hardsfeldt
Street SE. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-11: NOTICE:
   A.   The city administrator is hereby authorized and directed to erect signs
on said designated streets advising the public and users of said streets of
this chapter and its restrictions.
   B.   The city administrator shall cause to be published in one issue of a
newspaper of general circulation within the city the weight limits established
by this chapter, and now or hereafter amended, the notice required by Revised
Code of Washington 46.44.080 as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-12: PENALTY:
The general penalties provided for in Revised Code of Washington 46.44.105 as
now or hereafter amended (where applicable) shall apply to any violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 705, 1-8-1998)
7-5-13: PARKING COMMERCIAL, CONSTRUCTION, OVERSIZE VEHICLES PROHIBITED;
PENALTIES:
   A.   Parking Unlawful: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person to park, leave standing, keep, store or leave
unattended, any construction or commercial truck or trailer or any combination
thereof upon any improved or unimproved public right of way, street, alley,
avenue, thoroughfare, or other right of way, or any portion thereof, including
any parking or planting strip or vegetated BMPs, in any zone classification of
the city permitting residential uses. It is further provided that this section
shall not be construed to grant any person a right to park any vehicle in any
location in the city, and this section does not relieve the driver or operator
of any vehicle of the responsibility to park a vehicle in a safe manner and in
accordance with applicable traffic codes. The restrictions contained in this
section are in addition to any other restrictions that may be applicable under
this code or state law. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of
this section, and any other applicable provision of this code or state law, as
may be now or hereafter amended, the more restrictive provision shall control.
   B.   Utility Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the driver or owner of any construction or commercial truck or trailer owned or
operated by or for or operated under contract with a utility, whether privately
or publicly owned, when parked or otherwise being used in the construction,
operation, removal, or repair of the utility property or facilities upon, in,
over, under, or adjacent to such restricted streets, whether privately,
municipally, or publicly owned, when the vehicle is engaged in authorized work
on such restricted streets.
   C.   Loading And Unloading Exception: The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the driver or owner of any construction or commercial truck or
trailer when parked or otherwise being used for the purpose of making pick ups
or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or
structure located on such restricted streets, or to the driver or owner of any
construction or commercial truck used for the purpose of delivering materials
in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of
any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building
permit has been obtained, if such building permit is required.
   D.   Service Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the driver or owner of any construction or commercial truck or trailer when
parked or otherwise being used in connection with, and in aid of, the
performance of a service to or on a property, including, without limitation,
the pick up of solid waste and recyclable materials.
   E.   Emergency Vehicle Exception: The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the driver or owner of an emergency vehicle when parked or otherwise
being used for the purpose of responding to an emergency or otherwise in the
official performance of a public service.
   F.   Trailer Defined: For purposes of this section, “trailer” shall mean
every vehicle, including, without limitation, container chassis and cargo
containers whether attached or unattached to a container chassis, without
motive power designed for being drawn by or used in conjunction with a motor
vehicle constructed so that no appreciable part of its weight or load rests
upon or is carried by such motor vehicle, but does not include any vehicle that
is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling without a permanent foundation
and may be used without being connected to utilities.
   G.   Penalties: Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation. A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
parking infraction, the maximum fine for which shall be seventy-five dollars
($75.00) for each such violation.
   H.   Presumption: In any prosecution charging a violation of this section,
proof that the particular construction or commercial truck or trailer described
in the citation was in violation thereof, together with proof that the
defendant named in the citation was at the time of such violation, the
registered owner of such vehicle or trailer, shall constitute in evidence a
prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle or trailer
was the person who parked, left, left unattended, kept, stored, or placed such
vehicle or trailer at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred. The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the
officer finding such vehicle or trailer in violation of this section, shall
take its registration number, and may take any other information displayed on
the vehicle which may identify its user, and conspicuously affixes to such
vehicle a traffic citation.
(Ord. 865, 6-11-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 6
MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER USE AND REGULATION
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Operation Of Motorized Foot Scooters
7-6-3: Parental Responsibility
7-6-4: Violation; Enforcement Authority And Penalties
7-6-5: Seizure And Forfeiture
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
“Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD)” means (1) a self-
balancing device with two wheels not in tandem, designed to transport only one
person by an electric propulsion system with an average power of seven hundred
fifty watts (one horsepower) having a maximum speed on a paved level surface,
when powered solely by such a propulsion system while ridden by an operator
weighing one hundred seventy pounds, of less than twenty miles per hour or (2)
a self-balancing device with one wheel designed to transport only one person by
an electric propulsion system with an average power of two thousand watts (two
and two-thirds horsepower) having a maximum speed on a paved level surface,
when powered solely by such a propulsion system, of less than twenty miles per
hour.
“Motorized foot scooter” means a device with two or three wheels that has
handlebars, a floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, and is powered by
an internal combustion engine or electric motor that has a maximum speed of no
greater than twenty miles per hour on level ground.
(Ord. 794, 9-30-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-6-2: OPERATION OF MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS:
   A.   Motorized foot scooters and electric personal assistive mobility
devices (EPAMD) shall not be operated upon a public roadway by any person under
sixteen (16) years of age.
   B.   Any person operating or riding upon a motorized foot scooter or EPAMD
in any public area of Orting shall wear a helmet in compliance with the current
federal consumer products safety commission standards as adopted by the code of
federal regulations 16 CFR 1203.
   C.   Operators of motorized foot scooters or EPAMD’s shall adhere to all
rules of the road applicable to motorized vehicles.
   D.   Motorized foot scooters or EPAMD’s shall not be operated on city owned
property, city parks, upon designated walkways, pathways, sidewalks, or any
other place where motorized vehicles are expressly prohibited.
   E.   Motorized foot scooters or EPAMD’s shall not be operated in a negligent
manner upon any roadway or city right of way within the city of Orting. For the
purpose of this section, “to operate in a negligent manner” means to operate a
motorized foot scooter in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property or to obstruct, hinder or impede the lawful course of
travel of any motor vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of public
streets, sidewalks, alley, parking areas, trails or public parks, or stormwater
facilities, or that would damage public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parking
areas, trails, public parks, or stormwater facilities within the city of
Orting.
   F.   Motorized foot scooters or EPAMD’s shall be equipped so that the drive
motor is engaged through a switch, lever, or other mechanism that, when
released, will cause the drive motor to disengage or cease to function, and
shall have a muffling device in good working order and in constant operation to
prevent excessive or unusual noise.
(Ord. 794, 9-30-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-6-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having control or
custody of a minor child to allow said minor to operate a motorized foot
scooter or EPAMD in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 794, 9-30-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-25-2025)
7-6-4: VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND PENALTIES:
The city of Orting police department personnel shall be responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Upon determining a violation of this
chapter has occurred, law enforcement officers may issue a civil infraction in
the following amounts to any person, including a parent or guardian, violating
any of the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   First offense: Written warning.
   B.   Second offense: Fifty dollars ($50.00) plus seizure.
   C.   Third offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus seizure.
   D.   Subsequent offenses: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus seizure
and forfeiture.
   In addition to issuing an infraction, law enforcement officers may impound
the motorized foot scooter or EPAMD in accordance with section
7-6-5 of this chapter and may sell or destroy seized property upon order of the
court in accordance with section
7-6-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 794, 9-30-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-25-2025)
7-6-5: SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE:
All motorized foot scooters operated in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to seizure and forfeiture in the following manner:
   A.   First Seizure: Any person who has property seized for the first time
pursuant to this chapter may prevent forfeiture of said property by contacting
the police department within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of violation
and requesting the property be returned. All monetary penalties imposed must be
paid prior to release of seized property.
   B.   Second Seizure: Any person who has property seized a second time
pursuant to this chapter may cause the property to be impounded for a period of
no less than ten (10) days from the receipt of notice of violation. All
monetary penalties imposed must be paid prior to release of property.
   C.   Third And Future Seizures: Any person who has property seized a third
or more times pursuant to this chapter shall cause the property to be subject
to forfeiture. The chief of police, or designee, may apply to the court for an
order of forfeiture in accordance with Revised Code of Washington 35.20.250.
(Ord. 794, 9-30-2004)
CHAPTER 7
INATTENTIVE DRIVING
SECTION:
7-7-1: Inattentive Driving Prohibited
7-7-1: INATTENTIVE DRIVING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in an
inattentive manner over the roadways of the city. For the purpose of this
section, “inattentive” means the operation of a vehicle upon the public
roadways of the city in a lax or slack or careless or imprudent manner; or
without due regard for road, weather and traffic conditions then existing; or
who fails to give full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle; or
whoever fails to maintain a proper lookout while operating the vehicle; or
shall be so engaged or occupied as with an activity, other than driving the
vehicle, that interferes or reasonably appears to interfere with the safe
driving of such vehicle and the person’s ability to drive the vehicle safely.
   B.   The offense of operating a vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be
considered to be a lesser offense than, but included in the offense of
operating a vehicle in a negligent manner. (Ord. 876, 5-13-2009)
   C.   A violation of this chapter shall be a traffic infraction punishable by
a monetary penalty in accordance with section
1-4-2 of this code.
(Ord. 876, 5-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2016-988, 8-17-2016, eff. 9-1-2016; Ord. 2025-
1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 8
GOLF CART ZONE
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Zone Designated
7-8-3: Daylight Operation
7-8-4: [Reserved]
7-8-5: [Reserved]
7-8-6: No Driver's License Required
7-8-7: Violation/Penalty
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
“Golf Cart” means a gas-powered or electric-powered four-wheeled vehicle
originally designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for
sporting purposes and has a speed attainable in one mile of not more than
twenty miles per hour. A golf cart is not a nonhighway vehicle or off-road
vehicle as defined in RCW 46.04.365.
(Ord. 903, 2-9-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-8-2: ZONE DESIGNATED:
Under the authority granted to the city pursuant to section 4 of chapter 217 of
the laws of 2010, codified at Revised Code Of Washington 46.08.175, the city
hereby creates and designates a golf cart zone described as, those portions of
the streets and highways located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
city of Orting, as exist now or as may be hereinafter amended, having a speed
limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less. Said zone may be hereinafter
referred to and known as the "golf cart zone". (Ord. 903, 2-9-2011)
7-8-3: DAYLIGHT OPERATION:
No person may operate a golf cart upon the public streets or highways within
the golf cart zone any time from a half hour before sunset to a half hour after
sunrise. (Ord. 903, 2-9-2011)
7-8-4: [RESERVED]:
 
7-8-5: [RESERVED]:
 
7-8-6: NO DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
   All operators of golf carts must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and
must have either completed a driver education course or had previous experience
as a licensed driver. Thus, a valid driver’s license is not required, however,
no one with a suspended license can operate a golf cart on a city street.
(Ord. 903, 2-9-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-8-7: VIOLATION/PENALTY:
   Unless otherwise set out in applicable law or court rule, any person who
violates the provisions of section
7-8-2 or
7-8-3 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. A violation of this
chapter shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a monetary penalty in
accordance with section
1-4-2 of this code.
(Ord. 903, 2-9-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 9
PARKING RESTRICTED UPON DESIGNATED RESIDENTIAL STREETS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Purpose
7-9-2: Parking Restricted
7-9-3: Exceptions
7-9-4: Violation/Penalties
7-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting
from the use of streets within areas zoned for residential use for the parking
of vehicles by persons utilizing adjacent or nearby open space for recreational
activities; to protect such areas from polluted air, excessive noise, litter
and refuse caused by such vehicles and operators; to protect the residents of
such areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their homes; to
preserve the character of such areas as residential neighborhoods; to promote
efficiency in the maintenance of residential streets in a clean and safe
condition; to preserve the value of property in such areas; to promote safe
unimpeded traffic circulation; and to preserve the safety of children,
pedestrians and traffic, as well as the peace, good order, comfort, convenience
and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 879, 11-12-2009)
7-9-2: PARKING RESTRICTED:
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall stop, stand or park a motor
vehicle, whether attended or unattended upon any of the following designated
streets on and from September 1 through November 30:
   Bridge Street Southeast from Varner Avenue Southeast to the east end of
Bridge Street Southeast
   Daffodil Avenue NE
   Mill Avenue Southeast between Hardefeldt Street Southeast and Train Street
Southeast
   River Avenue Northeast between Calistoga Street East and the Carbon River
   Washington Avenue Southeast between Hardefeldt Street Southeast and Brown
Way Southeast
(Ord. 879, 11-12-2009; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-9-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The parking restrictions set forth in section
7-9-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any person who affirmatively
establishes that the vehicle was stopped, standing or parked:
   A.   While loading or unloading passengers, freight, materials or
merchandise between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M.;
   B.   While effecting emergency repairs when a vehicle is so disabled as to
render it unsafe to proceed further;
   C.   While engaged in construction, maintenance or repair of public streets
or utilities;
   D.   While serving as an emergency vehicle; or
   E.   Within three hundred feet (300') of property at which the registered
owner of the vehicle resides or at which the driver is an invited guest. (Ord.
879, 11-12-2009)
7-9-4: VIOLATION/PENALTIES:
   A violation of this chapter shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a
monetary penalty in accordance with section
1-4-2 of this code. The provisions of section 308-330-720, 730 and 740 of the
model traffic ordinance of the city, as now or hereinafter amended, shall apply
to any such violation.
(Ord. 879, 11-12-2009; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 10
TRAFFIC SCHOOL
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 11
SEASONAL PARKING PERMITS
SECTION:
7-11-1: Definitions
7-11-2: Seasonal Parking Restricted
7-11-3: Display
7-11-4: Fees
7-11-5: Term
7-11-6: Registration
7-11-7: Enforcement; Violation; Revocation; Impound; Penalty
7-11-8: Model Traffic Ordinance; Incorporation
7-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply throughout this chapter:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading of property or passengers.
SEASONAL PARKING: Parking that is subject to permit requirements during a
specified time period.
SEASONAL PARKING AREA: That area upon public property that has been posted by
the city with official signs designating such area for seasonal parking.
SEASONAL PARKING PERIOD: That period of time commencing at one minute past
twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on September 1 and ending at eleven fifty nine
o'clock (11:59) P.M. on November 30 of each year, or such other time period as
may be designated on official signage posted by the city upon the seasonal
parking area.
SEASONAL PARKING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Orting for seasonal
parking in accordance with this chapter and any applicable procedures that may
be adopted by the mayor or his/her designee. (Ord. 906, 4-27-2011)
7-11-2: SEASONAL PARKING RESTRICTED:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or an official traffic control
device, or when by a public employee in furtherance of an official governmental
purpose, no person shall park a vehicle in a seasonal parking area during a
seasonal parking period unless such vehicle displays a valid seasonal parking
permit in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 906, 4-27-2011)
7-11-3: DISPLAY:
The seasonal parking permit shall be displayed near the lower left corner and
on the outside of the windshield of the vehicle when the vehicle is parked in a
seasonal parking area during a seasonal parking period. (Ord. 906, 4-27-2011)
7-11-4: FEES:
Fees for the seasonal parking permit shall be established by the city council
by resolution or by ordinance. All fees so established shall be paid at the
time of application for a seasonal parking permit and shall not be prorated.
The fee for a replacement seasonal parking permit shall be the same as the fee
for a seasonal parking permit. (Ord. 906, 4-27-2011)
7-11-5: TERM:
Seasonal parking permits shall be issued for one seasonal parking period only
and shall be valid only for the seasonal parking period designated on the
seasonal parking permit. Seasonal parking permits may only be issued no sooner
than nine (9) months in advance of the date of commencement of the seasonal
parking period for which the permit is issued. Issuance of a seasonal parking
permit does not operate to reserve or guarantee availability of parking upon a
seasonal parking area. Parking will be available on a first come, first served
basis. (Ord. 906, 4-27-2011)
7-11-6: REGISTRATION:
A seasonal parking permit is valid only for display upon those vehicles
registered at the time of application for the seasonal parking permit. (Ord.
906, 4-27-2011)
7-11-7: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION; REVOCATION; IMPOUND; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person or persons designated by the city administrator, and all
police officers including code enforcement officers, shall be and are
designated and specially commissioned as an enforcement officer with authority
to enforce all provisions of this chapter, to issue parking infraction notices
for violations of this chapter, and to authorize the impound of vehicles found
to be in violation of this chapter, but shall have no arrest authority.
   B.   Failure to perform any act required or the performance of any act
prohibited by this chapter is designated as a parking infraction and shall not
constitute a civil infraction or a criminal offense, unless otherwise indicated
in this chapter.
   C.   City police officers and all enforcement officers specially
commissioned herein have the authority to issue a notice of parking infraction.
   D.   A seasonal parking permit may be revoked by the city administrator, or
his/her designee upon a finding that the applicant provided false or misleading
information in the application for a seasonal parking permit or upon a finding
that the operator or passenger of a vehicle parking in a seasonal parking area
violated the posted rules for use of the seasonal parking area.
   E.   Any vehicle found in violation of this chapter is subject to impound at
the expense of the owner.
   F.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
have committed a parking infraction in violation of the model traffic ordinance
of the city, and shall be subject to a maximum penalty of forty two dollars
($42.00) plus statutory assessments.
(Ord. 906, 4-27-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-11-8: MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE; INCORPORATION:
   The provisions of this chapter are incorporated into and made a part of the
model traffic traffic ordinance, and the specific provisions of this chapter as
incorporated therein are, for purposes of Revised Code Of Washington 46.61.005
and Washington administrative code 308-330-400, intended to apply to seasonal
parking areas. By way of example and not limitation, the provisions of
Washington administrative code sections 308-330-720, 730 and 740 shall apply to
a notice of infraction issued pursuant to this chapter.
   A.   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested or cited for a violation
of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.345, 46.61.502, or 46.61.504, the
vehicle is subject to summary impoundment, pursuant to the terms and conditions
of this chapter or state agency rule at the direction of a police officer. Upon
an arrest for a suspected violation of either RCW 9.68A.100 or 9A.88.110 where
a motor vehicle was used in the commission of that crime, if the person has
previously been convicted under either statute, the police officer will impound
the vehicle.
   B.   When an arrest is made for a violation of RCW 46.20.342, if the vehicle
is a commercial vehicle and the driver of the vehicle is not the owner, before
the summary impoundment directed under subsection (A) of this section the
police officer shall attempt in a reasonable and timely manner to contact the
owner of the vehicle, and may release the vehicle to the owner if the owner is
reasonably available, as long as the owner was not in the vehicle at the time
of the stop and arrest and the owner has not received a prior release under
this subsection or RCW 46.55.120(a)(ii).
   C.   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested or cited for a violation
of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.30.345, 46.61.502, 46.61.504, or 46.20.342(1)
(c) and the driver has not been convicted one or more times of a violation of
RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five years, then the
vehicle may be released as soon as all the requirements of OMC 7-13-5 are
satisfied.
   D.   If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a
violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s
records show that the driver has been convicted one time of a violation of RCW
46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle
may be impounded for 15 days.
   E.   If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a
violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s
records show that the driver has been convicted two or more times of a
violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five
years, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.
   F.   If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a
violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of
Licensing’s records show that the driver has not been convicted of a violation
of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance within the past five
years, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.
   G.   If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a
violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of
Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted one time of a
violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance once within
the past five years, the vehicle may be impounded for 60 days.
   H.   If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a
violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of
Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted of a violation of
RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance two or more times within
the past five years, the vehicle may be impounded for 90 days.
   I.   If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a
suspended repeat violation of either RCW 9.68A.100 or 9A.88.110, the vehicle
may be impounded for up to 30 days.
(Ord. 906, 4-27-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 12
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERAS
SECTION:
7-12-1: Purpose
7-12-2: Definitions
7-12-3: Authorized Use
7-12-4: Notice Of Infraction
7-12-5: Prima Facie Presumption
7-12-6: Processing Of Infractions
7-12-7: Nonexclusive Enforcement
7-12-8: Penalties
7-12-9: Compensation For Services
7-12-10: Annual Reporting
7-12-1:   PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an automated traffic safety camera
program that will enhance roadway safety and create a safer community. The City
of Orting recognizes automated traffic safety camera enforcement of speed
limits encourages slower speeds and reduces crashes which leads to safer
streets for citizens. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-2:   DEFINITIONS:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERA: A device that uses a sensor installed to work
in conjunction with a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to
automatically record one or more sequence photographs, microphotographs, or
electronic images of the front or rear of a motor vehicle at the time the
vehicle exceeds a speed limit as detected by a speed measuring device.
SCHOOL: Includes a school as defined by RCW 28A.150.010 or 28A.150.020, and
includes a private school approved under RCW 28A.195.010.
SCHOOL SPEED ZONE: Has the same meaning as described in RCW 46.61.440 (1) and
(2), and includes areas designated as "playground zones."
SCHOOL WALK ZONE: A roadway identified under RCW 28A.160.160 or roadways within
a one-mile radius of a school that students use to travel to school by foot,
bicycle, or other means of active transportation. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-3:   AUTHORIZED USE:
   A.   The use of automated traffic safety cameras is subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   Consistent with the authority granted in chapter 46.63 RCW, City law
enforcement officers have the authority to issue a notice of traffic
infraction. Trained and authorized civilian employees of law enforcement, and
public works or transportation department performing under the supervision of a
qualified traffic engineer, and as designated by the City shall also have
authority to issue notices of infraction under this chapter.
      2.   Use of automated traffic safety cameras is restricted to those
school zones that are located within the following areas:
         a.   Washington Avenue North between Leber Street NE and Williams Blvd
NE.
         b.   Whitehawk Blvd NW between Washington Avenue North and Orting
Avenue NW.
      3.   Automated traffic safety cameras may only take pictures of the
vehicle and vehicle license plate and only while an infraction is occurring.
Pictures taken by automated traffic safety cameras may not reveal the face of
the driver or of the passengers in the vehicle. Cameras will be installed to
minimize the impact of camera flash on drivers.
      4.   Each location where an automated traffic safety camera is used shall
be clearly marked by placing signs, at least thirty (30) days prior to
activation of the camera, in a manner that clearly indicates to a driver that
the driver is entering an area where violations are enforced by an automated
traffic safety camera.
      5.   Prior to placing a new camera, or relocating any existing camera,
the City Council shall prepare an analysis of the location regarding equity
considerations, including the impact of the camera placement on livability,
accessibility, economics, education and environmental health. The analysis must
also show a demonstrated need for traffic cameras based on one or more of the
following in the vicinity of the road camera:
         a.   Travel by vulnerable road users;
         b.   Evidence of vehicles speeding;
         c.   Rates of collisions;
         d.   Reports showing near collisions; and
         e.   Anticipated or actual ineffectiveness or infeasibility of other
mitigation measures.
      6.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs,
microphotographs, and electronic images prepared under this chapter, and as
provided in RCW 46.63.220, are not open to the public and may not be used in a
court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates
to a violation under this section. No photograph, microphotograph, or
electronic image may be used for any purpose other than enforcement of
violations under this section nor retained longer than necessary to enforce
this section.
      7.   Automated traffic safety cameras may not be used on an on-ramp to a
limited access facility as defined in RCW 47.52.010.
      8.   Automated traffic safety cameras may be used to enforce speed limits
on state highways that are also classified as city streets under chapter 47.24
RCW. The City shall notify the department of transportation prior to
installation of any automated traffic safety camera in such locations. (Ord.
2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-4:   NOTICE OF INFRACTION:
   A.   A notice of infraction based on evidence detected through the use of an
automated traffic safety camera shall be mailed to the registered owner of the
vehicle within fourteen (14) days of the violation, or to the renter of a
vehicle within fourteen (14) days of establishing the renter's name and address
under subsection C of this section. The notice of infraction must include with
it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon the inspection of
photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images produced by an automated
traffic safety camera, citing the infraction and stating the facts supporting
the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence
of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a
violation under this chapter. The photographs, microphotographs, or electronic
images evidencing the violation must be available for inspection and admission
into evidence in a proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the infraction. A
person receiving a notice of infraction based on evidence detected by an
automated traffic safety camera may respond to the notice of infraction by
mail.
   B.   The registered owner of a vehicle is responsible for an infraction
detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera unless the
registered owner overcomes the presumption stated in this chapter, or, in the
case of a rental car business, satisfies the conditions under subsection C of
this section. If appropriate under the circumstances, a renter identified under
subsection C1 of this section is responsible for such an infraction.
   C.   If the registered owner of a vehicle responsible for a notice of
infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera is a
rental car business, the Chief of Police or his designee shall, before such a
notice of infraction is issued, provide a written notice to the rental car
business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business
if the rental car business does not, within eighteen (18) days of receiving the
written notice, provide to the City of Orting Police Department by return mail:
      1.   A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of
the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or
      2.   A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who
was driving or renting the vehicle at the time of the infraction occurred
because the vehicle was stolen at the time of the infraction. A statement
provided under this subsection must be accompanied by a copy of a filed police
report regarding the vehicle theft; or
      3.   In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business
may pay the applicable penalty.
      Timely mailing of the above statements to the City of Orting Police
Department relieves a rental car business of any liability under this chapter
for the notice of infraction.
   D.   Notices of infraction for infractions detected through an automated
traffic safety camera shall not be issued to the registered vehicle owner of a
marked fire engine equipped with emergency lights and siren or to an ambulance
licensed by the department of health and equipped with emergency lights and
siren. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-5:   PRIMA FACIE PRESUMPTION:
   A.   In a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through
the use of an automated traffic safety camera under this chapter, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the notice of infraction was involved in a
violation of the speed limit in a public park zone (or other location where
automated traffic safety cameras are authorized), together with proof that the
person named in the notice of infraction was at the time of the violation the
registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control
of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation
occurred.
   B.   This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states
under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the
court, that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care,
custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner. (Ord. 2024-
1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-6:   PROCESSING OF INFRACTIONS:
Infractions detected through the use of automated traffic safety cameras are
not part of the registered owner's driving record and shall be processed in the
same manner as parking infractions. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-7:   NONEXCLUSIVE ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter prohibits a City of Orting law enforcement officer from
issuing a notice of traffic infraction to a person in control of a vehicle at
the time a violation occurs under RCW 46.63.030(1) as now in effect or
hereinafter amended. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
7-12-8:   PENALTIES:
   A.   The maximum penalty for infractions detected through the use of an
automated traffic safety camera shall be one hundred forty five dollars
($145.00). This amount may be doubled for school speed zone infractions as per
RCW 36.63.220(16).
   B.   Revenue from fines assessed under authority of this chapter shall be
used solely for:
      1.   Subject to the requirements of RCW 46.63.220, traffic safety
activities related to construction and preservation projects and maintenance
and operations purposes including, but not limited to, projects designed to
implement the complete streets approach as defined in RCW 47.04.010, changes in
physical infrastructure to reduce speeds through road design, and changes to
improve safety for active transportation users, including improvements to
access and safety for road users with mobility, sight, or other disabilities,
which activities will be informed by the department of health's environmental
health disparities map; and
      2.   The cost to administer, install, operate, and maintain the automated
traffic safety cameras, including the cost of processing infractions.
   C.   Beginning four (4) years after an automated traffic safety camera
authorized under this chapter is initially placed and in use after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, twenty-five percent
(25%) of the noninterest money received for infractions issued under this
chapter in excess of the cost to administer, install, operate, and maintain the
automated traffic safety cameras, including the cost of processing infractions,
shall be deposited into the Cooper Jones active transportation safety account
created in RCW 46.68.480.
   D.   Registered owners of vehicles who receive notices of infraction under
this chapter and who are recipients of public assistance under Title 74 RCW or
participants in the Washington women, infants, and children program, upon
request to the City, shall receive reduced penalty amounts of fifty percent
(50%) of what would otherwise be assessed for a first automated traffic safety
camera violation and for subsequent automated traffic safety camera violations
issued within twenty-one (21) days of issuance of the first automated traffic
safety camera violation. The City shall provide information to registered
owners of vehicles on their eligibility and the opportunity to apply for a
reduction in penalty amounts through the mail or internet. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-
26-2024)
7-12-9:   COMPENSATION FOR SERVICES:
   A.   The compensation paid to the vendor of the automated traffic safety
camera equipment shall be based only upon the value of the equipment and
services provided or rendered in support of the automated traffic safety camera
equipment. Compensation paid to the vendor shall not be based upon any portion
of the fines or civil penalties imposed or the revenue generated by infractions
detected through the use of the automated traffic safety cameras.
   B.   Unless otherwise included in the vendor contract, the City will perform
a performance audit of the vendor of the equipment every three (3) years to
ensure images produced from the automated traffic safety cameras are sufficient
for evidentiary purposes as described in this chapter. (Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-
2024)
7-12-10:   ANNUAL REPORTING:
   A.   The City shall post an annual report on the City's website which
includes the number of traffic crashes that occurred at each automated traffic
safety camera location, as well as the number of notices of infraction issued
for each camera.
   B.   Beginning January 1, 2026, the annual report shall include the
percentage of revenues received from fines issued from automated traffic safety
camera infractions that were used to pay for the costs of the automated traffic
safety camera program and shall describe the uses of revenues that exceeded the
costs of operation and administration of the automated traffic safety camera
program implemented under this chapter by the City.
(Ord. 2024-1138, 11-26-2024)
CHAPTER 13
IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-13-1: Reserved
7-13-2: Reserved
7-13-3: Reserved
7-13-4: Authority To Impound - Additional Situations
7-13-5: Redemption Of Impounded Vehicles
7-13-6: Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure
7-13-1: RESERVED:
7-13-2: RESERVED:
7-13-3: RESERVED:
7-13-4: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND - ADDITIONAL SITUATIONS:
   In addition to the situations set forth in RCW 9A.88.140 and 46.55.113, a
vehicle may be impounded at the discretion of the law enforcement officer, with
or without citations and without giving prior notice to its owner, when the
vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked in violation of WAC 308-330-439, 308-
330-442, 308-330-445, 308-330-457, or OMC 7-5 or OMC 7-12.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-13-5: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
Vehicles impounded by the city shall be redeemed only under the following
circumstances:
   A.   Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner,
or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces
proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an
impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to OMC
7-13-3 must, prior to redemption, establish that they have a valid driver’s
license, are in compliance with RCW 46.30.020 and have paid a $100.00
administrative fee to the Orting municipal court. A vehicle impounded pursuant
to OMC
7-13-3 D. through I. can be released only pursuant to a written order from the
court.
   B.   Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the city shall pay the
towing contractor for costs of impoundment removal, towing and storage prior to
redeeming such vehicle, except as provided for by subsection C. of this
section. Such towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW
46.55.120(1) (b) as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded
pursuant to OMC
7-13-3 and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it
may not be released to any person until all penalties, fines or forfeitures
owed by the registered owner have been satisfied.
   C.   Either the City of Orting or the Orting municipal court is authorized
to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to OMC
7-13-3 D. through H. prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment.
However, the agency may only order early release upon the basis of the
following:
      1.   A petition of the spouse of the driver based on economic or personal
hardship to such spouse resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle and
after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from release
of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history,
driving record, license is authorized; or
      2.   The owner of the vehicle was not the driver, the owner did not know
that the driver’s license was suspended or revoked, and the owner has not
received a prior release under this subsection or OMC
7-13-3 B.
      Other than for the reasons for release set forth in subsections C.1. and
C.2. of this subsection, the agency shall deny release in all other
circumstances without discretion. The person redeeming the vehicle still must
satisfy the requirements of subsections A. and B. of this section. The court
may waive any or all of the administrative fee.
   D.   Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded as a result of a
parking or traffic citation has a right to a municipal court hearing to contest
the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing, and storage
charges if such request for hearing is in writing, in a form approved by the
Orting municipal court and signed by such person, and is received by the Orting
municipal court within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of
the date the notice was given to such person by the registered tow truck
operator pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2) (a). Such hearing shall be provided as
follows:
      1.   If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including
expiration of any period of impoundment under OMC
7-13-3, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released
immediately and a hearing as provided in OMC
7-13-6 shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing.
      2.   If not all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including
expiration of any period of impoundment under OMC
7-13-3, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released
until after the hearing provided pursuant to OMC
7-13-6, which shall be held within five business days (excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays) of the written request to the court for hearing.
      3.   Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing
within the time specified in subsection (4) of this section may petition the
Orting municipal court for an extension of time to file a request for hearing.
Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to
the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For purposes of
this section, good cause shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control
of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a
timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person
receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this
chapter.
      4.   If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no
extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is
waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to
be proper, and the city shall not be liable for removal, towing, and storage
charges arising from the impoundment.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-13-6: POST-IMPOUNDMENT HEARING PROCEDURE:
   Hearings requested pursuant to OMC
7-13-5 shall be held in the Orting municipal court, which court shall determine
whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated removal, towing,
and/or storage fees were proper.
   A.   At the hearing, an abstract of the driver’s driving record is
admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence
of the status of the driver’s license, permit, or privilege to drive and that
the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a
certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without
further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of
the registered owner of the vehicle.
   B.   If the impoundment is found to be proper, the court shall enter an
order so stating. In the event that the cost of impoundment, removal, towing,
and storage have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of OMC
7-13-4 A. and B. have not been satisfied or any period of impoundment under OMC
7-13-3 has not expired, the court’s order shall also provide that the impounded
vehicle shall be released only after payment to the city of any fines imposed
on any underlying traffic or parking infraction and satisfaction of any other
applicable requirements of OMC
7-13-5 A. and B.
   C.   If the impoundment is found to be improper, the court shall enter an
order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs
of impoundment have already been paid, the court shall enter judgment against
the city and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in
the amount of the costs of impoundment.
   D.   In the event that the court finds that the impound was proper, but that
the removal, towing, storage, fees charged for the impoundment were improper,
the court shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of
impoundment have been paid, the court shall enter a judgment against the city
and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount
of the overpayment.
   E.   No determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall
have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and
such determination shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a
subsequent criminal prosecution.
   F.   As to any impoundment arising from an alleged violation of RCW
46.20.342 or 46.20.420, if it is determined to be improper, then the law
enforcement officer directing the impoundment and the government employing the
officer are not liable for damages if the officer relied in good faith and
without gross negligence on the records of the department in ascertaining that
the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
CHAPTER 14
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
7-14-1: Speed Limits - State Law Application
7-14-2: Speed Limit Decreases And Increases
7-14-3: Speed Limit In School Zones
7-14-1: SPEED LIMITS- STATE LAW APPLICATION:
   A.   Under normal operating conditions, the speed limit for all streets and
roads within the city is 25 miles per hour unless otherwise signed.
   B.   The speed limit on State Route 162 from milepost 10.31 to milepost
10.34 shall be 30 miles per hour.
   C.   The speed limit on State Route 162 from milepost 8.05 to milepost 9.13
shall be 35 miles per hour.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-14-2: SPEED LIMIT DECREASES AND INCREASES:
   A.   Whenever the city public works director or designee determines on the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum speed limit
permitted by state law upon the public streets, roads or other rights-of-way of
the city is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions
found to exist upon a public street, road or other right-of-way, the city
public works director or designee may determine and declare a reasonable and
safe maximum speed limit between 20 and 50 miles per hour.
   B.   Any decreased or increased speed limit as authorized by subsection A of
this section shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof
are erected. Such maximum speed limit may be declared to be effective at all
times or at such times as are indicated upon such signs; and differing limits
may be established for different times of the day, different types of vehicles,
varying weather conditions, and other factors bearing on safe speeds, which
shall be effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
7-14-3: SPEED LIMIT IN SCHOOL ZONES:
   A.   Notwithstanding the speed limit that would otherwise apply on a city
street, road or other right-of-way, the speed limit in posted school zones is
20 miles per hour when children are present. Signage shall be installed at
appropriate locations, as determined by the city public works director or
designee stating “School Zone - 20 mph when children are present, per OMC 7-14-
3" or words to that effect. For the purposes hereof, “when children are
present” means:
      1.   Children are occupying or walking within a marked or unmarked
crosswalk, as defined by RCW 47.04.010 or successor statute, in a posted school
zone;
      2.   Children are occupying or waiting at the curb or on the shoulder of
the roadway in a posted school zone and are about to cross the roadway by way
of the marked or unmarked crosswalk; or
      3.   Children are present on or walking along the roadway, either on the
adjacent sidewalk or, in the absence of sidewalks, on the shoulder within the
posted school speed limit zone which extends up to 300 feet in either direction
from a marked school crosswalk.
   B.   Notwithstanding the speed limit that would otherwise apply on a city
street, road or other right-of-way, the speed limit in posted school zones is
20 miles per hour when lights have been installed in conjunction with any
school zone sign and such lights are flashing. Flashing lights shall be
installed at appropriate locations, as determined by the city public works
director or designee stating “School Zone - 20 mph when lights flashing, per
OMC 714-3" or words to that effect in conformance with the following
requirements:
      1.   The flashing lights shall be located within 300 feet in either
direction from school boundaries as defined by WAC 468-95-330 except the
flashing lights may be located more than 300 feet from said school boundaries
if the city engineer deems appropriate based on a traffic engineering
assessment.
      2.   In order to enhance public safety around schools, the city public
works director shall periodically coordinate with the school principal and/or
representatives of the school district to evaluate the appropriate times when
flashing lights adjacent to various schools should be flashing.
   C.   The city public works director or designee may utilize the combined
signage and flashing light provisions of subsections A and B of this section
where deemed appropriate.
(Ord. 2025-1152, 9-24-2025)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Survey Point
8-1-1: SURVEY POINT:
   A.   Initial Point Of Survey Designated: A stone monument with a cross cut
in the top thereof, now lying buried at the intersection of the center line of
Bridge Street with the north line of Washington Avenue be and the same is the
initial point of survey of the official surveys of the City. (1973 Code §
14.28.010)
   B.   Official Benchmark Designated: The official benchmark for the grades,
sewers and drainage of the City is the stone hereinbefore designated as the
initial point and the elevation of the same shall be one hundred (100). (1973
Code § 14.28.020)
   C.   Use Of Initial Point: All grades, drains, sewers or any official work
of the City requiring levels shall be determined therefrom and all surveys
shall in like manner have their starting point from the initial point. (1973
Code § 14.28.030)
   D.   Protection Of Initial Point And Benchmark: The initial point and
benchmark shall forever be fixed and shall be protected from removal or
destruction by the City Council. (1973 Code § 14.28.040)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
8-2-1: Compliance With Construction Specifications
8-2-2: New Residences, Conversions To Commercial Use In Mixed Use-Town Center
Zone And Improved Property
8-2-3: Grade Establishment; Permit
8-2-4: Sidewalk Construction Requirements
8-2-5: Replacement Or Repair Of Existing Sidewalks
8-2-6: Widths In Relation To Street Rights Of Way
8-2-7: Notification To Repair Sidewalk; Action On Failure To Repair
8-2-8: Removal And Replacement Of Improperly Constructed Sidewalk; Lien; Appeal
8-2-9: Violation; Penalty
8-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city shall be according to plans and
specifications as provided in this chapter. (1973 Code § 12.04.010)
8-2-2: NEW RESIDENCES, CONVERSIONS TO COMMERCIAL USE IN MIXED USE-TOWN CENTER
ZONE AND IMPROVED PROPERTY:
   A.   All new residences, all existing residences within a mixed use-town
center zone being converted to commercial use, and all property improved by new
construction thereon shall have sidewalks constructed on all sides abutting on
a public street of the property being developed before buildings on the subject
properties shall be occupied or used.
   B.   Where unfavorable weather conditions or good construction practice
require a delay in completion of the sidewalk construction, the city may grant
a waiver on the occupancy or use of the building upon receiving assurances
acceptable to the city that the sidewalk construction will be completed in a
timely manner.
   C.   "New construction", for the purpose of this chapter, shall be defined
as the construction of a new building or reconstruction of an existing building
where more than fifty percent (50%) of the value of said building immediately
after completion of all reconstruction is represented by newly constructed
improvements. (Ord. 797, 11-29-2004)
8-2-3: GRADE ESTABLISHMENT; PERMIT:
   A.   Grades: Grades for construction, repair and/or replacement required by
this chapter shall be established by the city.
   B.   Permit: A permit is required for all sidewalk repairs over sixteen (16)
square feet of surface.
   C.   Fees: There shall be a minimum fee as determined by resolution of the
mayor and city council to cover administration and inspection. If the city
engineer, in coordination with the building inspector, is required to set
grades and/or locations, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer the
estimated cost of the engineering fees as set by the city, and upon completion
of engineering, the applicant shall be responsible for the actual costs of
engineering fees.
   D.   Compliance With Specifications: Repairs must meet sidewalk
specifications shown in this chapter. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
8-2-4: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
The procedure, plans and specifications for the construction of concrete
sidewalks shall be as follows: (1973 Code § 12.04.030)
   A.   Notification Of Building Inspector: The property owner or contractor
shall notify the building inspector at least ten (10) days before work on the
sidewalk is started, in order that grades, etc., may be established. (1973 Code
§ 12.04.040)
   B.   Inspection And Acceptance Of Sidewalk Forms: The contractor shall
notify the city when sidewalk forms are set and no concrete shall be placed
therein until after the forms have been inspected and accepted. (1973 Code §
12.04.050)
   C.   Notification Of City Prior To Pouring Concrete: The contractor shall
notify the city beforehand when he is to pour the concrete so that provisions
may be made for inspections, and any sidewalk placed without the notice shall
be condemned, and the contractor cannot hold the owner to the payment of such
condemned work. (1973 Code § 12.04.060)
   D.   Barriers Required To Protect Freshly Poured Sidewalk: Proper barriers
shall be provided by the contractor to keep all traffic off the freshly poured
sidewalk, and he is responsible for any damage done to the freshly poured walk.
(1973 Code § 12.04.070; amd. 1996 Code)
   E.   General Requirements: Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with
the plans included in the approved permit(s). Sidewalks shall have a minimum
width of four feet (4'). The street side of the sidewalk shall be four feet
(4') from the property line on streets fifty feet (50') or less in width. The
street side of the sidewalk shall be five feet (5') from the property line on
streets over fifty feet (50') in width unless a sidewalk has already been
established on the side of the street and in the block that the proposed
sidewalk is to be constructed. If there is an existing sidewalk, then the
proposed sidewalk shall be in alignment, on the street side with the existing
sidewalk, assuming the existing sidewalk was engineered correctly. If the
existing sidewalk was located incorrectly at the time of its construction, then
the street side of the proposed sidewalk shall be located at the discretion of
the city. The street side of the walk will be alignment control and the
property side of the walk will be grade control. There shall be a right of way
strip one foot (1') from the property line on the homeowner's side of the walk.
(1973 Code § 12.04.080; amd. 1996 Code)
   F.   Material Requirements: All materials shall be secured from approved
sources. Aggregate shall be of a standardized grade acceptable for sidewalk
construction. Concrete shall contain five and one-half (51/2) bags of cement
per cubic yard proportioned as follows: six (6) gallons of clean water to one
hundred eighty eight (188) pounds of fine aggregate to three hundred forty five
(345) pounds of coarse aggregate per bag of cement (approximately 1:2:4 mix).
Weight of the aggregate based on a specific gravity of 2.65. (1973 Code §
12.04.090)
   G.   Construction Methods; Subgrade: All boulders, organic materials, soft
clay, spongy material and any objectionable materials shall be removed and
replaced with approved material. When considered necessary by the inspecting
authority, the subgrade shall be constructed of pit run gravel, or its
equivalent, thickness to depend on existing conditions and determined by the
inspector and shall be properly shaped and uniformly compacted. All fills under
a subgrade shall be made of suitable material, spread in layers not to exceed
one foot (1') in thickness and each layer shall be firmly compacted by an
approved method. Shoulders of these fills shall be such that they will amply
protect the subgrade from settling and will allow for proper backfilling of the
completed sidewalk. (1973 Code § 12.04.100)
   H.   Concrete Forms: The forms for the concrete shall be of wood or metal,
straight and free from warps or kinks and of sufficient strength. They shall be
stacked securely enough to resist the pressure of the concrete without spring.
When ready for the concrete to be deposited, they shall not vary from the
approved line and grade and shall be kept so until the concrete has set. The
grade control will be for the side of the walk towards the property. The walk
will have a slope of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot (1') toward the street.
(1973 Code § 12.04.110)
   I.   Placing And Finishing Concrete: Just prior to placing the concrete the
subgrade shall be moistened. The concrete mixed to the proper consistency shall
be placed in the forms and thoroughly tamped in place so that all honeycombs
will be eliminated and sufficient mortar will be brought to the surface. After
this the surface shall be brought to an even finish by means of a wooden float.
All faces adjacent to the forms shall be spaced so that after the forms are
stripped, the surfaces of the faces will be smooth, even and free of
honeycombs. All edges shall be tool rounded. (1973 Code § 12.04.120)
   J.   Expansion Joints And Scoring Concrete: One-half inch (1/2") transverse
expansion joints shall be placed at intervals not exceeding twenty five feet
(25') and at intersections with walks, driveways, and all curb points.
Sidewalks shall be scored to a depth of one inch (1") every four feet (4') for
walks four feet (4') in width, five feet (5') for walks five feet (5') in width
and six feet (6') for walks six feet (6') in width. (1973 Code § 12.04.130)
   K.   Curing Concrete: When completed, the concrete shall be kept moist for a
period of not less than three (3) days and longer if necessary, and shall be
protected from the elements in a satisfactory manner. (1973 Code § 12.04.140)
   L.   Backfilling: Backfills shall be of suitable selected material and shall
be placed and tamped until firm and solid. Backfilling shall follow immediately
after the concrete forms have been removed. (1973 Code § 12.04.150)
   M.   Seasonal Limits: No concrete shall be poured on a frozen or thawing
subgrade, or during unfavorable weather conditions or during such time that the
temperature is thirty eight degrees Fahrenheit (38°F) and falling. (1973 Code §
12.04.160)
   N.   Grade And Alignment Specifications: Sidewalks shall be constructed to
the grade and alignment as specified and approved by the city.
   O.   It is unlawful for any person to tear up, break or remove any sidewalk,
gutter, or curb, or part thereof, except for the purpose of repairing or
replacing the same; or to place, maintain or permit any obstruction on, under,
over or across any sidewalk, which restricts or impairs the full and free use
thereof by the public unless said obstruction is expressly permitted by the
city in accord with the municipal code; or to create, cause, maintain or permit
any condition to exist which renders any sidewalk curb, parking strip or
driveway across any sidewalk unfit or unsafe for the use by the general public.
   P.   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of abutting property to
keep the sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking strip and any driveway access the same
in good repair at the owner’s own expense, and to remove or correct any
condition which renders any such sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking strip or
driveway unsafe or unfit for use, including snow, ice, or obstruction of any
kind, natural or artificial. (1973 Code § 12.04.170) (Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020;
amd. Ord. 2021-1084, 1-26-2022)
8-2-5: REPLACEMENT OR REPAIR OF EXISTING SIDEWALKS:
Existing sidewalks of the city must be replaced by the owners of abutting
property or must be repaired to the satisfaction of the city building inspector
whenever the following conditions exist:
   A.   The surface of the sidewalk has become eroded to a depth in excess of
one-half inch (1/2") extending over an area of not less than four (4) square
inches or judged to be hazardous to pedestrian travel;
   B.   The surface of the sidewalk has settled, raised or shifted out of line
more than two inches (2") from the adjacent sections or adjoining sections jut
above each other more than one-quarter inch (1/4");
   C.   Sidewalks have acquired loose or broken sections or edges. (1973 Code §
12.04.180; amd. Ord. 2021-1084, 1-26-2022)
8-2-6: WIDTHS IN RELATION TO STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
Concrete sidewalks shall be four feet (4') wide in all residential districts
and five feet (5') in all mixed-use districts. Sidewalks on Washington Avenue
from Bridge to Whitesell Streets, and adjoining frontage areas to any new
businesses shall have a minimum of five foot (5') wide sidewalks. Existing
streets having a right of way of less than forty four feet (44') shall have no
sidewalk placed in the right of way. However, the city council, on application
of any interested property owner and with the concurrence of the building
inspector and planning commission, may provide for the installation of
sidewalks on streets of less than forty four foot (44') right of way. (1973
Code § 12.04.200; amd. 1996 Code)
8-2-7: NOTIFICATION TO REPAIR SIDEWALK; ACTION ON FAILURE TO REPAIR:
   A.   Notify Property Owner: The building inspector, upon determining a
sidewalk is in need of repair as defined by this chapter, shall notify the
property owner in writing to repair the same within one hundred twenty (120)
days of date of such notice. Property Owner can submit a request for extension
in writing to the City Administrator for an additional 60 days.
   B.   Repair By City; Assessment Of Costs: If a property owner fails to
accomplish the repairs within the time specified, or any extensions of such
date granted by the city Administrator, then the city may accomplish the
necessary repairs and assess the costs thereof against the property abutting
such repaired sidewalk. Such assessment may be collected in any manner provided
by law. (1973 Code § 12.04.210; amd. Ord. 2021-1084, 1-26-2022)
8-2-8: REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF IMPROPERLY CONSTRUCTED SIDEWALK; LIEN;
APPEAL:
In the event that the construction covered under this chapter is not performed
in accordance with the established specifications, such construction may be
removed by the city. Upon the failure of the owner to take such corrective
steps as outlined within sixty (60) days of notice in writing by the city
council, costs of the removal and replacement as performed by the city shall
become a lien against the premises until paid. Any person aggrieved by the
decision may appeal to the city council. (1973 Code § 12.04.220)
8-2-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of a project permit or approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter,
shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil
infraction or civil violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code. Any act or omission by a person
responsible for compliance that constitutes a failure to obtain a project
permit or approval required pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this code.
   B.   Violation; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful to wilfully fail to comply
with any provision of this chapter, wilfully fail to comply with any provision
of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, wilfully fail to comply with
a civil regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, wilfully fail to
obtain a project permit or approval required by this chapter, or wilfully fail
to comply with a provision of a project permit or approval issued under
authority of this chapter. Such wilful failure shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
CHAPTER 3
CURB AND STREET CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
8-3-1: Compliance With Chapter
8-3-2: Permit Required; Form Inspection And Approval
8-3-3: Permit Fee
8-3-4: Curb Specifications
8-3-5: Specifications According To Street Width
8-3-6: Violation; Penalty
8-3-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
All curbs hereafter constructed in the city shall conform to the specifications
and location prescribed by this chapter. (1973 Code § 12.08.010)
8-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FORM INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
The installer of a curb must obtain a permit from the building inspector and
forms must be inspected and approved before the curb is poured. (1973 Code §
12.03.070)
8-3-3: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for a curb permit shall be as provided by resolution of the mayor and
city council. (1973 Code § 12.08.080; amd. 1996 Code)
8-3-4: CURB SPECIFICATIONS:
Curbs shall be sixteen inches (16") in height, eight inches (8") wide at the
base and six inches (6") wide at the top. The property side shall be vertical
and the street side sloping. Top street edge shall be finished to a one inch
(1") radius and top property edge to a one-half inch (1/2") radius. Concrete
shall be a 5-sack mix. (1973 Code § 12.08.020)
8-3-5: SPECIFICATIONS ACCORDING TO STREET WIDTH:
   A.   Sixty Foot Street: A sixty foot (60') street, unless otherwise
established by action of the city council, shall consist of a traveled portion
forty four feet (44') wide centered upon the centerline of the street. Next on
each side shall be the curb. Next on each side shall be a two and one- half
foot (21/2') median strip. Next on each side shall be a four foot (4') sidewalk
and the edge of the strip shall be a one foot (1') buffer against the property
line. (1973 Code § 12.08.030)
   B.   Forty Four To Sixty Foot Street: A forty four foot (44') to sixty foot
(60') street shall contain all specifications of a sixty foot (60') street
except the traveled portion shall be reduced in conformity with the available
right of way. (1973 Code § 12.08.040)
   C.   Less Than Forty Four Foot Street: A street less than forty four feet
(44') shall eliminate all features of a sixty foot (60') street except the curb
and traveled portion. (1973 Code § 12.08.050)
   D.   Streets Over Sixty Feet: Streets over sixty feet (60') shall retain all
features of sixty foot (60') streets except the median strip shall increase,
unless otherwise established by the city council. (1973 Code § 12.08.060)
8-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of a project permit or approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter,
shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil
infraction or civil violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code. Any act or omission by a person
responsible for compliance that constitutes a failure to obtain a project
permit or approval required pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this code.
   B.   Violation; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful to wilfully fail to comply
with any provision of this chapter, wilfully fail to comply with any provision
of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, wilfully fail to comply with
a civil regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, wilfully fail to
obtain a project permit or approval required by this chapter, or wilfully fail
to comply with a provision of a project permit or approval issued under
authority of this chapter. Such wilful failure shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING STRIPS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Width Specifications
8-4-2: Improvements And Maintenance By Abutting Property Owners
8-4-3: Violation; Penalty
8-4-4: Abatement Action
8-4-1: WIDTH SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Ten Foot Parking Strips: The widths of parking strips on each side of
the traveled portion of the following streets and avenues shall be ten feet
(10'):
      Bridge Street
      Calistoga Avenue
      Corrin Avenue
      Eldridge Street
      Hardefeldt Street
      Leber Street
      Train Avenue
      Varner Street
      Whitesell Street
      (1973 Code § 12.12.010)
   B.   Eight Foot Parking Strips: The widths of parking strips on each side of
the traveled portion of the following streets and avenues shall be eight feet
(8'):
      Beckett Street
      County Street
      Factory Street
      Grinnell Street
      Hays Street
      Kansas Avenue
      Kensington Street
      Olive Street
      Tacoma Street
      Train Avenue, the lower east end
      (1973 Code § 12.12.020)
   C.   Six Foot Parking Strips: On all streets and avenues whose width is not
exceeding fifty feet (50') nor less than forty feet (40'), the width of parking
strips shall be six feet (6'). (1973 Code § 12.12.030)
8-4-2: IMPROVEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS:
The owners of property abutting upon streets and avenues shall have the right
to improve by grading, planting of shrubbery, trees or otherwise and by seeding
for lawn purposes, the parking strips immediately abutting their property on
the width above provided, subject to the right reserved by the city to use the
parking strips for the purposes of laying water pipes, sewer pipes and other
public or street use.
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain
abutting parking strips, and corresponding planting strips, to keep them free
from rubbish and debris, and to maintain vegetation thereon in a reasonable
manner consistent with the surrounding properties. Improvements and maintenance
shall be subject to title 5, chapter 1, "Nuisances", of this code except for
conflicting provisions provided under this chapter shall control.
Prior to modifications of parking strips, the abutting property owner shall
consult with the City to determine if such modifications are subject to the
stormwater requirements of Title 9, Chapter 5 and implement such requirements
as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 2016-995, 9-28-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
8-4-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of a project permit or approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter,
shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil
infraction or civil violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code. Any act or omission by a person
responsible for compliance that constitutes a failure to obtain a project
permit or approval required pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this code.
   B.   Violation; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful to wilfully fail to comply
with any provision of this chapter, wilfully fail to comply with any provision
of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, wilfully fail to comply with
a civil regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, wilfully fail to
obtain a project permit or approval required by this chapter, or wilfully fail
to comply with a provision of a project permit or approval issued under
authority of this chapter. Such wilful failure shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
8-4-4: ABATEMENT ACTION:
Upon determination that any real property within the city is the site of
vegetation in violation of this chapter, the city administrator shall be
notified, and he or the fire chief, public works director, or their authorized
representative shall take the following actions:
   A.   Contact the property owner and inform the owner of the determination
and the need to remove the vegetation within twenty (20) days.
   B.   Upon failure of the property owner to comply with the informal
notification, the city administrator shall issue written notice by certified
mail to the property owner as shown by the records of the county assessor
directing the removal of the vegetation within twenty (20) days of the issuance
of the notification.
   C.   Upon failure of the property owner to comply with the written
notification, the city attorney shall present for city council consideration a
resolution which instructs the property owner to remove the vegetation within
twenty (20) days following adoption of the resolution. Such resolution shall
contain the street address and legal description of the real property, shall
describe the violations thereon, and shall notify the property owner that
failure to comply with the abatement directions therein will result in
abatement by the city, with the costs thereof to become a charge against said
property owner and a lien upon the real property. The owner of the property
shall be given not less than five (5) days' written notice of presentation of
the proposed resolution to the city council and shall be given an opportunity
to speak at the council meeting regarding the resolution. In addition to
written notice the city shall also post a copy of the notification of council
consideration upon the real property. Upon passage of the resolution, the city
shall promptly give notice in writing thereof to the property owner. (Ord.
2016-995, 9-28-2016)
CHAPTER 5
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Title
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Permit Required
8-5-4: Specifications Presented To Applicant
8-5-5: Application For Permit
8-5-6: Permit Fees
8-5-7: Security Requirements
8-5-8: Work Done By Permittee; Restoration Of Area
8-5-9: Notice Of Commencement Of Work
8-5-10: Delinquent Prosecution Of Work
8-5-11: Depth Of Utility Installations
8-5-12: Traffic Safety Requirements
8-5-13: Clearance For Vital Structures
8-5-14: Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
8-5-15: Protection Of Adjoining Property
8-5-16: Care Of Excavated Material
8-5-17: Cleanup Operations
8-5-18: Protection Of Watercourses
8-5-19: Breaking Through Pavement
8-5-20: Backfilling
8-5-21: Restoration Of Surface
8-5-22: City Right To Restore Surface
8-5-23: Inconvenience To Public
8-5-24: Preservation Of Monuments
8-5-25: Inspections; Rules And Regulations
8-5-26: Liability Of City
8-5-27: Violation; Penalty
8-5-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and cited as the STREET EXCAVATION ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF ORTING. (1973 Code § 12.16.010)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: As provided for in this Chapter, is the Building
Inspector.
APPLICANT: Any person making written application to the administrative
authority for an excavation permit under this Chapter.
EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a street made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a
street, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed
as to permit frequent opening without injury or damage to the street.
FACILITY: Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure or object of
any kind or character whether enumerated herein or not which is or may be
lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under
or over any street.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an
excavation permit issued under this Chapter.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
STREET: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza or
any other similar public property owned or controlled by the City and dedicated
to public use.
SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or
wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface of any street.
(1973 Code § 12.16.020)
8-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Request For Permit: No person shall excavate, tunnel over, full in,
grade, pave, level, alter, construct, repair, remove or excavate any pavement,
sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, driveway, gutter, sewer, water main or any other
structure or improvement located over, under or upon any public street,
highway, avenue, alley or public right of way within the City limits without
first obtaining a written permit to do so from the administrative authority.
The permit shall be requested upon an application form as provided at the
office of the administrative authority and the application, when approved by
the administrative authority, will constitute the permit.
   B.   Emergency Situation: In the event of an emergency occurring after
office hours, at night, on Sundays, or legal holidays, when an excavation may
be necessary for the protection of public or private property; the same can be
made after the person making such excavation has notified the Police and Fire
Departments of such work; an application for a written permit as provided in
this Chapter shall be made on the next succeeding business day whether or not
the emergency work has been completed.
   C.   Term Of Permit; Extension: Work for which a permit has been issued
shall commence within six (6) months after issuance. If not so commenced, the
permit shall be automatically terminated unless the permittee applies to the
administrative authority for an extension of time within which to commence
work, and if such an extension is granted, the original permit shall remain in
force for the period of time specified in the extension. Every permit shall
expire at the time stated in the permit, at which time the excavation must be
closed and brought to grade unless an extension of time is granted by the
administrative authority. Permits which terminate may be renewed only upon
payment of an additional permit fee as originally required.
   D.   Permits Nontransferable; Conditions: Permits are nontransferable from
one person to another and the work shall not be made in any place other than
the location specified in the permit.
(1973 Code § 12.16.030; amd. Ord. 2019-1047, 8-28-2019)
8-5-4: SPECIFICATIONS PRESENTED TO APPLICANT:
At the time of issuance of the permit as provided in this Chapter, the
administrative authority shall supply the person obtaining such permit
specifications designating the method of street cutting, excavation, disposal
of excavated material backfilling and the replacement of concrete or asphaltic
materials. It is unlawful for any person to deviate from the provisions of
these specifications. (1973 Code § 12.16.040)
8-5-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Form And Contents: Application for permit required by this Chapter
shall be made in writing to the administrative authority on forms furnished by
him or in a manner acceptable for him. The written application shall state the
name and address of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the
excavation, the date of commencement and estimated date of completion of the
excavation and other data as may reasonably be required by such official.
   B.   Accompanying Documents: The application shall be accompanied by plans
showing the location and extent of the proposed excavation work, and such other
information as may be required by the official; except that plans shall not be
required when excavations are to be made for connections by a utility or for
the location of trouble in conduits or pipes or making repairs. (1973 Code §
12.16.050)
8-5-6: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Fee: A permit fee shall be charged by the City for the
issuance of an excavation permit which shall be in addition to all other fees
for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The City
shall charge such fees as are required to recover fully the costs of issuing
and administering the permit plus any reasonable allowance for overhead.
   B.   Collection Of Fee: Before a permit is issued as set forth in this
Chapter, the administrative authority shall collect from the applicant a permit
fee as determined necessary by the City. Such fees, charges and cash deposits
shall be in accordance with a list of fees approved by resolution of the City
Council and kept on file in the office of the administrative authority.
   C.   Replacement Costs Additional: The fee paid for any work does not
include replacement costs. It is the responsibility of the permittee to replace
any removed, damaged or disturbed existing work.
   D.   Double Fee: The permit fee as provided in this Chapter shall be in
double the amount required in the event that work of excavation begins prior to
obtaining a permit, except in the event of an emergency as herein provided.
   E.   Reimburse City For Cost Of Services: The permittee shall reimburse the
City for all costs incurred in providing necessary engineering, inspection and
testing services to administer the permit. (1973 Code § 12.16.060)
8-5-7: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Guarantee Against Defects: Any person obtaining a permit for any of the
purposes designated shall, before renewing or in any manner changing the
surface of the sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, highway, avenue or alley,
deliver to the City a security fund in escrow, in cash, or by an irrevocable
letter of credit as a guarantee against any defect in the materials and
workmanship in such sum as shall be designated by the administrative authority
as necessary for the proper protection of the City. The security fund may be
applied by the City for any amounts required to correct any defects arising
prior to issuance of a certificate of final approval. Such deposit may be
applied by the City for any amounts required by the City to repair any defects
arising within any applicable guarantee or warranty period. The balance of such
deposit, if any, held at the end of twenty four (24) months following final
acceptance, shall be refunded or returned to the depositor, or to the order of
the depositor.
   B.   Liability Insurance: Before a permit shall be issued for any of the
purposes designated in this Chapter, any applicant, with the exception of all
public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Washington State Utilities and
Transportation Commission shall file with the administrative authority a
certificate of insurance of general liability showing a minimum public
liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for one person, five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for two (2) or more persons, two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) general property damage insurance. (1973 Code §
12.16.070)
8-5-8: WORK DONE BY PERMITTEE; RESTORATION OF AREA:
   A.   Inspection And Approval Of Work: Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit
any person from doing all or any part of the work called for in the permit;
provided, that permission is obtained from the administrative authority; and
provided further, that all such excavations and pavement repairs shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the administrative authority.
   B.   Restoration By City; Expense Of Permittee: If the area covered thereby
is not restored to as good condition as the same was in before the work was
done, the administrative authority shall at the expense of the permittee,
proceed to do such work as may be necessary to restore the area. (1973 Code §
12.16.080)
8-5-9: NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF WORK:
At least two (2) working days before the work is started, the permittee shall
give notice of the time of commencement of the work to the administrative
authority, and, if requested by the administrative authority, similar notice
shall be given to the Police Department and Fire Department. Notice shall also
be given to the owners of such other substructures in the immediate vicinity of
the work covered by the permit; provided, that such notice shall not be
required when such excavations are occasioned by emergencies or made to install
service connections, or in connection with search for leaks in substructures or
in repair of substructures. (1973 Code § 12.16.090)
8-5-10: DELINQUENT PROSECUTION OF WORK:
After the excavation is commenced, the work of making and refilling the same
shall be prosecuted with due diligence and so as not to obstruct the street
more than is actually necessary. (1973 Code § 12.16.100)
8-5-11: DEPTH OF UTILITY INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Direction Of Administrative Authority: All underground installations
shall be laid down as directed by the administrative authority at a depth of
not less than thirty six inches (36") below the surface of the ground along and
under City streets and in such a manner as not to interfere with the
construction of sewers, drains and other underground utilities, nor with the
grading of public streets; provided, that in the unpaved shoulder area only,
installation shall be permitted at a depth of thirty inches (30") so long as
there is a twelve inch (12") undisturbed buffer zone adjacent to the utility
trench between the trench and the inner and outer edges of the unpaved
shoulder. All underground utility vaults shall be placed with one edge of the
vault at or outside of the right-of-way line such that no portion of the vault
is closer than two feet (2') from any paved surface (shoulder and/or traveled
way).
   B.   Underground Utility Vaults: All underground utility vaults (except
electrical vaults) with a maximum width of seven feet zero inches (7'0") and a
maximum length of twelve feet zero inches (12'0") shall have a minimum cover of
not less than thirty six inches (36") when the longest side is placed adjacent
to the edge of the right of way. All underground utility vaults (except
electrical vaults) with a maximum width of more than seven feet zero inches
(7'0") and/or length of more than twelve feet zero inches (12'0") shall have a
minimum cover of not less than forty eight inches (48"). There shall be no
minimum cover requirement for electrical surface grade elevation. The uppermost
elevation of the electrical vault may be flush with the surface ground
elevation at the installation point.
   C.   Variance: A variance may be granted upon such conditions and terms as
the administrative authority determines are necessary which shall include, but
not be limited to, agreement to remove the utility vault at such time as the
administrative authority determines road improvements are necessary. (1973 Code
§ 12.16.110)
   D.   Appeal To City Council: Any person aggrieved by any act or decision of
the City under this Chapter may appeal to the City Council pursuant to the
procedures in the City Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance, Title 13 of
this Code as now enacted or hereafter amended. (1973 Code § 12.16.110; 1996
Code)
8-5-12: TRAFFIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Routing Of Traffic: The permittee shall take appropriate measures to
assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions
as nearly normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause
as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property
and to the general public; provided, that the administrative authority may
permit the closing of street to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by
him if, in his opinion, it is necessary. No more than one City block, measured
longitudinally, shall be opened in any street at any one time, except by
special permission of the administrative authority. (1973 Code § 12.16.120)
   B.   Protection Of Traffic:
      1.   Reasonable Precautions: It shall be the duty of every person cutting
or making any excavation in or upon any public street or sidewalk to take
reasonable precautions.
      2.   Access Near Opening: No opening or excavation in any street shall
extend beyond the center line of the street before providing adequate traffic
facilities across the opened or excavated portion of the street so as to cause
as little inconvenience as possible to the general public.
      3.   Compliance With MUTCD: Traffic control shall be in accordance with
MUTCD (Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices).
      4.   Barriers And Lights: Every permittee shall place around the project
such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the administrative authority to be necessary for the protection
of the public. Whenever any permittee fails to provide proper safety devices,
within a reasonable time after being notified, such devices may be installed
and maintained by the City or its contracted representative. The costs incurred
shall be paid by the permittee. (1973 Code § 12.16.130)
   C.   Maintenance Of Traffic: The permittee shall maintain safe crossing for
two (2) lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible,
and safe crossing for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred
feet (300'). If any excavation is made across any public street, alley, or
sidewalk, adequate crossing shall be maintained for vehicles and pedestrians.
If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using
part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passage way of at least one-half (1/2) of the
sidewalk width shall be maintained in and along such sidewalk line. (1973 Code
§ 12.16.150)
8-5-13: CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES:
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with the access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates,
underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment and
to private driveways, and administrative authority. (1973 Code § 12.16.140)
8-5-14: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
   A.   Consent Required: The permittee shall not interfere with any existing
facility without the written consent of the administrative authority and the
owner of the facility.
   B.   Work Done By Owner: If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing
facility, such work shall be done by its owner.
   C.   Liability For Cost: No facility owned by the City shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the
permittee. The cost of moving privately- owned facilities shall be similarly
borne by the permittee unless other arrangements are made with the owners of
the facility.
   D.   Protection Of Facilities: The permittee shall support and protect all
pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be affected in any
way by the excavation work and do everything necessary to support, sustain, and
protect them under, over, along or across the work. The permittee shall secure
approval of method of support and protection from owners of the facility.
   E.   Damaged Facilities; Liability: In case any of the pipes, conduits,
poles, wire or pipe coating or the encasement or devices or apparatus should be
damaged, the permittee shall promptly notify the owners thereof. All damaged
facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the
expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of
this Section that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to
facilities, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
facility damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of
the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is
exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility.
   F.   Knowledge Of Location Of Facilities: The permittee shall inform itself
as to the existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the
same against damage. (1973 Code § 12.16.160)
8-5-15: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY:
   A.   Protective Measures: The permittee shall at all times at his or its own
expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing
proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose.
   B.   Right Of Entry; Permission From Owner: Where, in the protection of such
property, it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of
taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission
from the owner of such private property for such purpose, and if he cannot
obtain such permission from such owner, the administrative authority may
authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making
the property safe.
   C.   Shore Up And Protect Buildings: The permittee shall, at its own
expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property
likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be
responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting
from its failure to properly protect and carry out the work.
   D.   Trench Through Lawns: Whenever it is necessary for the permittee to
trench through any lawn area, the area shall be reseeded or the sod shall be
carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as
required in this Chapter. All construction and maintenance work shall be done
in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in
a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before the work began.
   E.   Remove Trees Or Shrubs From Parking Strip Areas: The permittee shall
not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip
areas or permanent BMPs without first having notified and obtained the consent
of such property owner.
(1973 Code § 12.16.170; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
8-5-16: CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL:
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any
street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those
working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as
little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining
property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the
case in a narrow alley, the administrative authority shall have the authority
to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and
then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the
permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all
necessary arrangement for all required storage and disposal sites. (1973 Code §
12.16.180)
8-5-17: CLEANUP OPERATIONS:
As the excavation work progresses all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of
all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work. All
cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the administrative authority. From time to time as may be
ordered by the administrative authority, and in any event immediately after
completion of the work, the permittee shall at his or its own expense clean up
and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work,
and upon failure to do so within twenty four (24) hours after having been
notified to do so by the administrative authority, the work may be done by the
administrative authority and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. (1973
Code § 12.16.190)
8-5-18: PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES:
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot (1') in width from the
face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting
street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. The
permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt,
slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or
other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its
failure to so provide. (1973 Code § 12.16.200)
8-5-19: BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT:
On streets without concrete base, the surfaces on multiple lift or asphaltic
concrete streets must be cut completely through at the trench edges before
removal. Such work can be accomplished by hand-operated tools or machine
operated devices in a manner which will leave a neat alignment and clean break.
(1973 Code § 12.16.210)
8-5-20: BACKFILLING:
   A.   Compliance With City Specifications: All pavement cuts, openings and
excavations shall be properly made, backfilled, compacted to ninety five
percent (95%) and temporarily surfaced by the permittee according to City
specifications. Temporary surfacing must be installed within twenty four (24)
hours after the trench is backfilled or as directed by the administrative
authority.
   B.   Notify City: The administrative authority must be notified by the
permittee forty eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of backfilling. Notice
shall include the date and approximate time at which filling will begin. (1973
Code § 12.16.220)
8-5-21: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
   A.   Permittee Responsible: The permittee shall restore the surface of all
streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work.
   B.   Temporary Patching: Temporary patching shall be done by the permittee,
and it is the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the temporary patch
for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or until weather conditions permit
placement of the permanent patch.
   C.   City Directions: The work of final restoration of the paving surface
shall be performed by the contractor under the direction of the administrative
authority.
   D.   Negotiated Contribution For Resurfacing: If the administrative
authority finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street opening may be
damaged where trenches are made parallel to the street, or where a number of
cross trenches are laid in close proximity to one another or where the
equipment used may cause such damage, the administrative authority may require
a negotiated contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing in place of
patching of such street if the total area of the proposed patch or probably
damaged area exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the total pavement surfacing
between curb faces or between concrete gutter edges in any block. Such
negotiations shall be carried on and contributions agreed upon prior to
issuance of a permit. Such contributions shall be in lieu of the standard
permit fee.
   E.   Inspection: Inspection of excavation or restoration by the
administrative authority shall not relieve the permittee of its responsibility
under this Chapter.
   F.   Certificate Of Final Approval: The permittee shall notify the
administrative authority in writing upon completion of all work accomplished
under the provisions of the permit. A certificate of final approval will be
issued by the administrative authority to each permittee no sooner than two (2)
years after the permanent restoration of the excavation has been made;
provided, that the work authorized by the permit has been performed according
to City specifications. Any settlement in a restored area which has occurred
within the two (2) year period, following completion of the permanent
restoration, shall be repaired by the permittee or any expense incurred by the
City in correcting such settlement shall be paid by the permittee unless the
permittee submits proof satisfactory to the administrative authority that the
settlement was not due to defective backfilling. (1973 Code § 12.16.230)
8-5-22: CITY RIGHT TO RESTORE SURFACE:
If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its
original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by such
permit or fails to prosecute the work in accordance with the requirements of
this Chapter or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work
covered by such permit, the administrative authority shall have the right to do
all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the
excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual costs thereof
plus a reasonable allowance for general overhead and administrative expenses.
(1973 Code § 12.16.240)
8-5-23: INCONVENIENCE TO PUBLIC:
   A.   Conduct Of Work: Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation
work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property.
   B.   Compliance With Conditions: In granting any permit, the administrative
authority may attach such other conditions thereto as may be reasonably
necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent the
operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in
a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not
be limited to:
      1.   Limitations on the hour, the day and the period of the year in which
the work may be performed;
      2.   Restrictions as to the size and type of excavating equipment;
      3.   Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
      4.   The manner of removal of excavated materials;
      5.   Requirements as to the control of dust nuisance, the cleaning of
street and the prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to
the neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof.
   C.   Order Stoppage Of Work: Additionally, at any time conditions unforeseen
at the time of issuance of the permit are discovered which could, in the
opinion of the administrative authority, cause unforeseen damage to public or
private property or a hazard to life or property or become a public nuisance,
the administrative authority may forthwith order the stoppage of any further
work under the permit until the permit conditions have been modified by the
administrative authority in such a manner as to protect from or eliminate the
potential damages, hazards or nuisances enumerated in this chapter. (1973 Code
§ 12.16.250)
8-5-24: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
Any monuments set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a
permanent survey bench mark within the city shall not be removed or disturbed
or caused to be removed or disturbed, except in case of an emergency, without
first obtaining permission in writing from the administrative authority.
Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points, or bench
marks shall be granted only upon condition that the person applying for such
permissions shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this
monument by the administrative authority. (1973 Code § 12.16.260)
8-5-25: INSPECTIONS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Inspections Authorized; Payment Of Fees: The administrative authority
shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of
this chapter. When so made the permittee shall pay for such inspections,
including engineering fees, if required at the city's cost.
   B.   Enforce Rules And Regulations: The city council shall have the
authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as
may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this
chapter. (1973 Code § 12.16.270)
8-5-26: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official
or employee any liability or responsibility for any damages to any person
injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued under this chapter, nor shall the city or any official or
employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility
by reason of inspections authorized under this chapter, the issuance of any
permit or the approval of any excavation work. (1973 Code § 12.16.280)
8-5-27: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter,
any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision or condition
of a project permit or approval issued or granted pursuant to this chapter,
shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil
infraction or civil violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code. Any act or omission by a person
responsible for compliance that constitutes a failure to obtain a project
permit or approval required pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4,
"Penalties", of this code.
   B.   Violation; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful to wilfully fail to comply
with any provision of this chapter, wilfully fail to comply with any provision
of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, wilfully fail to comply with
a civil regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter, wilfully fail to
obtain a project permit or approval required by this chapter, or wilfully fail
to comply with a provision of a project permit or approval issued under
authority of this chapter. Such wilful failure shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
CHAPTER 6
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Title; Conduct Regulated
8-6-2: Liberal Construction
8-6-3: Permit Requirements For Certain Activities
8-6-4: Prohibited Activities
8-6-5: Campgrounds And Picnic Areas
8-6-6: Motor Vehicles And Bicycles
8-6-7: Animal Control
8-6-8: Fires
8-6-9: Park Hours
8-6-10: Enforcement
8-6-11: Violation; Penalty
8-6-1: TITLE; CONDUCT REGULATED:
   A.   This chapter shall constitute the PARK CODE OF THE CITY and may be
cited as such.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all public parks in the city. Such public
parks include the following public parks and improvements, and any land and/or
facility declared to be a public park by resolution or ordinance of the city
council or by dedication of the same:
City Of Orting Assessor's Tax Parcel Number Park Addresses
City Of Orting              Assessor's Tax Parcel Park Addresses
                            Number
Class A parks:                                    
 Charter Park              0519321017            425 Washington Ave SE
 City Park (including the  0519293126            101 and 102 Train St SW
  barbecue and gazebo)
 Fisherman parking         0519322123            423 Washington Ave SE
 Memorial Park             0519293132            104 Whitesell St NW
 North Park/Orting Station 0519293133            101 Washington Ave NW
                                                  511 Brown St SE (located
 Rainier Meadows Park      7000540610            behind residential
                                                  properties)
 Three Corners Park        None                  404 Harman Way S
 Triangle Park             None                  312 River Ave SE
 Williams Park             7002130730            1116-A Ross Ave NW
Class B parks:                                    
 Calistoga Park            7000980080            802 Calistoga St W
 Gratzer ball fields       0519304037            401 Whitehawk Blvd NW
 Whitehawk Park            7000940480            409 Orting Ave NW
 
   C.   Conduct in all public parks shall be subject to all the general police
regulations of this code and not exclusively to the provisions of this chapter,
and to the rules and regulations governing use of all city parks as established
by the city administrator.
   D.   The city administrator, in consultation with the parks department staff
and mayor, is hereby directed to establish and make available for public
inspection, rules and regulations governing the use of and activities within
all city parks. The purposes of such rules and regulations shall be to preserve
and protect the city parks for the long term use and enjoyment of the public.
In the event of a conflict between the rules and regulations established by the
city administrator and this code, the provisions of this code shall prevail to
the extent of the conflict. (Ord. 953, 9-10-2014)
8-6-2: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter is an exercise of the police power of the state of Washington, and
the city of Orting for the public peace, health, safety and welfare, and its
provisions shall be liberally construed. (1973 Code § 8.28.020)
8-6-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Activities Enumerated: It shall be unlawful in any park, without first
securing a permit from the city, for any person to:
      1.   Public Address System: Use a public address system or other sound
amplifying device.
      2.   Advertisements: Use, place or erect any signboard, sign, billboard,
bulletin board, post, pole or device of any kind for advertising in any park or
to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or card to any tree, shrub,
railing, post or structure, or erect a structure of any kind.
      3.   Refreshment Or Merchandise Sales: Sell refreshments or merchandise
or engage in any business or occupation, provided:
         a.   The business shall also obtain all other required permits,
including but not limited to a business license or valid mobile food vendor
license (per chapter 3-2); and
         b.   These activities may only occur:
            (1)   In the area depicted in Figure A, subject to a vendor permit
issued by the City, payment of a permit fee and rental fee set by resolution of
the City Council, and execution of an indemnification agreement and submission
of evidence in a form acceptable to the City Administrator of liability
insurance the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) (combined
single limits per occurrence), two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate
naming the City of Orting as additional insured; or
            (2)   Subject to a special event permit (per section 3-2-26).
FIGURE A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2462.png]
      4.   Peddling Or Soliciting; Entertainment: Take up any collections or to
act as or apply the vocation of a solicitor, agent, peddler, beggar, strolling
musician, organ grinder, exhorter, barker or showman within a park. (1973 Code
§ 8.28.030)
   B.   Permit Administration:
      1.   Display Permit Upon Request: Any person claiming to have a permit
from the city must produce and exhibit such permit upon the request of any
authorized person who may desire to inspect the same.
      2.   Cancel Permit For Cause; Notice: The city reserves the right to
cancel a permittee's activity on any day that the city wishes to make use of
the facility and when there is a need of the facility which transcends the need
of the permittee or for cause. Such notice shall be given at least twenty four
(24) hours in advance.
      3.   Clean Up Facility: All permittees must leave the facility in a
condition considered satisfactory to the caretaker or his designee who will
supervise cleanup activities. No group shall conduct activities causing extra
custodial work unless previous agreement has been made to pay for such work.
      4.   Assembly Of Minors; Adult Supervision: At all assemblies of minors
under eighteen (18) years of age, responsible adults must be present throughout
the entire function. (1973 Code § 8.28.040; amd. Ord. 2021-1080, 8-11-2021)
8-6-4: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Deface Property: Cut, remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any turf,
tree, plant, shrub, flower, structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall,
fence, railing, vehicle, bench, lighting system, sprinkling system or the
property in any park.
   B.   Garbage Deposits:
      1.   Leave, deposit, drop or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes,
wastepaper, cans or other rubbish in a park except in a garbage can or other
receptacle designated for such purposes.
      2.   Deposit any household or commercial garbage, refuse, waste or
rubbish which is brought as such from any private property in any garbage can
or other receptacle designated for such purpose located within a park.
      3.   Drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper or automobile
or other vehicle except in designated disposal areas or receptacles.
   C.   Water Pollution: Pollute or in any way contaminate by dumping or
otherwise depositing therein any waste or refuse of any nature, kind or
description including human waste or bodily waste in any stream, river, lake or
other body of water running in, through or adjacent to any park.
   D.   Clean Vehicles: Clean or wash any automobile or any other vehicle in
any park except in areas specifically designated for that use.
   E.   Fireworks: Possess, discharge, set off or cause to be discharged in or
into any park, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, firework, explosive or other
substance harmful to the life or safety of persons or property. (Ord. 952, 3-
26-2014)
   F.   Unlawful Discharge: Discharge across, in or into any park a firearm,
bow and arrow or air or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or
killing any person or animal or damaging or destroying any public or private
property. (Ord. 955, 4-9-2014)
   G.   Annoy Others: Annoy, bother, molest, insult or offer an affront to any
other person within a park. (Ord. 952, 3-26-2014)
   H.   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   In a class A park, engage in any of the following sports, games,
athletic competitions or activities, or any sports, games, athletic
competitions or activities of like character:
         a.   Golf;
         b.   Baseball or softball;
         c.   Cricket;
         d.   Lacrosse;
         e.   Polo;
         f.   Archery;
         g.   Hockey;
         h.   Tennis;
         i.   Football; or
         j.   Soccer.
      2.   In a class A or B park,
         a.   To hurl or propel or cause to be hurled or propelled any missile,
spear, rocket, dart, rock or other similar object or projectile, except at
places set apart for such purposes by the city; or
         b.   Engage in any sport, game, athletic competition or activity
prohibited pursuant to the rules and regulations established by the city
administrator pursuant to the provisions of section
8-6-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 953, 9-10-2014)
   I.   Alcoholic Beverages: Possess, display or open and/or consume alcoholic
beverages in a park; provided that, wineries and brewers that have been issued
a valid farmers' market authorization/endorsement by the Washington state
liquor control board, may provide wine and beer tasting, and sales of wine and
beer for off premises consumption, in public parks of the city as allowed
under, and in compliance with, applicable state laws and regulations, and only
during the hours of operation, and at the site, of qualifying farmers' markets.
"Qualifying farmers' markets" shall mean a farmers' market meeting the
requirements established by the Washington state liquor control board. (Ord.
952, 3-26-2014)
8-6-5: CAMPGROUNDS AND PICNIC AREAS:
   A.   Picnic Areas: Picnicking is permitted only in designated and marked
picnicking areas or in such other places within a park as may from time to time
be designated by a caretaker.
   B.   Camping Prohibited: No person shall camp in any park. (Ord. 788, 5-13-
2004)
   C.   Use Fee: Use fees shall be charged for the group use of any athletic
field and any covered facility in a city park in accordance with title 3,
chapter 8 of this code. Collection of such use fees shall be administered by
the parks and recreation director or his/her designee. Use of such athletic
fields or covered facilities shall be subject to the scheduling priorities set
forth at title 3, chapter 8 of this code and the policies and procedures
established by the city administrator that are not inconsistent with this
chapter. For purposes of this section and any resolution or ordinance
establishing use fees, "covered facility" shall mean the public portions of any
covered structure in any city park regardless of whether or not such structure
is enclosed in whole or in part, and shall include by way of example and not
limitation, the barbecue pit, the gazebo, and the Orting Station Facility
(North Park Building). (Ord. 919, 11-30-2011)
8-6-6: MOTOR VEHICLES AND BICYCLES:
   A.   Parking Restricted: No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper,
boat trailer, or other vehicle shall park such vehicle in any park except where
the operator is using the area for a designated recreational purpose and the
vehicle is parked either in a designated parking area or in another area with
the permission of the city. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a
vehicle in any park after closing time. Any vehicle found parked in violation
of this section may be towed away at the owner's or operator's expense.
   B.   Use Of Trails, Streets And Parking Lots: No person shall operate any
motor vehicle on a trail in any park unless such trail has been specifically
designated and posted for such use. Subject to the provisions of this code, no
person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a park except on
roads, streets, highways, parking lots or parking areas; provided, that
traveling upon such roads, streets, highways, parking lots or parking areas has
not been prohibited by proper posting.
   C.   Speed Limits: No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any park at
a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the
traffic and the surface and width of the road and in no event at a speed which
endangers the safety of persons, property or wildlife; provided, however, that
in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles
per hour in camp, picnic, utility or headquarters areas or in areas of general
public assemblage; and provided further, that in no event shall a vehicle be
driven at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour in any other area.
The city council, however, upon finding that the safety of persons and the
condition of the road and the traffic thereon so warrant, may establish lower
speed limits and shall post the same in the area where so established.
   D.   Driving And Servicing: It is unlawful to enter or leave a park by other
than established entrances and exits. The parking of vehicles in any park is
prohibited except in established parking areas. It is unlawful to park along
roadways if the normal flow of traffic is impeded or if parking causes
conditions that are hazardous to public safety. The servicing of vehicles
within a park is prohibited, including oil changes and other than emergency
repairs. It is unlawful to engage in, conduct or hold any trials or
competitions for speed, endurance or hill climbing involving any motor vehicle.
   E.   Riding Bicycles: No riding of bicycles shall be permitted in any park
except on roadways and other areas where designated and posted to specifically
permit such activity.
   F.   Model Aircraft And Rockets:
      1.   Certain Areas: No one shall fly rockets or model aircraft in any
park except in areas specifically designated and/or posted for that purpose.
      2.   Engines To Be Muffled: All engines over 0.25 CI used in model
aircraft being flown in designated park areas shall be muffled.
      3.   Abide By Safety Code: All persons flying model aircraft in
designated park areas shall abide by the official AMA safety code. (1973 Code §
8.28.070)
8-6-7: ANIMAL CONTROL:
All dogs and domestic animals in the city park shall be on a leash, and the
owners of the animals shall be responsible for disposing of, in a sanitary
fashion, any dog or domestic animal excrement. Horses are not permitted in the
park at any time, unless authorized by special permit issued by the city. When
horses are kept to designated trails and areas, no permit shall be required.
(1973 Code § 8.28.080; amd. 1996 Code)
8-6-8: FIRES:
No fires are permitted in the park outside of a designated fire or barbecue
site. (1973 Code § 8.28.090)
8-6-9: PARK HOURS:
Normal park hours are between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Any person who shall knowingly enter or remain unlawfully
in or upon the premises of any city park shall be guilty of criminal trespass
in the second degree. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain
upon the premises of any city park except during normal park hours, or when
authorized pursuant to a permit duly issued by the city, or while attending an
event authorized pursuant to a permit duly issued by the city, or when acting
in an official capacity as an employee or agent of the city. (Ord. 953, 9-10-
2014)
8-6-10: ENFORCEMENT:
The police department personnel are authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any officer of the police department personnel
having reasonable cause to believe that any person has violated one of the
provisions of this chapter may, in addition to invoking other sanctions, direct
said person to leave the park. Any person failing to leave the park when so
directed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code § 8.28.110)
8-6-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any act or omission in violation of subsection
 8-6-4A, "Deface Property", or section
8-6-9, "Park Hours", of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any act in
violation of subsection
8-6-4F, "Unlawful Discharge", of this chapter shall constitute a gross
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2017-1008, 3-8-2017)
   B.   Prosecution Of Violator: Anyone concerned in the violation of this
chapter, whether directly committing the act or omitting to do the thing
constituting the offense or who aids or abets the same, whether present or
absent, and anyone who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires,
commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit such an offense, is
and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter and shall be proceeded
against and prosecuted as such.
   C.   Penalties Enumerated; Civil Infractions: Violations of the following
sections of this chapter are civil infractions and shall be subject to a fine
as follows:
8-6-3A1 - A4, B1 Permit required       $125.00
8-6-4B           Littering             125.00
8-6-4E           Fireworks in the park 125.00
8-6-4G           Annoy others          125.00
8-6-4H           Rules and regulations 50.00
8-6-4I           Alcoholic beverages   50.00
8-6-5B           Camping prohibited    125.00
8-6-6A - D       Motor vehicle         125.00
8-6-6E           Bicycles              50.00
8-6-7            Animal in park        See section
                                       6-3C-2 of this Code
8-6-8            Unlawful park fires   $125.00
 
(Ord. 953, 9-10-2014)
CHAPTER 7
TREES AND PLANTS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Authority For Chapter
8-7-2: Nuisance Conditions; Abatement Required
8-7-3: Enforcement; Resolution Ordering Abatement
8-7-4: Abatement By City; Costs
8-7-1: AUTHORITY FOR CHAPTER:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by section 35.21.310,
chapter 7, laws of 1965 as amended by Revised Code Of Washington 35.21.310.
(1973 Code § 12.20.060)
8-7-2: NUISANCE CONDITIONS; ABATEMENT REQUIRED:
   A.   Obstructing Sidewalks Or Streets: Trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation
or parts thereof which so overhang any sidewalk or street, or which are growing
thereon in such manner as to obstruct or impair the free and full use of the
sidewalk or street by the public are public nuisances.
   B.   Fire Hazard Or Menace: Grass, weeds, shrubs, bushes, trees or
vegetation growing or which have grown and died, and all debris upon any
property and which is a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety or
welfare, are likewise public nuisances.
   C.   Abatement By Property Owner: It is the duty of the owner of the
property wherein or whereon any such nuisances exist to abate the nuisance by
destroying, removing or trimming any such growth, and removing or destroying
any such debris. (1973 Code § 12.20.010)
   D.   Penalty For Failure To Abate Nuisance 1 : The failure or refusal to
comply with any of the provisions of subsections A through C of this section
shall subject the offender to a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1973 Code § 12.20.020)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-1-2 of this code for definition of "noxious weed".
8-7-3: ENFORCEMENT; RESOLUTION ORDERING ABATEMENT:
   A.   Abatement Order By Resolution: The building inspector shall enforce
this chapter and if any property owner fails or refuses to abate any such
nuisance as contemplated by section
8-7-2 of this chapter, the city council may, after report filed by the building
inspector, by resolution require such property owner, in addition or
alternative to the penalty prescribed by subsection
8-7-2D of this chapter, to abate the nuisance by removal or destruction; and if
the removal or destruction is not made by such owner within the time specified,
the building inspector may abate the same as provided by section
8-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Proposed Resolution: The resolution mentioned in subsection A
of this section shall not be passed until the property owner is given at least
five (5) days' notice of the pendency of the proposed resolution. Such notice
shall be given by the city building inspector by mailing a copy of the notice
to the owner as shown upon the records of the county treasurer at the address
shown thereon; and, if no owner and address is shown on such records, a copy of
the notice shall be posted upon the property, and shall also be published in
one issue of the official newspaper. The mailing, posting and publication shall
be made at least five (5) days before the resolution is adopted and proof shall
be made by affidavit of the city building inspector filed with the city clerk.
The notice shall include the resolution number and both shall describe the
property involved and the nature of the hazardous condition constituting the
nuisance. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
8-7-4: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS:
If the nuisance is not abated by removal or destruction by the property owner
within the time fixed in the resolution, the building inspector may abate the
same and he shall render a bill covering the cost to the city of such
abatement, including the building inspector's expense, and mail the bill to the
property owner. If the property owner fails or refuses to pay the bill
immediately, or if no bill is rendered because he cannot be found, the building
inspector in the name of the city may file a lien therefor against said
property which lien shall be in the same form, filed with the same officer and
within the same time and manner and enforced and foreclosed as is provided by
law for liens for labor and material. (1973 Code § 12.20.050)
CHAPTER 8
TELECOMMUNICATIONS MASTER USE PERMITS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Purpose
8-8-2: Policy Guidelines
8-8-3: Definitions
8-8-4: Master Permit Required - Exceptions
8-8-5: Application For A Master Permit
8-8-6: Compensation
8-8-7: General Conditions Governing Use Of Public Rights-Of-Way
8-8-8: Protection Of The City And Residents
8-8-9: Enforcement And Remedies
8-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are to:
   A.   Establish a local policy governing the use of the public rights-of-way
by telecommunications systems and private communications systems;
   B.   Ensure that the City retains the authority to protect the public safety
and welfare with respect to a dynamic industry that is placing increasing
demands on public resources;
   C.   Establish clear and nondiscriminatory local guidelines, standards and
time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation
of the use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications operators;
   D.   Avoid unnecessary local regulation of providers and services;
   E.   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of- way of the
City for communications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   F.   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights- of-way
held in public trust by the City;
   G.   Assure that the City's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public rights-of- way are paid by
the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   H.   Secure, in a nondiscriminatory manner, fair and reasonable compensation
to the City for the private use of the public rights-of-way;
   I.   Assure that providers of telecommunications services comply with the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the City;
   J.   Enable the City to obtain sufficient information to ensure effective
decision making concerning access to City rights-of-way and management of
activity in the rights-of-way;
   K.   Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly
evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development; and
   L.   Provide for the fullest exercise possible of the authority and
discretion of the City to require that:
      1.   Facilities are installed and maintained in the public rights- of-way
in such manner and at such points so as not to inconvenience the public use of
the public rights-of-way or to adversely affect the public, safety and welfare;
      2.   The City is reimbursed and held harmless for the actual costs
incurred by the City by reason of the construction or presence of
communications facilities in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-
2018)
8-8-2: POLICY GUIDELINES:
   A.   The City supports efforts to establish and maintain an open,
competitive marketplace for telecommunications services through the consistent
application of regulations to all telecommunications providers and to that end
the City reserves and intends to exercise all legislative, administrative and
discretionary authority it may have.
   B.   The City intends to manage its rights-of-way proactively, taking into
account the need to:
      1.   Manage access to the public rights-of-way for telecommunications
purposes in a nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral and nonexclusive way;
      2.   Protect the public interest to the extent allowed under applicable
law by collection of fair compensation for use of rights-of-way and by
collecting associated fees, taxes, administrative costs, and construction costs
for use of the rights-of-way;
      3.   Manage rights-of-way to preserve the integrity of the City's
infrastructure, to ensure efficient use of City property, and to ensure
compliance with City ordinances, rules and regulations; and
      4.   Manage and regulate the use of public rights-of-way in the best
interests of the City and its citizens.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to diminish or in any way to
limit the discretionary, administrative or legislative authority of the City
and its officials as respects the management and use of the City's public
rights-of-way or in respect to the granting, delaying, or denying of any master
permit, right-of-way permit or license. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-2018)
8-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be
construed consistent with USC title 47.
ADMINISTRATOR: Means the City Administrator or designee.
APPLICANT: Means any person or entity that applies for a master use permit
under this chapter.
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE: Means the one-way transmission to subscribers of
video programming and other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, that is required for the selection or use of the video programming or
other programming service.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Means a device which alone or as part of an
aggregation of devices is capable of transmitting signals from place to place.
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: Means a telecommunications system.
CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION OR REPAIR: Means the named actions interpreted broadly,
encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance,
replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site
preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready and excavation.
GRANTEE: Means a person holding a master permit.
MASTER PERMIT: Means the franchise granted by the City to an operator of a
telecommunications system under this chapter, giving the operator the
nonexclusive right to occupy the space, or use facilities upon, across,
beneath, or over any public right-of-way in the City, to provide a specified
service within a master permit area. Such master permit shall not include or be
a substitute for:
   A.   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the
ordinances and laws of the City;
   B.   Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with
operations on or in public streets or property;
   C.   Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the City
or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the master
permit including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing
devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements,
whether owned by the City or a private entity; or
   D.   The right to place devices in the right-of-way, such as pay telephones,
for end user use in terminating or originating transmissions.
By way of example, and without limiting the foregoing, this chapter shall not
be read to diminish or in any way affect the authority of the City to control
the use of the City's real estate, fixtures or personal property. Therefore,
any person who desires to use such property must obtain additional approvals,
or agreements for that purpose, as may be required by the City.
MASTER PERMIT AREA: Means the area of the City that a grantee is authorized to
serve by the terms of its master permit or by operation of law.
OPERATOR: Means a person: a) who provides service over a communications system
and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
such facility; or b) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a facility. A person who
operates a telecommunications system or a specific portion of a
telecommunications system under agreement to provide telecommunications
services shall be treated as an operator for purposes of this chapter.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Means communications facilities located above the surface
of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such
facilities.
PERSON: Means corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or
associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals,
including their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Means commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as
defined by Federal law and regulations.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: Means a facility located in the public rights-
of-way that provides communications in connection with a person's business, but
that does not encompass in any respect the provision of telecommunications
services.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OWNER: Means a person that owns or leases a
private communications system.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Means land acquired or dedicated for public roads and
streets. The public rights-of-way may be more specifically defined in the
master permit or right-of-way permit granting the right to use the public
rights-of-way. For purposes of this chapter, the term does not include:
   A.   State highways;
   B.   Land dedicated for roads, streets and highways not opened and not
improved for motor vehicle use by the public;
   C.   Structures such as, but not limited to, poles and conduits located in
the right-of-way;
   D.   Parks and open space;
   E.   Publicly owned shorelines or harbor areas; and
   F.   Utility easements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Means the authorization given by the City as provided in
section
8-5-3 of this title to enter and use the specified right-of-way for the purpose
of installing, maintaining, repairing, or removing identified facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Means the transmission for hire of information in
electronic or optical form, including, but not limited to, voice, video, or
data, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself.
Telecommunications service includes telephone service but does not include
cable television service or over-the-air broadcasts to the public at large from
facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor
thereto.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: Means a facility used to provide one or more
telecommunications services. The term "telecommunications system", by way of
example and not limitation, includes wires, equipment cabinets, guys, conduits,
radio transmitting towers, poles, other supporting structures, and associated
and appurtenant facilities used to transmit telecommunications signals. The
term "telecommunications system" includes all devices mounted on light poles in
the public rights-of-way through which telecommunications services are
originated or terminated.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Means utility, communication, and cable facilities
located underground, but excluding the underground foundations or supports for
overhead facilities.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES: Means facilities that are
necessary to provide personal wireless services that the City has authorized to
be located in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-2018)
8-8-4: MASTER PERMIT REQUIRED - EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Master Permit Requirement: Except as otherwise provided herein, an
operator of a telecommunications facility or a private communications system
owner proposing to use the public right-of- way must obtain from the City
Council a master permit before constructing a telecommunications facility or
providing telecommunications services or constructing a private communications
system. A separate master permit shall be obtained for each use whenever a
particular master permitted communications facility may be used for multiple
purposes, unless applicable Federal or State law prohibits the City from
requiring such additional master permit. A master permit shall only become
effective after the grantee signs an acceptance of the master permit.
   B.   Exceptions: The Administrator may waive the requirement for a master
permit as follows:
      1.   Subject to the requirements of applicable law, a master permit
requirement may be waived in whole or in part for a telecommunications system
or private communications system where the City determines the use of the
public rights-of-way is de minimis (i.e., uses only a short distance of street
or occupies only a small isolated area of a specific street). For such
facilities, the City may issue a right-of-way permit. Every right-of-way permit
shall include or be read to include, as if stated therein, a reservation of
rights by the City to require the permit holder to obtain a master permit if
the City determines that the permit holder's use of the public rights-of- way
has increased substantially and is no longer de minimis use.
      2.   Any operator providing telecommunications service over an existing
telecommunications system in the City's public rights- of-way without having a
master permit from the City authorizing such use at the time this chapter
becomes effective shall apply for a master permit from the City for such use of
the public rights-of-way; provided, that if the operator has obtained a
franchise, permit, license, or other authorization from the City allowing such
use of the public right-of-way, the operator may continue its use of the public
right-of-way pursuant to such franchise, permit, license or other authorization
until the expiration or termination of such authority, at which time the
operator shall apply for and obtain a master permit under this chapter.
      3.   If an operator submits evidence satisfactory to the City that it has
an existing State-wide grant to occupy the public right- of-way, then the
requirement for obtaining a master permit will be suspended until there is a
final judicial decision resolving the issue or the City Council determines that
the best interests of the City will be served by not requiring the operator to
obtain a master permit. The suspension of any master permit requirement under
this section shall not constitute a waiver of any right of the City to require
the operator to obtain a master permit in the future or to remove any or all of
its facilities in the public right-of-way at any time upon its failure to
obtain a master permit. If an operator fails to obtain a master permit and the
master permit requirement is suspended as provided in this subsection, then the
operator shall apply for and obtain a City right-of-way permit prior to
constructing or placing any telecommunications facility in the public right-of-
way.
   C.   Nature Of Grant: Neither a master permit nor a right-of-way permit
shall convey equitable or legal title to the public rights-of-way. The right
granted is only the right to occupy those portions of the public rights-of-way
to which the City has the right to grant access, for the purposes and the time
period stated in the master permit or right-of-way permit, and the right may
not be subdivided or subleased. A master permit or right-of- way permit shall
not grant a vested right for any facility to be located or to remain at any
specific location in the public right-of-way and any right, permission or
consent to occupy any location in the public right-of-way shall be revocable
and terminable at the lawful discretion of the City and the facility therein
removed at the cost of the operator in order to allow free and unencumbered use
of the public right-of-way for public work or other public purpose as may be in
the best public or Municipal interest as determined by the City. Every master
permit shall be:
      1.   Deemed to include all of the provisions that are required to be in a
master permit under this chapter, as if fully set forth in the master permit;
      2.   Deemed to provide for forfeiture under the circumstances set forth
in the provisions of this chapter and any master permit thereunder; and
      3.   Construed to exclude the grant of any rights in any easement granted
for or in favor of any City or public utility facilities or operations, unless
the master permit or license shall expressly state otherwise.
Any reference herein, or in any master permit or right-of- way permit, to a
public right-of-way shall not be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by
the City that its interest or other right to control the use of such property
is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a master permit shall be
deemed to grant no more than those rights which the City may have the
undisputed right and power to give. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-2018)
8-8-5: APPLICATION FOR A MASTER PERMIT:
   A.   Contents Of Application For Initial Or Renewal Master Permit: To obtain
an initial or renewal master permit, an operator of a telecommunications system
must apply for a master permit. The application must contain the following
information, and such information as the City may from time to time reasonably
require:
      1.   Identity of the applicant and corporate structure.
      2.   A proposal for construction of a telecommunications facility that
includes at least the following:
         a.   A description of the services that are to be provided using the
facility;
         b.   The location of proposed facility and facility design, including
a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the
size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed
along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of
the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the
operation of the same; provided, however, that if some of the descriptive data
is not available at the time of application, the master permit may be issued
subject to conditions that the data be filed and approved by the City before
construction begins and that the master permit will be deemed to be forfeited
if the data is not supplied and approved;
         c.   A map of the general route the facility will follow; a
designation of the portions of the system that will be placed above ground and
the portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques
that the operator proposes to use in installing the system above ground and
underground; plan and profile view of the facilities, showing crossings of
existing utilities and elevation above or below ground; a schedule for
construction of the facility describing when and where construction will begin,
how it will proceed, and when it will be completed; and the expected effect on
right-of-way usage, including information on the ability of the public rights-
of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the
system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an
estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities;
         d.   A description, where appropriate, of how services will be
converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done
with existing facilities;
         e.   Identification of the area of the City to be served by the
proposed system, including a description of the proposed area's boundaries
under the master permit; and
         f.   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized
officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of
applicable law.
   B.   Applications For Transfer: An application for a transfer of a master
permit must contain the same information required by subsection A of this
section, except that, if the transferor submitted an application under
subsection A of this section, to the extent information provided by the
transferor under subsection A2 of this section remains accurate, the transferee
may simply cross-reference the earlier application.
   C.   Confidentiality: In the event that subsections A2b and A2c or B of this
section require information that is a business or trade secret and/or
proprietary information and the operator wishes to protect the information
against disclosure, then operator shall provide said information to the City in
a separate envelope marked "Proprietary Information: DO NOT DISCLOSE". The City
will exercise good faith efforts to protect the confidentiality of the business
or trade secrets or proprietary information that is designated as such;
provided further, that: 1) if a public disclosure request is made for
information marked as proprietary, and if the City Attorney determines that
said information may be subject to being disclosed, or 2) the City determines
that the information should be disclosed in connection with its enforcement of
any provision of this chapter, or in the exercise of its police or regulatory
powers, then the City shall notify the operator of the operator's opportunity
to seek a protective order from a court with appropriate jurisdiction. If a
protective order is not obtained within the time limitation set forth in State
law for the City's disclosure of public records, then the City may disclose
said information. The operator is obligated to reimburse and indemnify the City
for all costs, damages and attorneys' fees that may be awarded or assessed by
the court for any actions the City took at the request of operator.
   D.   City Review: The City may request such additional information as it
finds reasonably necessary, and require such modifications to the system
proposed as may be necessary and lawful in the exercise of the City's police
power authority over the use of its public rights-of-way for telecommunications
systems. Once the information required by the City has been provided, the
application shall be subject to review by the City and any approval shall be
subject to the City's determination that:
      1.   The applicant will accept the modifications required by the City to
its proposed system. This section does not authorize the City to exercise
authority it does not otherwise have under applicable law.
      2.   The applicant will accept a master permit satisfactory to the City
and comply with any conditions precedent to its effectiveness.
      3.   In the case of a transfer, any approval will also be subject to a
determination that:
         a.   There will be no adverse effect on the public interest as it
relates to the right-of-way, or the City's interest in the master permit;
         b.   Transferee will agree to be bound by all the conditions of the
master permit and to assume all the obligations of its predecessor; and
         c.   Any outstanding compliance issues will be resolved or preserved
to the satisfaction of the City.
      4.   Unless the applicant agrees to an extension, the City shall approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove an application no later than one hundred
twenty (120) days after a complete application has been filed. Whenever the
City disapproves an application it shall set forth its reasons in writing based
on the substantial evidence in the written record.
   E.   Inaccurate Information: An applicant shall not be issued a master
permit if it files or has previously filed materially inaccurate or misleading
information in a master permit application or intentionally withheld
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide. (Ord. 2018-
1031, 7-11-2018)
8-8-6: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Every operator of a telecommunications facility shall compensate the
City for its actual costs that are related to receiving and approving a master
permit or right-of-way permit, to inspecting plans and construction pursuant
thereto, or to the preparation of a detailed statement pursuant to chapter
43.21C Revised Code of Washington.
      1.   Costs shall be billed to the operator on a time and material basis
in the manner and at the rates provided in a resolution adopted by the City
Council.
      2.   Fees must be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the City's
billing.
      3.   On request of an operator, the City will submit proof of any charges
or expenses incurred. For any project or time frame, an operator can also
request a written estimate from the Administrator, in advance of costs planned
to be expended by the City, and the operator may object to any costs by filing
a written protest with the Administrator. The Administrator shall decide the
protest within five (5) business days, and the decision shall be the final
decision of the City.
   B.   Every operator of a telecommunications facility shall compensate the
City for its actual incremental costs necessarily incurred on City public works
projects because of the presence of telecommunications facilities in the right-
of-way.
      1.   Fees must be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the City's
billing.
      2.   On request of an operator, the City will submit proof of such
incremental costs.
      3.   Before commencing work, the City shall notify the operator of its
proposed project, and the incremental costs the City estimates will be
incurred. The operator may object to any costs by filing written protest with
the Administrator. The Administrator shall decide the protest within five (5)
business days, and the decision shall be the final decision of the City.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the City from collecting a site-
specific charge pursuant to an agreement between the City and a service
provider of personal wireless services acceptable to the parties for:
      1.   The placement of new structures in the right-of-way regardless of
height, unless the new structure is the result of a mandated relocation in
which case no charge will be imposed if the previous location was not charged;
      2.   The placement of replacement structures when the replacement is
necessary for the installation or attachment of wireless facilities, the
replacement structure is higher than the replaced structure, and the overall
height of the replacement structure and the wireless facility is more than
sixty feet (60'); or
      3.   The placement of personal wireless facilities on structures owned by
the City located in the right-of-way. However, a site- specific charge shall
not apply to the placement of personal wireless facilities on existing
structures, unless the structure is owned by the City. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-
2018)
8-8-7: GENERAL CONDITIONS GOVERNING USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Right-Of-Way Permit Required: Before any work is performed in the
public right-of-way, a communications system operator or a private
communications system owner shall obtain a right-of-way permit in accordance
with section
8-5-3 of this title. An application for a right-of-way permit by a grantee
shall be approved or disapproved within thirty (30) days of the date of the
filing of a complete application. A right-of-way permit shall incorporate the
requirements of this chapter in addition to the requirements of section
8-5-3 of this title.
   B.   Responsibility For Costs: Except as expressly provided otherwise, any
act that a communications system operator, its contractors or subcontractors is
required to perform under this section shall be performed at their cost. If a
communications system operator fails to perform work that it is required to
perform within the time provided for performance, the City may perform the work
and bill the communications system operator therefor. The communications system
operator shall pay the amounts billed within thirty (30) days.
   C.   Construction Procedures And Placement Of Facilities - Obligation To
Minimize Interference With Use Of Public Rights-Of- Way:
      1.   The construction, operation, and repair of communications facilities
are subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the City with
jurisdiction over such matters and shall be performed in compliance with all
laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations affecting such system.
      2.   The construction, operation, and repair shall be performed in a
manner consistent with high industry standards and shall meet applicable City
of Orting development standards. Persons engaged in the construction,
operation, or repair of communications facilities shall exercise reasonable
care in the performance of all their activities and shall use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to
cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property.
      3.   Construction, operation, or repair of a communications system shall
not commence until all required permits have been properly filed for and
obtained from the proper City officials and all required permits and associated
fees paid and bonds or other performance security provided. In any permit so
issued, the City may impose as a condition of the granting of the permit such
conditions and regulations as may be necessary to the management of the rights-
of-way, including, by way of example and not limitation, for the purpose of
protecting any structures in the public rights-of-way, for the proper
restoration of such public rights-of-way and structures, and for the protection
of the City and the public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
      4.   A master permit or right-of-way permit may provide for the
conditions under which emergency work may be undertaken before obtaining City
permits where such work is necessary to immediately remedy an emergency
situation involving an imminent danger to health, safety or property or to
temporarily restore communications system services that have been disrupted by
storms, earthquakes, riots or other unexpected accidents. A communications
system operator undertaking such emergency work shall be required:
         a.   To give notice to the City of the commencement of the emergency
work as quickly as practical;
         b.   To apply for the permits which would otherwise be required for
such work by the next business day from the commencement of such work; and
         c.   To conform any work performed prior to the approval of the
required permit and to carry out any other work in the area involved in
accordance with the requirements of the permit.
      5.   Operators of communications systems must follow City- established
requirements for placement of facilities in public rights-of-way, including the
specific location of facilities in the public rights-of-way, and must install
facilities in a manner that minimizes interference with the use of the public
rights-of- way by others. The City may require the installation of facilities
at a particular time, at a specific place, or in a particular manner as a
condition of access to a particular right- of-way; it may require a person
using the rights-of-way to cooperate with others to minimize adverse impacts on
the rights- of-way through joint trenching, joint use of facilities and other
arrangements; it may deny access if an operator is not willing to comply with
the City's requirements; it may remove, or require removal of, any facility
that is not installed in compliance with the requirements established by the
City, or that is installed without prior City approval of the time, place, or
manner of installation; and it shall charge the operator of the facility for
all the costs associated with removal.
      6.   Upon order of the Administrator, all work that does not comply with
the permit, the approved plans or specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this chapter or other applicable law shall be removed.
      7.   Unless otherwise agreed or provided in a master permit or right-of-
way permit, a communications systems operator shall be required to reimburse
and hold harmless the City for any cost or expense reasonably incurred by the
City in planning, construction, installing, altering, or implementing any
public work as a result of the construction or the presence in the public
right-of-way of the facility of such communications system operator.
      8.   The specific location within the right-of-way and the method of
installing facilities underground or overhead will be subject to approval by
the City Engineer. Cutting of pavement in the public right-of-way shall be
prohibited where the City Engineer approves locating underground facilities in
the unimproved portions of the right-of-way or in the sidewalk areas or
requires alternative methods for undergrounding not requiring trenching or the
cutting of pavement.
      9.   Except to allow for compliance with State or Federal law, cutting of
pavement shall be prohibited in any event in a newly constructed or
reconstructed street for a period of five (5) years from the paving of such
street or in a street where a trench was previously available for a period of
three (3) years from the date the trench was available. The City may require as
a condition to the occupancy of the rights-of-way that communications
facilities be located in existing underground ducts or conduits wherever the
capacity exists; provided, however, the City Engineer may in his or her
discretion permit pot-holing (subject to conditions to alleviate the harmful
effects) where conduit is to be placed underground by means of directional
boring and the person seeking permission has provided evidence satisfactory to
the City Engineer that:
         a.   Such pot-holing is necessary to avoid interference with existing
utilities;
         b.   Such pot-holing is the only reasonable alternative available to
locate existing utilities; and
         c.   Such pot-holing will result in little or no visual or other
detrimental impact to the street.
      10.   Any and all public rights-of-way, public property, or private
property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation,
repair or removal of a communications facility shall be promptly repaired by
the communications system operator that disturbed or damaged the public rights-
of-way, public property or private property. Public property and public rights-
of-way must be restored to the satisfaction of the City and to a condition as
good as or better than before the disturbance or damage occurred.
      11.   A communications system operator shall continue to maintain the
restored street area, which may consist of curb, gutter, sidewalk, pavement, or
other restored appurtenances, in a condition as good as or better than the
condition of the adjacent undisturbed area of the street for the life of the
street when such maintenance or restoration is required as:
         a.   A result of the restored street area being defective or otherwise
inferior to the adjacent undisturbed area of the street; or
         b.   A result of the presence of the facilities of the communications
system operator until the restored area is repaved or reconstructed by a
different party.
      12.   Tree trimming shall not be performed without the permission of the
City and other affected authorities, and tree trimming must be performed in
strict accordance with this Code.
      13.   Within forty eight (48) hours after notice from the City, a
communications system operator shall remove any graffiti on any part of its
communications system in the public rights-of-way. If the operator fails to do
so, the City may remove the graffiti and bill the operator for the cost
thereof.
   D.   Relocation And Abandonment Of Facilities:
      1.   A communications system operator shall, by a time specified by the
City, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its
property when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions; public
safety; public right-of-way construction; public right-of-way repair (including
resurfacing or widening); change of public right-of-way grade; construction,
installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal
lines, tracks, or any other type of government- owned communications system,
public work, public facility or improvement, or any government-owned utility;
public right-of-way vacation; or for any other purpose where the work involved
would be aided by the removal or relocation of the communications facility.
Collectively, such matters are referred to below as the "public work".
         a.   Except in the case of emergencies, the City shall provide written
notice describing where the public work is to be performed as soon as practical
but at least thirty (30) days prior to the deadline by which a communications
system operator must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove its facilities. A communications system operator may seek an extension
of the time to perform such tasks where they cannot be performed in thirty (30)
days or by the completion time specified even with the exercise of its best
efforts, and such request for an extension shall not be unreasonably refused.
         b.   In the event of an emergency, or where a communications facility
creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or
property, the City may protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or
relocate any or all parts of the communications facility without prior notice,
and charge the communications system operator for costs incurred.
         c.   If a communications system operator does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the applicable master permit or right-of-way
permit does not provide otherwise, and if not prohibited by applicable law, the
City shall have the right to revoke any right of a communications system
operator to have its facilities remain at a specific location in the public
right-of- way at any time the City determines that the facilities of such
communications system operator must be removed from their present location or
from the street in order to facilitate a public work in the public right-of-way
and upon revocation of the master permit, license or right-of-way permit of the
communications system operator as to the affected designated facilities the
communications system operator shall remove the same and restore the street at
its cost.
      2.   If any person that is authorized to place facilities in the rights-
of-way requests another communications system operator to protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate its facilities to accommodate the
construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of such other person, the
communications system operator shall, after thirty (30) days' advance written
notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested. Unless the
matter is governed by a valid contract or a State or Federal law or regulation,
the reasonable cost of the same shall be borne by the person requesting the
protection, support, temporary disconnection, removal, or relocation and at no
charge to the City, even if the City makes the request for such action on
behalf of such party.
      3.   A communications system operator shall, on the request of any person
holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily raise or
lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or other objects. The expense
of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the
person requesting the same. A communications system operator shall be given not
less than seven (7) days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
      4.   A grantee may abandon and surrender its master permit to the City on
six (6) months' written notice to the Administrator, with copies served on the
Mayor and City Attorney. Abandonment shall be subject to acceptance by the
City, by a resolution of acceptance adopted by the City Council. Upon
abandonment, nonrenewal, revocation or expiration of this master permit, and if
no extension is granted, grantee may, at the discretion of the Administrator,
be required, in part or entirely, to remove all its fiber, wire, poles,
fixtures, and other facilities or equipment installed or used in the enjoyment
of the master permit. Alternatively, the Administrator may direct, limit or
condition grantee's removal, sale or continued use or abandonment of grantee's
facilities and equipment, either by agreement or through means of any other
lawful Municipal power or right. The City may continue to invoke any provision
of this master permit against grantee or any successor entity enjoying de facto
master permit privileges after revocation or expiration. The City may take all
other actions deemed necessary and proper by the City to accommodate the
transition to any successor as may be in the best interests of the City and its
residents.
   E.   Facility Subject To Inspection - Operator Must Provide Information:
Every communications facility shall be subject to the right of periodic
inspection by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, a master permit or right-of-way permit, or other applicable law. The
City shall have the right, upon request, to be notified and be present when the
communications system is inspected by the operator to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, a master permit, right-of-way permit, or
applicable law where the City has enforcement authority. Each operator must
respond to requests for information regarding its system and plans for the
system as the City may from time to time issue, including requests for
information regarding its plans for construction, operation and repair and the
purposes for which the plant is being constructed, operated, or repaired to the
extent such plant is or will be in the public right-of-way or has been or will
be provided under any master permit or right-of-way permit granted by or
requested from the City.
   F.   Underground Services Alert: Each operator of a communications system
that places facilities underground shall be a member of the regional
notification center for subsurface installations and shall field mark the
locations of its underground communications facilities upon request. The
operator shall locate its facilities for the City at no charge. Each operator
shall reasonably cooperate with City initiatives to coordinate underground
fixture locations and installations. Each operator shall be familiar with
chapter 19.122 Revised Code of Washington, Washington State's Underground
Utilities Statute. Each operator shall certify that it understands local
procedures, custom and practice relating to facilities locating, and shall
ensure that its contractors or others working in the right-of-way on grantee's
behalf are similarly well informed.
   G.   Undergrounding Of Lines: Each operator shall recognize the City's right
to preserve and control of the public right-of-way, particularly with respect
to policies regarding the undergrounding of overhead lines for aesthetic
reasons. Consistent with any general Municipal undergrounding policy or program
now or hereafter developed, the City reserves the right to require each
operator's participation in Municipally imposed undergrounding or related
requirements as may now or hereafter arise, as a condition of the operator's
new installation or major maintenance or restoration construction activities of
overhead facilities under this franchise. Each operator shall coordinate its
underground installation and planning activities with the City's underground
plan and policies; provided, in no event shall any third party beneficiary
rights be implied or created. Nothing in this section shall be permitted in
conflict with Revised Code of Washington 35.99.060, and the provisions of this
section shall be applied in conformity thereto.
   H.   Reimbursement: A communications system operator may request
reimbursement from the City as provided in Revised Code of Washington 35.99.060
(3)(a) through (c) and if so requested the City shall make reimbursement as
provided therein.
   I.   Plans For And Publicizing Work:
      1.   Work shall be publicized as the City may direct from time to time to
notify the public and operators of other communications systems of the
impending work, to minimize inconvenience and disruption to the public and to
allow for cooperative construction and for joint use of trenches and
facilities.
      2.   Each communications system operator shall provide the City a plan
for any initial system construction, or for any substantial rebuild, upgrade or
extension of its facility, which shall show its timetable for construction of
each phase of the project, and the areas of the City that will be affected.
      3.   Each operator shall supply and maintain updated, at no cost, any
information requested by the Administrator to coordinate Municipal functions
with the operator's activities and fulfill any Municipal obligations under
State law. The Administrator may request information concerning an installation
inventory, location of existing or planned facilities, maps, plans, and as-
built drawings of the operator's installations in the City. The information may
be requested either in hard copy and/or electronic format compatible with the
City's database system. Each operator shall keep the Administrator informed of
its long- range plans for coordination with the City's long-range plans.
      4.   Each communications facility operator shall maintain accurate maps
and improvement plans which show the location, size, and a general description
of all facilities installed in the public rights-of-way and any power supply
sources (including voltages and connections). Maps shall be based upon post-
construction inspection to verify location. The operator of each communications
facility shall provide a map (on 24-inch by 36- inch bond and/or PDF) to the
City showing the location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as may be
directed by the City Engineer. Vertical and horizontal tolerance limits shall
be +/- 0.01 foot. New system maps shall be promptly submitted to the City when
the facility expands or is relocated. Copies of maps shall be provided on disk,
in a commercially available electronic format specified by the City Engineer or
in such alternate form as approved by the City Engineer.
      5.   The Administrator may, when the City receives application for a
permit to use a particular route, or on the Administrator's own initiative,
designate by published order a route or proposed route for installation of
communications facilities and may:
         a.   Require all persons who wish to place underground facilities
along that route or any part thereof to install them during a specified period;
and
         b.   To the extent allowed by law, otherwise prohibit placement of
such facilities along the route or any part thereof for thirty six (36) months
or for such other, longer period as is necessary to protect the public. (Ord.
2018-1031, 7-11-2018)
8-8-8: PROTECTION OF THE CITY AND RESIDENTS:
   A.   Indemnification: No master permit or right-of-way permit issued to a
communications system operator or a private communications system owner shall
be valid or effective until and unless the City obtains an adequate indemnity
from such operator or owner. Unless otherwise agreed, in writing, adequate
indemnity must:
      1.   Release the City from and against any and all liability and
responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation, or maintenance
of the communications facility in the public right-of-way by the communications
facility operator or private communications system owner; and
      2.   Provide that the indemnification provision shall survive the term of
any master permit or other authorization and continue in full force and effect
as to the communications facility operator's or private communications system
owner's responsibility to indemnify.
   B.   Insurance: A master permit or right-of-way permit issued to a
communications system operator or a private communications system owner shall
not be valid or effective until and unless the City obtains assurance that the
insurance required by the City's insurer is in effect. A communications system
operator or a private communications system owner shall procure and maintain
for the duration of the master permit or right-of-way permit, insurance against
claims for injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise from or in
connection with operations or activities performed by the communications system
operator or a private communications system owner or on their behalf with the
issuance of the master permit or right-of-way permit.
      1.   A grantee or right-of-way permit holder shall not commence
construction or operation of any facilities without obtaining all insurance
required by the City and approval of such insurance by the City, nor shall a
grantee or right-of-way permit holder allow any contractor or subcontractor to
commence work on its contract or subcontract until all such similar insurance
required of the same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance
must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the grantee or right-of-
way permit holder has facilities in the rights-of-way, and for a period
thereafter as specified. If the operator, its contractors, or subcontractors do
not have the required insurance, the City may order such entities to stop
operations until the insurance is obtained and approved.
      2.   Certificates of insurance reflecting evidence of the required
insurance, coverage, endorsements, and ratings shall be filed with the
Administrator. The grantee or right-of-way permit holder shall furnish the City
with original certificates and a copy of the amendatory endorsements, including
the additional insured endorsement, evidencing the insurance requirements of
the grantee or right-of-way permit holder before issuance of the master permit
or right-of-way permit.
      3.   If the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance
shall terminate or lapse during the period of the master permit or license,
then the grantee or right-of-way permit holder shall furnish, at least thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration date of such insurance, a renewed certificate
of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage has been or will be obtained
prior to any such lapse or termination to be in effect during the balance of
the period of the master permit or right-of-way permit under which the
communications system operates. Failure on the part of the grantee or right-of-
way permit holder to maintain the insurance as required shall constitute a
material breach of the master permit or right-of-way permit, upon which the
City may, after giving five (5) business days' notice to the grantee or right-
of-way permit holder to correct the breach, immediately terminate the master
permit or right-of-way permit or, at its discretion, procure or renew such
insurance and pay any and all premiums in connection therewith, with any sums
so expended to be repaid to the City on demand.
      4.   Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of Washington. Financial ratings must be no less
than "A:VII" in the latest edition of "Bests Key Rating Guide", published by
A.M. Best Guide.
      5.   In every master permit or license agreement, the City shall reserve
the right to require any other insurance coverage it deems necessary depending
upon the exposures.
   C.   Performance/Payment Bonds: Every operator of a communications facility
may be required to obtain performance bonds and, if necessary, payment bonds to
ensure the faithful performance of its responsibilities under this chapter and
any master permit, right-of-way permit or license, including a sufficient
amount to cover removal of facilities and/or restoration of City facilities
within rights-of-way. The amount of the performance and payment bonds shall be
set by the Administrator or may be set in a master permit in light of the
nature of the work to be performed and is not in lieu of any additional bonds
that may be required through the permitting process. The bond shall be in a
form acceptable to the City Attorney. The City may from time to time increase
or decrease the amount of the required performance bond to reflect changes in
risks to the City and to the public. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-2018)
8-8-9: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
   A.   Administrator's Responsibilities: The Administrator is responsible for
enforcing and administering this chapter, and the Administrator is authorized
to give any notice required by law or under any master permit, including, by
way of example and not limitation, a notice required under 47 USC section 546.
The Administrator is also authorized to seek information from any
communications system operator, and to take all other actions necessary or
appropriate to the administration of this chapter or any master permit. Master
permits may be denied, issued or revoked only by the City Council. General
administration of the master permit for the City is through the Office of the
Administrator. However, the Administrator may delegate this authority and
responsibility to other agents of the City. All questions of application,
interpretation, conflict or ambiguity arising out of or in connection with a
master permit may be determined through communications with the Administrator,
except where otherwise specifically stated.
   B.   Minimum Contents Of Every Master Permit Or Right-Of-Way Permit: In
addition to satisfying the other applicable requirements of this chapter, every
master permit or right-of-way permit for a communications system shall contain
the following provisions:
      1.   The master permit or right-of-way permit shall provide that neither
the granting of any master permit or right-of-way permit, or any provision
thereof, shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental
right or power, police power, or regulatory power of the City as may exist at
the time the master permit or license is issued or thereafter be obtained.
      2.   The master permit or right-of-way permit shall only authorize
occupancy of the right-of-way to provide the services and for the purposes
described in the master permit or license.
      3.   A master permit or right-of-way permit shall be a privilege that is
held in the public trust and personal to the original grantee or permit holder.
The master permit or right-of-way permit shall ensure that no transfer of the
master permit or license may occur, directly or indirectly, without the prior
consent of the City.
      4.   The master permit or license shall contain appropriate provisions
for enforcement, and protection of the public, consistent with the other
provisions of this chapter.
      5.   The master permit or license shall be for a specified term, set
forth in the master permit or license. A master permit issued under this
chapter shall be for a term of no longer than five (5) years, unless the City
Council determines that a longer period would be in the City's interest. A
right-of-way permit issued under this chapter shall be for a term of no longer
than one year.
   C.   Penalties: Any person found to have occupied or carried out activities
in the public rights-of-way without first having obtained or having in effect a
valid master permit, license, or right-of-way permit as required by this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any such
occupancy or activity shall continue in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
   D.   Revocation, Reduction Of Term, Or Forfeiture Of Master Permit Or Right-
Of-Way Permit:
      1.   Revocation Of Permits: A master permit or right-of-way permit may be
revoked for violation of any terms and conditions of the master permit or other
City ordinances, resolutions or policy including but not limited to the
following:
         a.   Construction or operation in the public rights-of-way of the City
or on City property in a manner in violation of a master permit or right-of-way
permit;
         b.   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location in the
public rights-of-way of the City or on City property;
         c.   Misrepresentation by or on behalf of the operator in any material
respect in any application or written statements or documents to the City on
which the City relies in making the decision to grant, review, or amend the
master permit or right- of-way permit;
         d.   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public
rights-of-way or on City property;
         e.   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required by this
chapter, master permit, or right-of-way permit;
         f.   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees, or costs when and as
due the City under this chapter;
         g.   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the operator; or
         h.   Violation of any material provision of this chapter or master
permit which is not timely cured on notice to the operator by the City.
      2.   Written Notice: If the City believes that grounds exist for
revocation of the master permit, the operator shall be given written notice of
the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the grounds for revocation. The notice shall provide the operator
a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
         a.   That corrective action has been or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
         b.   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; or
         c.   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
      3.   Administrator Actions: If the Administrator determines that the
operator has failed to comply with the master permit, the Administrator shall
enter a written order of violation and impose sanctions, including revocation
of the master permit, a requirement for curative actions, and/or a fine not to
exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The decision of the Administrator
shall be based upon the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the
violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
         a.   Whether the misconduct was egregious;
         b.   Whether substantial harm resulted;
         c.   Whether the violation was intentional;
         d.   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or
other requirements;
         e.   Whether there is a history of overall compliance; and
         f.   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or
cured; provided, that no opportunity for cure is allowed for fraud, which shall
be deemed incurable.
      4.   Appeals:
         a.   The operator may appeal any decision of the Administrator to the
hearing examiner by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within ten (10) calendar days of the date of issuance of the Administrator's
decision. The notice of appeal must include a copy of the Administrator's
decision and a complete record originally submitted to the Administrator by the
operator. The City Clerk shall forward the appeal and the record to the hearing
examiner who shall set the matter for hearing as provided in the adopted rules
for hearing examiner appeals.
         b.   The hearing examiner shall consider the record before the
Administrator and written and oral argument based upon that record; provided,
that the hearing examiner may, upon a showing of good cause, allow appellant to
introduce additional evidence and the City shall be allowed to rebut such
evidence. The operator shall have the burden of establishing that the
Administrator's decision is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence.
         c.   The hearing examiner shall accord substantial weight to the
Administrator's decision. The hearing examiner shall either affirm or reverse
the Administrator's decision. The hearing examiner's decision shall be the
final decision of the City.
      5.   Master Permit Forfeited: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may
declare a master permit forfeited without opportunity to cure or the notice
required by subsection D3 of this section where the operator fails to begin to
exercise its rights under the master permit within a period specified in the
master permit. However, an operator shall have the right to receive thirty (30)
days' prior notice of intent to declare a master permit forfeited, and shall
have the opportunity to show cause why the master permit should not be
forfeited.
      6.   Automatic Termination: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a master
permit or right-of-way permit will automatically terminate by force of law one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of
creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business
of the operator, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy
assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding.
However, the master permit or right-of-way permit may be reinstated within that
120-day period if: a) such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been
vacated; or b) such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the master permit or right-of- way
permit and has executed an agreement, approved by any court having
jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of
this chapter and the master permit or right-of-way permit. However, in the
event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment
or property of an operator, the City may revoke the master permit or right-of-
way permit, following a public hearing before the City Council, by serving
notice on the operator and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event
the master permit or right-of- way permit and all rights and privileges of the
master permit or right-of-way permit will be revoked and will terminate thirty
(30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless: a) the City has approved
the transfer of the master permit or right-of-way permit to the successful
bidder; and b) the successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the City to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the master permit or right-
of-way permit and this chapter.
   E.   Sale, Lease, Assignment:
      1.   This master permit or license shall not be sold, leased, assigned,
or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the City, and no rule of
estoppel shall be invoked against the City in case the City shall assert the
invalidity of any attempted transfer in violation of this section. The City
agrees not to withhold consent where the operator demonstrates that the
requested assignment is in the nature of a change of name or a change in the
nature of a reorganization or merger of or with an entity controlled by,
controlling, or under the common control of the operator, there being no other
change in the resulting entity's ability to meet its master permit or license
obligations.
      2.   The City reserves the right to invoke any or all provisions of this
master permit or license upon the operator's successors or assigns, judgment
creditors, or distributers of facilities or property used in enjoyment of
privileges conferred herein, whether or not stated elsewhere, all without
waiver of the right to withhold consent not expressly given of any such
transfer and/or require a new master permit or license.
      3.   The operator shall not permit installations by others in the
permitted areas, without written approval from the Administrator. Such approval
shall not be in lieu of a master permit or license or other requirements of the
City. Whether or not permitted, the operator shall remain responsible for all
third party users permitted or allowed by the operator for compliance with the
master permit or license. The intent of this provision is so third parties who
might otherwise desire to use the operator's facilities are also required to
comply with City requirements regarding master permit or right-of-way permit,
as may apply.
   F.   Effect Of Termination Or Forfeiture: Upon termination or forfeiture of
a license or master permit, whether by action of the City as provided above, or
by passage of time, the operator shall be obligated to cease using the
communications system for the purposes authorized by the master permit. The
City may either take possession of some or all of the operator's facilities in
the public rights-of-way or require the operator or its bonding company to
remove some or all of the operator's facilities from the public rights-of-way
and restore the public rights-of-way to its same, or better, condition. If the
operator neglects, refuses, or fails to remove such facility, the City may
remove the facility at the expense of the operator. The operator's obligation
to remove shall survive the termination of the master permit or right-of-way
permit for a period of two (2) years; provided, that this provision does not
permit the City to take possession of, or require the operator to remove, any
facilities that are used to provide another service for which the operator
holds a valid master permit or right-of-way permit issued by the City.
   G.   Remedies Cumulative: All remedies under this chapter and any master
permit or right-of-way permit are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated.
The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the
exercise of a remedy or the payment of liquidated damages or penalties relieve
a communications system operator of its obligations to comply with its master
permit or license. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in addition,
the City may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. Recovery by the City
of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond, the Security Fund or
letter of credit, or otherwise, does not limit a communications system
operator's duty to indemnify the City in any way; nor shall such recovery
relieve a communications system operator of its obligations under a master
permit, or right-of-way permit, limit the amounts owed to the City, or in any
respect prevent the City from exercising any other right or remedy it may have.
   H.   Compliance With Laws: Each operator shall comply with all applicable
laws heretofore and hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of
its master permit or right-of-way permit.
   I.   Reservation Of Authority: The City may do all things that are necessary
and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter.
   J.   No Waiver - Performance Or Compliance: The failure of the City to
insist on timely performance or compliance by any person holding a master
permit or right-of-way permit shall not constitute a waiver of the City's right
to later insist on timely performance or compliance by that person or any other
person holding such a master permit or right-of-way permit.
   K.   Chapter Not A Contract: The City expressly reserves the right to amend
this chapter and any master permit, right-of-way permit or license hereunder
from time to time in the exercise of its lawful powers. The provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed to create or to be a contract.
   L.   No Waiver - Enforcement: The failure of the City to enforce any
provision of this chapter on any occasion shall not operate as a waiver or
estoppel of this right to enforce any provision of this chapter on any other
occasion, nor shall the failure to enforce any prior ordinance, law or
contractual provision affecting communications facilities or communications
system operators act as a waiver or estoppel against application of this
chapter or any other provision of applicable law. (Ord. 2018-1031, 7-11-2018)
CHAPTER 9
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Unauthorized Occupancy Of Rights-Of-Way And/Or Sidewalks
8-9-2: Prohibition On Providing Commercial Goods Or Services Within Rights-Of-
Way Or Without Permit
8-9-1: UNAUTHORIZED OCCUPANCY OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND/OR SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall sit or lie down upon, or place a blanket,
sleeping bag, back pack, chair mattress, couch, stool, or any similar
equipment, item, or furniture upon a public sidewalk, or any portion of the
public right-of-way, whether improved or unimproved, in the area identified in
Exhibit A to Ordinance 2021-1088.
   B.   Exceptions: The prohibitions in subsection A of this section shall not
apply to any person:
      1.   Temporarily sitting or lying down on a sidewalk due to a medical
emergency;
      2.   Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker,
or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
      3.   Operating of patronizing an activity on the public sidewalk or
public right-of-way pursuant to a City issued permit for the activity; or a
person participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, meeting, or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk
pursuant to a street use or other applicable permit issued by the City.
Nothing in any of these expectations shall be construed to permit any conduct
which is prohibited by any City ordinance or regulation.
   C.   No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages
in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by law
enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section and refuses or
intentionally fails to cease such activity when ordered to do so.
   D.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by up to
ninety (90) days in jail, a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), or
both. (Ord. 2021-1088, 10-27-2021)
8-9-2: PROHIBITION ON PROVIDING COMMERCIAL GOODS OR SERVICES WITHIN RIGHTS-OF-
WAY OR WITHOUT PERMIT:
No Commercial Goods or Services to be Provided within the Right-of-Way or
without a Permit. No person may provide food, beverages, goods, supplies or
services of any sort for a commercial purpose within the public right of way in
the area described in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein unless
authorized by a valid commercial use of the right-of-way permit issued by the
City. The permit shall identify the specific activity authorized by the permit,
the specific location at which such activity is permitted, and the times during
which the activity may occur. The City may issue such permit only if it
determines that the activity and location for which the permit is requested
will not have an unreasonable adverse impact on the neighborhood, other uses in
the vicinity, or the public’s use of the right-of-way, and if the permit
application meets all requirements established for commercial use of the right
of way. The City may revoke such permit at any time if it determines that the
activity does have an unreasonable adverse impact on the neighborhood, other
uses in the vicinity, or the public’s use of the right-of-way. A fee for the
commercial use of rights-of-way permit may be adopted by resolution, and
council may adopt additional rules regulating the commercial use of the right-
of-way.
(Ord. 2021-1088, 10-27-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-1110, 7-26-2023)
CHAPTER 10
COMPLETE STREETS PROGRAM
SECTION:
8-10-1: Purpose And Vision
8-10-2: Definitions
8-10-3: Exceptions
8-10-4: Complete Streets Infrastructure
8-10-5: Goals To Foster Partnerships
8-10-6: Best Practices Criteria
8-10-1: PURPOSE AND VISION:
   The City of Orting shall, to the extent practical, scope, plan, design,
construct, operate and maintain appropriate facilities for the safe
accommodation of pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, emergency responders,
freight and users of all ages and abilities in all new construction, retrofit
or reconstruction projects. Through ongoing operations and maintenance, the
City of Orting shall identify cost effective opportunities to include Complete
Streets practices.
(Ord. 2023-1117A, 9-27-2023)
8-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
COMPLETE STREET: A road that is designed to be safe for drivers, bicyclists,
and pedestrians of all ages and abilities.
COMPLETE STREETS INFRASTRUCTURE: Design features that contribute to a safe,
convenient, or comfortable travel experience for users, including but not
limited to features such as: sidewalks; shared use paths; bicycle lanes;
automobile lanes; paved shoulders; street trees and landscaping; planting
strips; curbs; accessible curb ramps; bulb outs; crosswalks; refuge islands;
pedestrian and traffic signals, including countdown and accessible signals;
signage; street furniture; bicycle parking facilities; public transportation
stops and facilities; traffic calming devices such as rotary circles, traffic
humps, and surface treatments such as paving blocks, textured asphalt, and
concrete, narrow vehicle lanes; and raised medians.
STREET PROJECT: The construction, reconstruction, retrofit, maintenance,
alteration, or repair of any street, and includes the planning, design,
approval, and implementation processes.
USERS: Individuals or vehicles that use streets, including pedestrians,
bicyclists, freight, automobiles, public transportation vehicles and riders,
and people of all ages and abilities, including children, youth, families,
older adults, and individuals with disabilities.
(Ord. 2023-1117A, 9-27-2023)
8-10-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists and/or people of all abilities are not
required to be provided under the following circumstances:
   A.   When elements of this policy would require the accommodation of street
uses prohibited by law;
   B.   For routine maintenance activities such as mowing, snowplowing,
sweeping, spot repair, joint or crack sealing, or pothole filing;
   C.   Paving projects which involve widening pavement may exclude elements of
this policy when the accommodation of a specific use is expected to require
more space than is physically available, located where both current and future
demand is proven absent or drastically increase project costs and equivalent
alternatives exists within close proximity;
   D.   Adverse impacts on environmental resources such as streams, wetlands,
floodplains, or on historic structures or sites above and beyond the impacts of
currently existing infrastructure;
   E.   Cost would be disproportionate to the current need or probable future
use;
   F.   Development of sidewalks in areas falling outside those identified as
appropriate for sidewalks on the basis of an adopted sidewalk policy;
   G.   In instances where a documented exception is granted by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 2023-1117A, 9-27-2023)
8-10-4: COMPLETE STREETS INFRASTRUCTURE:
   As feasible, Orting shall incorporate "Complete Streets Infrastructure" into
existing public streets to create a comprehensive, integrated, connected
transportation network for Orting that balances access, mobility, health and
safety needs of pedestrians (American with Disabilities Act and Title VI
compliance), bicyclists, motorists, emergency responders, freight and users of
all ages and abilities, ensuring a fully connected, integrated network that
provides transportation options.
(Ord. 2023-1117A, 9-27-2023)
8-10-5: GOALS TO FOSTER PARTNERSHIPS:
   It is a goal of the City of Orting to foster partnerships with all
Washington State transportation funding agencies including the Washington State
Department of Transportation (WSDOT), the Transportation Improvement Board
(TIB), the Federal Highway Administration, Pierce County, Orting School
District, citizens, businesses, interested groups, neighborhoods, and any
funding agency assisting in the City's implementation of the Complete Streets
ordinance.
(Ord. 2023-1117A, 9-27-2023)
8-10-6: BEST PRACTICES CRITERIA:
   The City Council or designee shall modify, develop and adopt policies,
design criteria, standards and guidelines based upon recognized best practices
in street design, construction, and operations including but not limited to the
latest relevant editions of the America Association of State Highway
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) manuals while reflecting the context and character of the surrounding
built and natural environments and enhance the appearance of such.
(Ord. 2023-1117A, 9-27-2023)
TITLE 9
WATER AND SEWERS
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-1A-1: Short Title
9-1A-2: Effective Date
9-1A-3: Ordinance Not A Contract
9-1A-4: Definitions
9-1A-5: Offenses
9-1A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Article shall be known and cited as the WATER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY. (1973
Code § 13.04.010)
9-1A-2: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Chapter shall take effect on August 1, 1966. (1973 Code § 13.04.020)
9-1A-3: ORDINANCE NOT A CONTRACT:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be taken as creating any contractual
obligation between the City and any person receiving water from the City or as
limiting in any way the City's right to amend this Chapter or to change the
terms and conditions upon which water is provided and sold. (1973 Code §
13.04.030)
9-1A-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the
meaning ascribed to them below. (1973 Code § 13.08.010)
APPLICANT: The owner or authorized agent of the property to be served, and the
applicant shall be the responsible person for payment of bills for domestic
water service. (1973 Code § 13.08.020)
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USERS: All users other than single residences,
multiple residences or apartment houses and includes motels, hotels, rooming
houses and similar establishments as well as other business establishments.
(1973 Code § 13.08.030)
DEPARTMENT: The Water Department of the City. (1973 Code § 13.08.040)
DOMESTIC WATER OR DOMESTIC WATER SYSTEM: That water and water system which is
for human consumption and normal household and business or industrial uses
provided from the City's supply. (1973 Code § 13.08.050)
PERSON: Wherever used in this Chapter, means and includes natural persons,
associations, partnerships and corporations, whether acting by themselves or by
servant, agent or employee. (1973 Code § 13.08.060)
POINT OF DELIVERY: The point as designated by the Water Department on or inside
the customer's property line to which water will be delivered. Placement of a
water meter has no relationship to the point of delivery. (1973 Code §
13.08.070)
RESIDENTIAL USER: Includes the following:
   A.   "Single residential dwelling unit", which means a separate dwelling
house occupied by one family;
   B.   "Multiple residence", which means a residential building designed for
occupancy by two (2) families in separate dwelling units or two (2) separate
dwellings on one service each unit having separate kitchen facilities; and
   C.   "Apartment house", which means a building designated for occupancy by
three (3) or more families in separate dwelling units, each having separate
kitchen facilities. (1973 Code § 13.08.080)
WATER/WASTEWATER PLANT OPERATOR: The Water/Wastewater Plant Operator of the
City of Orting or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. (1973 Code §
13.08.090)
9-1A-5: OFFENSES:
   A.   Tampering With System Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, except
when duly authorized by an administrative head of the Department or by a member
of the Fire Department, to open, operate, close, turn on, turn off, interfere
with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with a fire hydrant, stop
valve or stopcock belonging to the City. (1973 Code § 13.32.010)
   B.   Unauthorized Digging In Street Or Sidewalk Prohibited: No person shall
dig into any street or sidewalk for the purpose of laying, moving or repairing
any water service line, water main, valve, hydrant or stopcock without having
secured permission to do so from the administrative head of the Department.
(1973 Code § 13.32.020)
   C.   Theft Of Water: No person shall bypass any water meter, damage or
tamper with such meter with intent to prevent or alter its recording of water,
tap a water line, connect to a water hydrant or in any other way tamper with
any part of the water system with intent to secure water without paying
therefor or without properly making the applications or paying the deposits
required by this Chapter. (1973 Code § 13.32.030)
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Violation; Penalty: Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1973 Code § 13.32.050)
      2.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the other penalties for such
act provided by this Chapter, any such person found guilty of any such act may
be denied water service for a period not in excess of one year and may be
required to post a cash bond equal to ten (10) times his ordinary anticipated
monthly billing as a precondition to future service. (1973 Code § 13.32.040)
ARTICLE B. CONNECTION AND SERVICE APPLICATIONS; REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1B-1: Owner Liable For Construction Costs
9-1B-2: Permit Required; Application
9-1B-3: General Facilities And Connection Charges
9-1B-4: Installation And Maintenance Of Service Line And Meter
9-1B-5: Connections Outside City Limits
9-1B-6: Maintenance Of Certain Existing Lines
9-1B-7: Water Service Application; Deposit
9-1B-8: Control Valve Placement Or Removal; Deposit
9-1B-9: Application For Temporary Supplies
9-1B-10: Water Meters
9-1B-11: Responsibility For Protection Of City Property
9-1B-12: Water Supply Protection; Cross Connections Prohibited
9-1B-13: Ownership, Maintenance And Testing Of Equipment
9-1B-14: Inspections
9-1B-15: Right Of Access
9-1B-1: OWNER LIABLE FOR CONSTRUCTION COSTS:
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
building water and service connection line shall be borne by the property
owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
water and service connection. (Ord. 853, 8-29-2007)
9-1B-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any water main or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city. A person
desiring to install a water service line to a building or property shall submit
a signed application for a permit provided by the department and, at the time
of and as a condition of approval of the permit, shall pay a connection fee as
identified in subsection
9-1B-3B of this article. The connection fee is not refundable.
   B.   Service Dependent On Distribution System: The connection of any water
service line to the water main is dependent upon available water distribution
facilities, and the department is not required to approve installation of a
water service line in areas not served by the existing water distribution
system or where a system is inadequate to handle increased demand that would
result from the applicant's proposed use. (Ord. 853, 8-29-2007)
9-1B-3: GENERAL FACILITIES AND CONNECTION CHARGES:
   A.   General Facilities Charges:
      1.   Every applicant for a new service connection to the city's public
water system shall be assessed and pay a general facilities charge as
authorized herein pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 35.92.025. The general
facilities charge for the water system shall represent payment to the city of
the applicant's pro rata share of the capital costs associated with the utility
facilities and may be assessed upon the property.
      2.   The general facilities charge shall be based upon equivalent
residential units and based upon the city engineer's recommendation; provided
that, general facilities charges that have been paid as a result of prior
development activities on the property, or portion thereof, or through
participation in an LID or ULID shall not be reassessed. The determination of
the number of ERUs for each applicant is based on the intended use of the
building/facility/improvements at full capacity.
      3.   The applicant for a subdivision or planned unit development
(resulting in creation of greater than 4 building lots) shall be assessed and
pay the general facility charge upon submission of an application for approval
of the final plat or final plan approval for each phase of the planned unit
development; provided that, if the property is to be subdivided by a
subdivision, at the time of submission of a completed application for final
plat approval. The applicant for a binding site plan shall pay the general
facilities charge prior to and as a condition of approval of the binding site
plan. The city and applicant may agree to include a different schedule or
method for payment of general facilities charges in a development agreement or
other binding agreement between the city and the property owner relating to
development of the property. The applicant for a building permit for single lot
construction (up to 4 building lots) shall pay the general facility charge at
the time, and as a condition, of building permit issuance and prior to physical
service connection to the city's water system. (Ord. 907, 6-29-2011)
      4.   The base general facilities charge for each equivalent residential
unit and any additional surcharges shall be set by ordinance or resolution of
the city council. (Ord. 2016-1002, 12-14-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
   B.   Connection Charges: There shall be established a connection fee which
the property owner shall be required to pay to the city for the cost of
installation of the meter (when applicable), and inspections of the water
service line and connection. The connection fees are reflective of the
inspection time costs associated with installation of different sized water
meters. The connection fee is to be paid at the time of permit issuance. If the
connection fee is not paid, the city will not allow connection to the water
main. The connection fees are hereby established as follows:
 
                          Rate  
In city classification:
 Residential/commercial/ $475.00
  industrial
Outside city limits classification:
 Residential/commercial/ 515.00
  industrial
 
(Ord. 853, 8-29-2007)
   C.   Disconnection Charges: There shall be established a disconnection fee
which the property owner shall be required to pay to the city for the cost of
disconnection of water service (when applicable). The disconnection fees are
reflective of the direct and indirect costs associated with disconnection of
water service. The disconnection fee, when disconnection is requested by the
property owner or customer, is to be paid at the time of the request. The
disconnection fees are hereby established as follows:
 
                        Rate  
In city classification:  
 Residential           $100.00
 Commercial            200.00
Outside city limits classification:
 Residential           200.00
 Commercial            300.00
 
(Ord. 904, 3-9-2011)
   D.   Equitable Adjustment Of General Facilities Charges: There is hereby
established an equitable adjustment to the general facilities charges
applicable to the applicant, or applicant's successor, for a subdivision,
planned unit development or binding site plan pursuant to subsection A of this
section, to be known as the "general facilities equitable adjustment charge".
The general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be assessed and paid
at the time of building permit issuance based upon the number of equivalent
residential units assigned to the building/facility/improvements to be
constructed under the building permit. The amount of the general facilities
equitable adjustment charge shall be calculated for each equivalent residential
unit as follows:
The difference between the rate for the general facilities charge effective
upon the date that the completed application for the building permit is filed
and the rate for the general facilities charge effective on the date of
assessment of the general facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of
payment. In the event that there has been no increase in the rate for the
general facilities charge between the date of assessment of the general
facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of payment, and the date the
completed building permit application is filed, the equitable adjustment will
be zero. In the event that there has been a decrease in the rate for the
general facilities charge between the date of assessment of the general
facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of payment, and the date the
completed building permit application is filed, the equitable adjustment will
be zero. For purposes of this section, prepaid shall mean general facilities
charges paid prior to the date of assessment.
Payment of the general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be a
precondition to issuance of the building permit and approval of a service
connection to the water main; provided that, the applicant and the city may
agree to a different schedule or method for payment of the general facilities
equitable adjustment charge pursuant to a development agreement or other
binding agreement between the city and the property owner relating to
development of the property.
   E.   Application Of General Facilities Equitable Adjustment Charge: General
facilities charges are intended to ensure that historic costs of water system
development are equitably shared by property owners who have not contributed to
the costs of system development. General facilities charges assessed upon final
plat, planned unit development or binding site plan approval will not include
costs of water system development, if any, incurred after such assessment but
prior to connection to the water system. The general facilities equitable
adjustment charge is therefore intended to apply to all applicants, and their
successors, who have paid general facilities charges pursuant to subsection A
of this section, whether or not paid before or after the effective date hereof;
provided that, the provisions in this subsection are not intended to and shall
not be construed to amend or alter the provisions set forth in a binding
development agreement or other binding agreement between the city and the
property owner relating to development of the property.
   F.   Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection E of this
section, the general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall not apply to
property, or any portion thereof, for which a service connection is made
pursuant to a building or connection permit that was issued on or before the
later of: 1) June 16, 2013; or 2) two (2) years following the date of
assessment of the general facilities charge. (Ord. 907, 6-29-2011)
9-1B-4: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE LINE AND METER:
   A.   Owner Responsibility: Upon approval of the permit by the department and
payment of the connection fee, the applicant shall, within the time period set
forth in the permit, install the water service line connection to the water
main in a right of way or easement, and the service line from this connection
up to and including a stopcock at the point of delivery. The applicant shall
install a connection for the water meter at the point of delivery or at a
location provided by the applicant that is satisfactory to the department on or
within the customer's premises. The city shall supply and install the water
meter when the meter is a five-eighths inch by three-fourths inch (5/8" x 3/4")
meter. Larger meters shall be paid for and installed by the applicant. The
meter location, if one is installed, must be unobstructed and readily
accessible. Maintenance, ownership and control of the meters, stopcocks, water
main, service lines, and service line connections shall be as set forth at
section
9-1B-13 of this article.
   B.   Construction Requirements: The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building water and service connection and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the
trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes
or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of Code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of ASTM and WSDOT/APWA standard specifications,
current edition, shall apply. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the City Engineer before installation. The water
service line from the point of delivery to the customer's building shall be
placed at least eighteen inches (18") below the surface of the ground, and
shall be provided with a stopcock or valve with which the customer may shut off
the water supply to perform repair or alteration work.
   C.   Inspection Prior To Connection: The applicant for the water service
line connection permit shall notify the City when the building water service
line and connection are ready for inspection and connection to the public
water. The connection to the public water main and installation of the meter
shall be made under the supervision of the City Engineer or his/her designee.
The City Engineer or his/her designee may require testing of the service as
part of the inspection.
   D.   Barricades And Lighting Of Excavations: All excavations for water
service lines and service connection installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard, in
accordance with the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 853, 8-29-
2007)
9-1B-5: CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Application For Service: Whenever any one or more persons outside the
limits of the City not already furnished with water by the City desires the
system to be extended so as to furnish any premises with water which are not
already connected with the system, such person or persons shall apply to the
City Council to have such water service so extended. Such application shall
designate the premises to be supplied and the number of services desired,
together with the plans and specifications for the extension.
   B.   Main And Pipe Installation By Owner: Should such permits be granted by
the City Council, the applicant shall, at his own expense, install all
necessary mains and pipes according to the specifications of the City and
furnish or perform all labor, and shall also, at his own expense, install a
separate meter for each premises to be supplied from such extension if the
meter is required by the City.
   C.   Sign Contract: Before connecting such pipe with the Municipal water
system, one property owner to be supplied by each extension shall sign a
contract therefor with the City.
   D.   Meter Installation By City; Payment Of Charges: The City may, at its
option, install one meter, either at the City limits or at the beginning of
such new extension, and all water supplied through such meter shall be charged
to and paid for by the property owner who signs such contract.
   E.   Compliance With Rules And Regulations: Except as otherwise provided in
this section, all other rules and regulations of this chapter shall govern the
use of the water of such extension. (1973 Code § 13.28.010)
9-1B-6: MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN EXISTING LINES:
Where, on the effective date hereof, one service line serves two (2) or more
residential properties, the common service line shall be maintained by the City
and each property owner shall maintain the line serving only his own property;
provided, however, that the City maintenance responsibility shall not extend
beyond the limits of public easements. The department, at its discretion, may
require the rearranging of piping systems to provide for separate services. In
such case, the rearranging of the piping shall be done by the customer and a
fee for meter installation, based upon actual material and labor cost for this
installation, shall be paid by customer. (1973 Code § 13.12.060)
9-1B-7: WATER SERVICE APPLICATION; DEPOSIT:
   A.   The occupant, lessee or owner of any property desiring the City to
provide water to such property shall prepare and sign a water service
application on forms prescribed by the City before water service is provided to
the subject property. The person signing the application shall be responsible
for the payment of water supplied to the property and the water bills forwarded
to said person together with any charges for connection of service or
discontinuance of service, reserving the right of the City to file utility
liens against the subject property in the event of a delinquency in payment.
   B.   Two (2) or more parties who join in one application for service shall
be jointly and severally liable for payment of bills and shall be billed by
means of single periodic bills. (Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
9-1B-8: CONTROL VALVE PLACEMENT OR REMOVAL; DEPOSIT:
The cost of placing and removing a control valve shall be paid by the
prospective customer at the time of making application for the service. The
cost of same shall be established by formal resolution of the City Council.
(1973 Code § 13.12.100)
9-1B-9: APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY SUPPLIES:
Any person other than authorized employees of the City requiring the use for
special water supplies of any hydrant, stopcock or valve belonging to the City
must make written application therefor on the form provided by the department
and pay a deposit in accordance with section
9-1B-8 of this article. The department shall then send an inspector appointed
by the water/wastewater plant operator to open such hydrant, stopcock or valve.
The rates shall be as provided in section
9-1B-3 of this article and section
9-1D-3 of this chapter. (1973 Code § 13.12.090)
9-1B-10: WATER METERS:
   A.   Installation On Unmetered Service Lines: The department may at any time
require the installation of a water meter on an unmetered service line. The fee
for such installation amounting to actual labor and material and cost shall be
paid by the customer. Where water is now supplied to more than one building
through a single service line, the department, at its discretion may require
the rearranging of the piping system to provide for separate metering. In such
case, the rearrangement of piping shall be done by the customer, and the fee
for meter installation, based on actual material and labor costs of the
installation, shall be paid by the customer. (1973 Code § 13.12.110)
   B.   Ownership Of Meters: All water meters installed pursuant to the
requirements of this article shall be and become the property of the City.
(Ord. 853, 8-29-2007)
9-1B-11: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROTECTION OF CITY PROPERTY:
It shall be the responsibility of each customer to protect the water meter
service line and shutoff device inside customer's building from damage due to
frost. All such equipment, either inside or outside, must be protected by the
customer from damage from backup hot water or steam. Any repair costs from such
damage suffered by the City due to negligence of the customer shall be charged
to the customer on his regular bill and shall constitute a charge for water
service. (1973 Code § 13.12.130)
9-1B-12: WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION; CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
The installation or maintenance of cross connections between pipelines
connected directly or indirectly to the City water distribution system or any
other source of water supply is prohibited. (1973 Code § 13.12.140)
9-1B-13: OWNERSHIP, MAINTENANCE AND TESTING OF EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Ownership Vested In City: All water mains, valves, service lines and
stopcocks up to the point of delivery and water meters shall be the property of
the City and shall be under the exclusive control of the department. (1973 Code
§ 13.24.010)
   B.   Maintenance By Department: It shall be the exclusive responsibility of
the City to maintain, repair or replace any water main, hydrant, valve, City
owned service line, City owned stopcock or water meter. (1973 Code § 13.24.020)
   C.   Meter Tests: The Water Department will, at the City's expense, make
periodic tests and inspection of meters in order to maintain a high standard of
accuracy. When a test of the water meter is requested by a customer, the
customer shall make a deposit as set by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council before such test is made. If the test discloses an error of three
percent (3%) or less, no adjustment in the bills will be made and the deposit
will be maintained as such charge as set by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council for the test. If the test discloses an error in excess of three percent
(3%), a correction will be made in the billing for the previous billing period;
but no charge will be made for the test and the deposit will be refunded. (1973
Code § 13.24.030; amd. 1996 Code)
9-1B-14: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Right Of Entry: The duly authorized and properly identified employees
of the department shall have the right, but shall not be obligated to inspect
the water supply, piping and plumbing at any customer's premises before or
after water service is turned on.
   B.   Refusal Or Discontinuance Of Service: Service may be refused or
discontinued when such piping or plumbing is not in conformance with the
applicable City ordinance.
   C.   Nonliability Of City: Such inspection or failure to inspect or failure
to refuse or discontinue service shall not render the City liable or
responsible for any loss, damage or injury resulting from any defects in the
piping or plumbing. (1973 Code § 13.12.150)
9-1B-15: RIGHT OF ACCESS:
The duly authorized and properly identified employees of the department shall
have access to the customer's premises at all reasonable times for the purposes
of inspecting water supply, piping and plumbing; inspection, testing or
repairing Water Department equipment and for reading water meters. (1973 Code §
13.12.160)
ARTICLE C. SERVICE RULES AND CONDITIONS
SECTION:
9-1C-1: Nonliability Of City For Service Interruptions Or Variances
9-1C-2: Waste Or Exclusive Use Of Water Prohibited
9-1C-3: Emergency Conditions
9-1C-4: Discontinuance Of Service By Department
9-1C-5: Restoration At Other Than Regular Business Hours
9-1C-6: Termination Of Service By Customer
9-1C-7: Notify City Of Problems With Water Supply Or Equipment
9-1C-8: Installation And Maintenance Of Fire Hydrants
9-1C-9: Fire Flow Minimums For Building Construction Or Water Hookup
9-1C-1: NONLIABILITY OF CITY FOR SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS OR VARIANCES:
   A.   Service Interruptions: The department will use all reasonable means to
provide an adequate and continuous water service for all customers; but in case
the water service is interrupted or reduced for any cause, the city shall not
be liable for any injuries or damages resulting therefrom; and such
interruption or reduction in service shall not give rise to any cause of action
as for a breach of agreement for service.
   B.   Volume Of Water: The city makes no commitment as to the volume of water
available, pressure per square inch or continuity of service and will not be
liable for injuries or damages due to insufficient volume, inadequate pressure
or interruption of service. (1973 Code § 13.16.010)
9-1C-2: WASTE OR EXCLUSIVE USE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
It shall be the duty of each customer to eliminate waste of the water supply by
repairing or causing to be repaired any defective or leaking pipes or plumbing
fixtures. No person shall use more water for irrigation, culinary purposes or
other uses than is reasonably necessary. (1973 Code § 13.16.020)
9-1C-3: EMERGENCY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Declaration Of Water Service Emergency: When there is a shortage of
water in the city's water utility the mayor may make a declaration of water
service emergency setting forth reasonable rules and regulations for the use of
water for irrigation, lawn and garden watering, car washing and other
nonessential uses of water during the duration of the emergency. This
declaration may be imposed against water utility customers who receive service
both inside and outside the city limits.
   B.   Notice Of Declaration Of Water Service Emergency And Extent Of
Restrictions: The mayor's declaration of water service emergency shall be
published in the official city newspaper and mailed or delivered to each water
customer. There shall be a minimum of five (5) days between the declaration of
water service emergency and its effective date.
   C.   Violations Of Water Service Emergency Declaration Restrictions And
Regulations: Water service customers both inside and outside the city limits
shall be subject to the following penalties for violation of the water service
declaration restrictions and regulations:
      1.   First offense: Warning in writing to address of record of customer.
      2.   Second offense: Civil fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      3.   Third offense: Termination of water service for the duration of the
water service emergency.
Any person who wishes to protest the imposition of sanctions imposed by this
chapter may request a hearing before the city administrator as to the basis for
said sanctions and may appeal the city administrator's decision thereof to the
city hearing examiner. During the course of any hearing the sanction imposed
shall be suspended unless there is a further violation of the water service
emergency declaration. (Ord. 753, 7-26-2001)
9-1C-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Reasons For Discontinuance: The department may refuse to supply or may
discontinue service to any customer for violations of this chapter or for
failure to pay bills or upon request by the property owner to discontinue
service. The department may refuse or discontinue service to any customer who
requires or uses such volume of water that the water service to any other
customer may be thereby impaired. The department shall discontinue service to
any customer who makes an unauthorized connection to a city water line or
bypasses a city water meter.
   B.   Discontinuance Not To Release Customer From Charges Due: Discontinuance
of service for any cause stated in subsection A of this section shall not
release the customer from his obligation to pay the city for bills or charges
already incurred.
   C.   Charge For Discontinuance; Restoration: Whenever water service has been
discontinued as provided in subsection A of this section, the customer shall be
charged a fee as determined by resolution or ordinance of the city council for
the discontinuance. Restoration of service at the customer's request, and after
payment of all bills due, shall be done at the convenience of the department.
(Ord. 904, 3-9-2011)
9-1C-5: RESTORATION AT OTHER THAN REGULAR BUSINESS HOURS:
For restoration of service at any time other than regular business hours, the
customer shall be charged the actual cost of labor, which shall be billed at
time and one-half (1/2), with a minimum charge of one hour. (1973 Code §
13.16.070)
9-1C-6: TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER:
The customer who wishes to terminate water service shall give at least three
(3) days' notice to the department. No charge will be made for shutting off the
supply. A customer who terminates water service and requests restoration of
service at the same location within ten (10) days shall be charged a
reconnection fee as determined by resolution of the mayor and city council.
(1973 Code § 13.16.080; amd. 1996 Code)
9-1C-7: NOTIFY CITY OF PROBLEMS WITH WATER SUPPLY OR EQUIPMENT:
The customer shall notify the department immediately should the service be
unsatisfactory for any reason, or should there be any accident, defects or
trouble affecting the water supply or equipment and lines. (1973 Code §
13.16.090)
9-1C-8: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants for the exclusive protection of any particular property shall be
installed and maintained by the owner of that property. (1973 Code § 13.16.100)
9-1C-9: FIRE FLOW MINIMUMS FOR BUILDING CONSTRUCTION OR WATER HOOKUP:
When it is necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, that any new
construction, remodeled construction or other water hookup is made which should
require the establishment of certain fire flow minimums, then those minimum
standards then in effect in Pierce County and which are adopted by the Pierce
County code are hereby incorporated by reference and established as those
standards, requirements and minimums within and for all water service customers
of the city of Orting. (1973 Code § 13.16.110)
ARTICLE D. RATES AND BILLING PROCEDURE
SECTION:
9-1D-1: Monthly Billing
9-1D-2: Disconnection Of Service Due To Nonpayment; Administrative Fee
9-1D-3: Water Rates
9-1D-4: Water Leak Rate Adjustment
9-1D-5: Payment Of Bills - Application Of Payments
9-1D-6: Protest To Rates And Charges
9-1D-1: MONTHLY BILLING:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills; Payment: Utility bills will be mailed during the
first week of each month and are due upon receipt. Any such bill not paid by
the twenty sixth day of the month in which payment was due shall be delinquent
at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., or if the twenty sixth is a weekend or City
holiday, at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next business day the City is open.
Failure to receive a bill will not release the customer from obligation for
payment. (Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
   B.   Penalty For Delinquent Payment: The City Council may set a penalty per
month on all delinquent obligations. The penalty may be changed from time to
time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2016-984, 5-25-2016)
   C.   Notice Of Intent To Discontinue Water Service: If the utility bill is
not paid by the twenty sixth day of the month in which the payment was due at
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., or if the twenty sixth is a weekend or City holiday,
at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next business day the City is open, a
delinquency notice will be mailed stating that the water service will be
discontinued fifteen (15) days following the due date of the utility bill.
(Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
   D.   Returned Check Fee: The charge per account for a returned check shall
be set by resolution of the City Council, which sum may be changed from time to
time. (Ord. 2016-984, 5-25-2016)
9-1D-2: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE DUE TO NONPAYMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
   A.   Any customer who has a bill not paid by eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
the fifteenth calendar day after the billing due date shall be charged an
administrative processing fee as established by resolution of City Council,
which sum may be changed from time to time, and have water service
disconnected. The City will provide notice in a manner as required by law.
(Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
   B.   Service that is discontinued due to nonpayment shall be restored after
the administrative fee and the past due portion of the account is paid.
   C.   The administrative fee on accounts that were shutoff for enforcement of
any other section of this chapter may be changed by ordinance or resolution of
the City Council. (Ord. 2016-984, 5-25-2016)
9-1D-3: WATER RATES:
   A.   Every residence, building, plant, or other structure to which a
connection has been made to the City's public water system shall be charged a
use fee at the rate as established by ordinance of the City Council.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the rates and charges for
water supplied to customers located outside the City of Orting shall be the
monthly base charge plus ten percent (10%) and the variable consumption charge
plus ten percent (10%). (Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
9-1D-4: WATER LEAK RATE ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   A City water utility customer may apply in writing to the City for a
water leak rate adjustment. Making such a request does not extend the period
for payment of the water bill. Requests for adjustments on delinquent accounts
will not be acted upon until the account balance is paid.
   B.   A water leak rate adjustment is permitted once in an eighteen (18)
month period and may only be applied to one billing period. If a leak adversely
affects two (2) bills and the customer showed due diligence in fixing the leak
in a timely manner, a second adjustment will be considered by the City
Treasurer. To be eligible for this rate adjustment, the following must apply:
      1.   The affected water line must be owned by or be subject to the
exclusive control of the customer;
      2.   The increase of water usage for which an adjustment is sought must
be due to a verifiable water leak in the water line between the customer's side
of the water meter and the customer's residence or structure;
      3.   The water usage sought for adjustment must exceed two (2) times the
customer's highest usage in any single billing period during the twelve (12)
months prior to the billing period sought for adjustment;
      4.   The customer must apply for a water leak rate adjustment within
thirty (30) days of the City's issuance of the water bill sought for
adjustment; and
      5.   The customer must provide proof that the affected water line has
been repaired, such as photos of repair or a receipt from a licensed plumber.
   C.   Following a request for a water leak rate adjustment, the City
Treasurer, or his/her designee, shall review the request and determine whether
or not to approve a water leak rate adjustment. In order to make a proper
determination, City staff shall be entitled to access, inspect, and approve the
customer's water line repair prior to granting a water leak rate adjustment.
   D.   If approved, the City shall make a water leak rate adjustment by
issuing a credit to the customer's account. The adjustment shall not exceed the
total water usage for the billing period sought for adjustment minus the
customer's average water usage. For purposes of this subsection, the "average
water usage" shall be computed by determining the total volume of water
consumed, under normal use conditions, during the preceding twelve (12) months
and dividing that total volume by the number of times the City would typically
read the customer's water meter in a twelve (12) month period. For customers
who have been receiving service for less than twelve (12) months, the average
water usage shall be based on average usage during the months of service. In no
instance shall the water leak adjustment exceed eight hundred dollars
($800.00). (Ord. 2016-984, 5-25-2016)
9-1D-5: PAYMENT OF BILLS - APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS:
   A.   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized
and directed to promulgate administrative policies and procedures for the
implementation of this chapter.
   B.   If a customer is unable to pay the full amount of utility charges,
partial payments shall be applied in the following order of priority: interest,
penalties or fees assessed by the City, sewer, stormwater, water. Remaining
charges shall continue to accrue time and penalties.
   C.   If a bill becomes past due, no officer, agent, or employee of the City
may process any application for a permit or license from the City, when such
application has been requested by the person in whose name an account stands
past due or when the delinquent utility bill is against the property or
business to which the application for permit or license pertains. This
requirement shall remain in effect until the past due account is paid in full.
(Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
9-1D-6: PROTEST TO RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   If a customer is dissatisfied with any utility charge imposed in this
chapter, the customer may file a written protest with the Director of Finance
setting forth: 1) all facts that are needed to understand the nature of, and
reason(s) for the protest; 2) a description of all acts or omissions; and 3)
the relevant basis for the protest. The customer must file a written protest by
no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the bill date of the bill being
protested.
   B.   Upon receipt of any such protest, the Director of Finance or his or her
designee shall, within fifteen (15) calendar days, investigate to determine if
there are violations of any applicable rule or law and if so, will work with
the parties to ensure compliance. The Director of Finance may also investigate
the accuracy of the bill.
   C.   If the customer is dissatisfied with the decision, the customer may
appeal to the City Administrator provided such written appeal is filed within
ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the Director of Finance or his or her
designee's decision. When the last day of the appeal period computed is a
Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal or City holiday, the period shall run until four
thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. on the next business day. A condition precedent to
such appeal is the payment to the City of the amount of the disputed bill. The
payment will be refunded if the City Administrator overturns the previous
decision. The City Administrator shall determine if there are violations of any
applicable rule or law. The City Administrator shall also determine the
correctness of the bill. (Ord. 2017-1017, 11-29-2017)
ARTICLE E. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
9-1E-1: Purpose
9-1E-2: Definitions
9-1E-3: Administration And Enforcement
9-1E-4: Inspection Of Premises
9-1E-5: Design Standards
9-1E-6: Backflow Prevention Devices
9-1E-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Water Supply Protection: The purpose of this article is to protect the
water supply of the City from contamination or pollution from potential cross
connections. For public health and safety this article shall apply equally to
all new and existing customers of the City of Orting's water system. (Ord.
2017-1012, 4-26-2017)
   B.   Cross Connection Prohibited: The installation or maintenance of any
cross connection which would endanger the water supply of the City is
prohibited. Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is
hereby declared unlawful and shall be abated immediately. (Ord. 2016-980, 2-10-
2016)
9-1E-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise defined in this article, all terms used in this article
pertaining to cross-connection control have the same definitions as those
contained in WAC 246-290-010 of the Washington State Drinking Water
Regulations. The following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated:
CITY: The City of Orting, Washington, or as indicated by the context, may mean
the Water Department, Public Works Director, Cross Connection Control Program
Manager, Cross Connection Control Specialist, City Clerk, City Treasurer,
Engineer or other employee or agent representing the City in the discharge of
his duties.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer regularly employed or retained by the
City.
COMMERCIAL WATER SERVICE: Water service provided to premises utilized for
business or industrial purposes.
CONSUMER: An individual dwelling unit or individual business which receives
water through an individual meter or master meter.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Orting.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM MANAGER: The cross connection control
specialist in charge of organizing and carrying out the Cross Connection
Program.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM PLAN: The written plan setting out specific
terms of City's Cross Connection Control Program, adopted pursuant to WAC 246-
290-490 and for implementation thereof, which shall be included as part of the
City of Orting's water system plan.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL SPECIALIST: A person certified by Washington State
having jurisdiction to administer a Cross Connection Control Program and to
conduct premises cross connection surveys.
MAINS: Water lines designed or used to serve more than one premises.
PERSON, CUSTOMER, OWNER AND OCCUPANT: Natural persons of either sex,
associations, copartnerships and corporations whether acting individually or by
a servant, agent or employee; the singular number shall be held to include the
plural and the masculine pronoun to include the feminine.
PREMISES: A continuous tract of land, building or group of adjacent buildings
under a single control with respect to use of water and responsibility for
payment therefor. Subdivisions of such use or responsibility shall constitute a
division into separate premises as herein defined.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The person duly appointed by the Mayor of the City as
the Public Works Director and is in responsible charge of all day to day
activities.
PURVEYOR: The City of Orting, who owns and operates the public water system.
"Purveyor" also means the authorized agent of the City of Orting.
RESIDENTIAL WATER SERVICE: Domestic water service (including lawn and garden
sprinkling) provided to a residential living unit.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: All users of the City's water supply shall comply with
the City of Orting Cross Connection Control Program plan (copy available at
City of Orting, Public Works Department), Uniform Plumbing Code chapter 10,
State of Washington Cross Connection Regulations, Washington Administrative
Code (WAC) 246-290-490, and the current edition of the "Cross Connection
Control Manual - Accepted Procedure and Practice" published by the Pacific
Northwest Section of American Waterworks Association. The specifications set
forth in the current volume of "Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and
Municipal Construction" prepared and distributed jointly by the Washington
State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) and by the Washington State Chapter
of the American Public Works Association (APWA) and the current "standards" of
the American Water Works Association (AWWA). All users of the City water supply
shall comply with these standards and all subsequent editions or amendments
thereto. (Ord. 2017-1012, 4-26-2017)
9-1E-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Implementation Of The Cross-Connection Control Policy And Program Plan:
The Public Works Director is charged with administration of this article. The
Public Works Director will engage the services of a DOH-certified cross
connection control specialist to develop, implement and be in responsible
charge of the City of Orting Cross-Connection Control Program. The Public Works
Director, under the direction of the aforementioned CCS, will prepare a written
Cross-Connection Control Program plan (hereinafter, the "plan") to implement
the requirements set out in this article. The written plan shall be consistent
with this article and shall comply with the requirements of chapter 246-290 WAC
(Group A Drinking Water Regulations).
The Public Works Director will use the most recently published editions of the
following publications as references and technical aids in preparing and
implementing the plan:
      1.   Cross-Connection Control Manual, Accepted Procedures and Practice,
published by the Pacific Northwest Section, American Water Works Association,
or latest edition thereof.
      2.   Manual of Cross-Connection Control, published by the Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern
California, or latest edition thereof.
      3.   Cross-Connection Control Guidance Manual for Small Water Systems,
published by the DOH Office of Drinking Water.
The Public Works Director shall incorporate the written program plan into the
City of Orting's water system plan and shall submit the plan to DOH for
approval when requested.
The Public Works Director, in consultation with the aforementioned CCS, shall
have the authority to make reasonable decisions related to cross connections in
cases and situations not provided for in this article or the City's written
plan.
If any provision in this article, or in the written plan is found to be less
stringent than or inconsistent with the Drinking Water Regulations (chapter
246-290 WAC), or other Washington State Statutes or rules, the more stringent
State Statute, rule, or regulation shall apply.
   B.   Conditions For Providing Service: The CCC Program and plan shall, at a
minimum, include the following terms and conditions, in this form or a
comparable form, to ensure the prevention of contamination to the City's water
system, and City shall record the customer's agreement to these terms and
conditions in a writing, executed by the customer:
      1.   The customer shall take all measures necessary to prevent the
contamination of the plumbing system within his/her premises and the purveyor's
distribution system that may occur from backflow through a cross connection.
These measures shall include the prevention of backflow under any backpressure
or backsiphonage condition, including the disruption of the water supply from
the purveyor's system that may occur during routine system maintenance or
during emergency conditions, such as a water main break.
      2.   The customer shall install, operate, and maintain at all times his
plumbing system in compliance with the current edition of the Uniform Plumbing
Code having jurisdiction as it pertains to the prevention of contamination and
protection from thermal expansion, due to a closed system that could occur with
the present or future installation of backflow preventers on the customer's
service and/or at plumbing fixtures.
      3.   For cross-connection control or other public health-related surveys,
the customer shall provide for the purveyor's employees or agents free access
to all parts of the premises during reasonable working hours of the day for
routine surveys and at all times during emergencies.
Where agreement for free access for the purveyor's survey is denied, the
purveyor may supply water service provided that premises isolation is provided
through a DOH- approved reduced-pressure principle backflow assembly (RPBA).
      4.   The customer shall install all backflow prevention assemblies
requested by the purveyor and to maintain those assemblies in good working
order. The assemblies shall be of a type, size, and make approved by DOH and
acceptable to the purveyor. The assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the recommendations given in the most recently published edition of the
Cross Connection Control Manual, Accepted Procedures and Practice, published by
the Pacific Northwest Section, American Water Works Association, or latest
edition thereof.
      5.   The customer shall have all assemblies (e.g., RPBAs and/or DCVAs)
that the purveyor relies upon to protect the public water distribution system
tested upon installation, annually thereafter and/or more frequently if
requested by the purveyor, after repair, and after relocation.
      6.   The customer shall have all testing done by the purveyor or a
purveyor-approved and currently DOH-certified backflow assembly tester (BAT),
and in the latter scenario, the customer shall have the RPBA or DCVA tested in
accordance with DOH-approved test procedures, and shall submit to the purveyor
the results of the test(s) on purveyor-supplied test report forms within the
time period specified by the purveyor.
      7.   The customer shall bear all costs for the aforementioned
installation, testing, repair, maintenance and replacement of the RPBA, RPDA,
DCVA or DCDA installed to protect the purveyor's distribution system.
      8.   At the time of application for service, if required by the purveyor,
the customer shall submit to the purveyor plumbing plans and/or a cross-
connection control survey of the premises conducted by the purveyor or a
purveyor-approved and DOH- certified cross-connection control specialist (CCS).
The cross-connection control survey shall assess the cross-connection hazards
and list the backflow preventers provided within the premises. The results of
the survey shall be submitted prior to the purveyor turning on water service to
a new customer. The cost of the survey shall be borne by the customer.
      9.   For classes of customers other than single-family residential, the
customer shall periodically submit a cross- connection control re-survey of the
premises by a DOH- certified CCS acceptable to the purveyor. The purveyor may
require the re-survey to be performed in response to changes in the customer's
plumbing or water use, or performed periodically (annually or less frequently)
where the purveyor considers the customer's plumbing system to be complex or
subject to frequent changes in water use. The cost of the re- survey shall be
borne by the customer.
      10.   Within thirty (30) days of a request by the purveyor, a residential
customer shall complete and submit to the purveyor a "Water Use Questionnaire"
for the purpose of surveying the health hazard posed by the customer's plumbing
system on the purveyor's distribution system. Further, the residential customer
agrees to provide within thirty (30) days of a request by the purveyor a cross-
connection control survey of the premises by a DOH-certified CCS acceptable to
the purveyor.
      11.   The customer shall obtain the prior approval from the purveyor for
all changes in water use, and alterations and additions to the plumbing system,
and shall comply with any additional requirements imposed by the purveyor for
cross- connection control.
      12.   The customer shall immediately notify the purveyor and the local
health jurisdiction of any backflow incident occurring within the customer's
premises (i.e., entry of any contaminant/pollutant into the drinking water) and
shall cooperate fully with the purveyor to determine the reason for the
backflow incident.
      13.   Where the purveyor imposes mandatory premises isolation in
compliance with DOH regulations, or agrees to the customer's voluntary premises
isolation through the installation of a RPBA immediately downstream of the
purveyor's water meter, the customer shall comply with the other cross-
connection control regulations having jurisdiction (i.e., Uniform Plumbing
Code).
      14.   The customer shall indemnify and hold harmless the purveyor for all
contamination of the customer's plumbing system or the purveyor's distribution
system that results from an unprotected or inadequately protected cross
connection within the customer's premises. This indemnification shall pertain
to all backflow conditions that may arise from the purveyor's suspension of
water supply or reduction of water pressure, recognizing that the air gap
separation otherwise required would require the customer to provide adequate
facilities to collect, store, and pump water for his/her premises.
      15.   In the event legal action is required and commenced between the
purveyor and the customer to enforce the terms and conditions herein, the
substantially prevailing party shall be entitled to reimbursement of all
incurred costs and expenses including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorney's fees as determined by the court.
      16.   The purveyor has the right, in keeping with changes to Washington
State regulations, industry standards, or the purveyor's risk management
policies, to impose retroactive requirements for additional cross-connection
control measures.
      17.   The customer shall acknowledge that the purveyor's survey of a
customer's premises is for the sole purpose of establishing the purveyor's
minimum requirements for the protection of the public water supply system,
commensurate with the purveyor's assessment of the degree of hazard.
It shall not be assumed by the customer or any regulatory agency that the
purveyor's survey, requirements for the installation of backflow prevention
assemblies, lack of requirements for the installation of backflow prevention
assemblies, or other actions by the purveyor's personnel constitute an approval
of the customer's plumbing system or an assurance to the customer of the
absence of cross connections therein.
   C.   Enforcement And Penalties: The Public Works Director is charged with
the enforcement of this article.
The purveyor shall deny or discontinue water service to any customer and/or
property owner failing to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, repair,
testing or inspection of backflow prevention assemblies as required by the
purveyor within seventy two (72) hours of giving notice to the customer and/or
property owner, or a lesser period of time if required to protect public
health.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, in lieu of discontinuing
water service, the purveyor may install an RPBA on the service pipe to provide
premises isolation, and recover all costs for the installation and subsequent
maintenance and repair of the assembly, appurtenances, and enclosure from the
customer as fees and charges for water. The customer shall be subject to all
applicable inspection and permitting fees, which shall be established by the
City Council by resolution or by ordinance. The failure of the customer to pay
these fees and charges may result in termination of water service in accordance
with the purveyor's water billing policies.
In addition to the remedies set forth in this article, any person charged with
a violation of this article shall be subject to a civil regulatory order and
the related civil penalties, set forth in section
1-13-7 of this Code. (Ord. 2017-1012, 4-26-2017)
9-1E-4: INSPECTION OF PREMISES 1 :
Authorized employees of the Water Department, properly identified, shall have
free access at reasonable hours of the day, to all premises served by the City
water system for the purpose of ascertaining conformity to this article. (Ord.
2016-980, 2-10-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-7-9 of this Code.
9-1E-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
In addition to the requirements set out in this article and in the plan
developed and implemented pursuant to this article, customers shall comply with
all design standards pertaining to the City's water system adopted by the City.
Design standards shall be adopted from time to time by the Council upon the
recommendation of the Public Works Director and the City Engineer and one copy
of the same shall be maintained on file at the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord.
2017-1012, 4-26-2017)
9-1E-6: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Compliance With Cross Connection Control Program And Plan Standards:
The customer's plumbing system, starting from the termination of the purveyor's
water service pipe, shall be considered a potential high-health hazard
requiring the isolation of the customer's premises by a DOH-approved, customer-
installed and maintained reduced-pressure principle backflow assembly (RPBA) or
reduced-pressure detector assembly (RPDA). The RPBA or RPDA shall be located at
the end of the purveyor's water service pipe (i.e., immediately downstream of
the meter). Water shall only be supplied to the customer through a DOH-
approved, customer-installed and maintained RPBA or RPDA.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the purveyor, upon an assessment of the risk of
contamination posed by the customer's plumbing system and use of water, may
allow:
      1.   A single-family or duplex residential customer to connect directly
to the water service pipe, i.e., without a purveyor- approved DCVA or RPBA.
      2.   Any customer other than a single-family or duplex residential
customer, as a minimum, to be supplied through a DOH-approved, customer-
installed and maintained double-check valve assembly (DCVA), reduced-pressure
principle backflow assembly (RPBA) or double-check detector assembly (DCDA).
The Public Works Director shall require the installation of backflow prevention
devices on any premises being serviced by the water system, pursuant to the
terms of this chapter and the City's Cross Connection Control Program plan,
including but not limited to when in the judgment of the Public Works Director,
acting upon the advice and recommendation of the Cross Connection Control
Manager, Cross Connection Control Specialist or City Engineer, the nature and
extent of activities on the premises or materials stored on the premises would
present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross connection
occur. The cost of such devices and the installation thereof shall be borne by
the customer and/or owner of the premises affected. The control or elimination
of cross connections shall be in accordance with the cross connection control
regulation in Washington State (rules and regulations of the State Board of
Health regarding public water supplies, WAC 246-290-490). The Cross Connection
Control Program plan shall identify the procedures and criteria for determining
appropriate levels of protection, and shall be in accordance with the "Cross
Connection Control Manual - Accepted Procedure and Practice published by the
Pacific Northwest Section of American Waterworks Association, Seventh Edition",
and all subsequent editions or amendments thereto.
   B.    Condition For Service: Water service to any premises shall be
contingent upon the customer provided cross-connection control in a manner
approved by the City.
   C.   Acceptable Model: Backflow devices required to be installed shall be a
model acceptable to the Washington State Department of Health and consistent
with WAC 246-290.
   D.   Annual Inspections Required; Fees For Inspections: All backflow
preventers that the City relies upon for protection of the water system will be
subject to annual inspection and testing. Inspection shall be performed, at the
customer's expense, by a DOH-certified backflow assembly tester and shall be
done: 1) at the time of installation; 2) annually after installation; 3) after
a backflow incident; 4) after repair, reinstallation, relocation or re-
plumbing; and 5) when necessary to protect against a high-health hazard or when
it repeatedly fails tests or inspections. The inspection and testing shall be
performed by a DOH-certified BAT employed by the customer at the customer's
sole expense, or by the City pursuant to the City of Orting Water Department's
annual testing program.
The cost of the program and testing will be included in the customer's water
bill on an annual basis. Any devices found to be defective shall be immediately
repaired by the affected water customer. (Ord. 2017-1012, 4-26-2017)
CHAPTER 2
SEWERS AND DRAINAGE
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-2A-1: Definitions
9-2A-2: Inspectors; Power And Authority
9-2A-3: Safety Rules And Liability
9-2A-4: Right Of Entry For Inspections; Easements
9-2A-5: County Health Officer Requirements
9-2A-6: Use Of Public Sewers Required
9-2A-7: Toilet Facilities
9-2A-8: Protection From Damage
9-2A-9: Violation; Penalty
9-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms and
words used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure as
described in the most current edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination
Of Water And Wastewater" in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C)
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from sanitary waste floor drains and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER, CONNECTING SEWER OR HOUSE LATERAL: The private extension from
the building drain to the public sewer, STEP tank or other place of disposal.
CITY: The city of Orting, Washington.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Orting.
CITY ENGINEER: The engineer of the city of Orting or the person authorized by
the mayor to act as such.
CITY TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city of Orting.
COLLECTION SYSTEM: The system of public sewers to be operated by the city
designed for the collection of sanitary sewerage.
COMMERCIAL USER: See “INDUSTRIAL USER.”
COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER: See “INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.”
CONNECTION CHARGE: That charge levied on sewer customers for connecting to the
sewage works and consists of an inspection fee.
COUNCIL: The council of the city of Orting.
COUNTY: Pierce County, Washington.
DOMESTIC WASTE: Any wastewater (sewage) emanating from a residence or from
domestic activities performed outside the place of residence (in lieu of a home
activity) by or for private citizens. The wastewater concentrations shall not
exceed two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) BOD5 and two hundred
fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) TSS.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT: The domestic waste usually generated by a
residential user. The daily average concentration shall not exceed two hundred
fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) BOD5 and two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) TSS.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GENERAL FACILITY CHARGE: That charge levied on sewer customers for connecting
to the sewage works which represents the property owner's pro rata share of the
capital costs of the sewer utility facilities.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Throughout this chapter, the term “industry” or “industrial
user” is meant to apply to any “person” (defined in WAC 173-216-030(13)) within
the Publicly-Owned service area which has, or may have, a discharge of
“industrial wastewater,” or who would be subject to categorical standards
promulgated by the EPA if they were discharging.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Means water or liquid-carried waste from any industry,
manufacturing operation, trade, business, or commercial establishment which
includes process wastewater, cooling water, contaminated stormwater,
contaminated leachates, or other waters in some combination such that the
combined effluent differs in some way from purely domestic wastewater, or is
subject to regulation under federal categorical pretreatment standards, the
State Waste Discharge Permit Program, or this chapter.
INSPECTOR: The person assigned by the city to inspect building sewer
installation between the building and the public sanitary sewer line within the
street. Inspectors shall operate under the direction of the mayor or his
designee.
LATERAL SEWER: A segment of the public sewer network that collects wastewater
from multiple service connections. It is responsible for funneling the
collected wastewater into larger sewer lines, known as trunk sewers or
interceptors.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city of Orting, Washington.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
NEW CONNECTION: Any new physical connection to the sewage works or a
discontinued connection where the periodic user charges are not paid for a one
year period.
OCCUPANT: Any person or owner in physical possession of a structure to which
sewer service is available.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: All activities, goods and services which are
necessary to maintain the proper capacity and performance of the sewage works
for which such works are designed and constructed.
PERMIT: An application for a printed and serially numbered form issued by the
city prior to construction of any side sewer.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions.
PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEM: An individual sewer line and disposal system that is
privately owned and not connected to the city of Orting sewerage system. A
private sewer shall be allowed only when connection to a city of Orting sewer
is not required by this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) centimeter in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
RESIDENTIAL USER: Those persons using the sewage works who reside in a single-
family or multi-family structure.
STEP: Septic tank effluent pumping system and is more particularly described in
the standards and specifications of the city of Orting.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface
water, groundwater and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally admitted.
SERVICE CONNECTION: Refers to the "side sewer" or pipeline with its
appurtenances that branches off or connects the public lateral or trunk sewer
in the right of way extending to the property line.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treatment and disposing
of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
SIDE SEWER: The service connection.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during the normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A sewer which carries stormwaters
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): All solids which are physically suspended in a
sample of wastewater under standard laboratory procedures as required by the
department of ecology of the state of Washington.
USER: Every person using any part of the public sewage works of the city of
Orting.
USER CHARGE: The periodic charges levied on all users of the public sewage
works and shall, at a minimum, cover each user's proportionate share of the
cost of operation and maintenance to include replacement.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1129, 5- 29-2024)
9-2A-2: INSPECTORS; POWER AND AUTHORITY:
The city engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city, having
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city
engineer or its representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment. (1973 Code § 13.52.020)
9-2A-3: SAFETY RULES AND LIABILITY:
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
section
9-2A-4 of this article the city engineer or duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the company shall be held harmless due to injury or death to
the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, as
required herein. (1973 Code § 13.52.030)
9-2A-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS; EASEMENTS:
   A.   STEP Inspection Easement: The city's authorized employees and/or
contractors shall have a right of entry onto private property for the purpose
of inspection and maintenance of STEP system facilities. (1973 Code §
13.52.040)
   B.   Easement Conditions: The city engineer or other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms, if any,
of the duly negotiated easement, pertaining to the private property involved.
(1973 Code § 13.52.050)
9-2A-5: COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER REQUIREMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health officer. (1973
Code § 13.52.060)
9-2A-6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Garbage Deposits Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharge Of Sewage: It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage
or other polluted waters, except where said discharge is approved by state and/
or federal regulatory agencies having jurisdiction and the city.
   C.   Privies And Septic Tanks: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (1973 Code §
13.52.070)
9-2A-7: TOILET FACILITIES:
   A.   Facilities Required: The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or
properties used for human occupancy, employment or other purposes, situated
within the city's service area and abutting on any street, alley, easement or
right of way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is
required, at the owner(s) expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within one hundred eighty (180)
days after date of official notice to do so. (1973 Code § 13.52.080)
   B.   Temporary Use Of Chemical Toilets:
      1.   Time Limit: The city engineer shall permit the use of chemical
toilets for a period of ninety (90) days during construction of permanent
structures.
      2.   Application; Fee: Application for such temporary use shall be on
such forms as the mayor may direct, and shall be accompanied by an application
fee to be set by resolution of the city council.
      3.   Permit Renewal: Temporary use permits may be renewed for an
additional period of thirty (30) days in the discretion of the mayor.
      4.   Structures To Comply With City Regulations: All structures erected
in connection with such temporary sanitary sewage facilities shall conform to
such construction and sanitary regulations as the city engineer may prescribe.
      5.   Use During Parades And Public Events Exempt: Use of chemical toilets
during parades, festivals and other public events lasting no more than three
(3) days shall be exempt from this subsection. (1973 Code § 13.52.090)
9-2A-8: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
   A.   Prohibited Act: No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
   B.   Violation; Liability: Any person violating this provision shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and in addition may be liable for damages or subject to
abatement proceedings in a civil action in which the city may, in addition to
its other remedies, recover a reasonable cost and attorney fee for bringing
this action. (1973 Code § 13.68.010)
9-2A-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Time Limit To Correct: Any person found to be
violating any provision of this chapter, except section
9-2A-8 of this article, shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount not exceeding
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation. Each day in which any
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Enforcement Action: The city may, at its option, enforce the provisions
of this chapter in an abatement action in superior court or by means of an
administrative procedure before any agency having jurisdiction. In such event
the city, if successful, shall be entitled to reimbursement from the offending
party for its attorney fees and expenses herein incurred.
   D.   Liability Of Violator: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the city by reason of such violation and a reasonable attorney
fee plus costs if legal action is necessary to enforce the city's rights
herein. (1973 Code § 13.68.020)
ARTICLE B. FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
9-2B-1: Schedule Establishment
9-2B-2: General Facilities Charge
9-2B-3: Connection Charge
9-2B-4: Use Charge
9-2B-5: Water Shutoff For Nonpayment; Reconnection Charge
9-2B-6: Nonpayment Of Charges; Lien On Property
9-2B-1: SCHEDULE ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Rate Schedule: Every residence, building, plant or other structure to
which a connection has been made to the city's public sewer, shall be charged a
use fee at the rate as established by ordinance of the city council.
   B.   Measurement Of Flow: "CCF" means one hundred (100) cubic feet,
equivalent to seven hundred forty eight (748) gallons. The flow rate for
customers with a connection to city water service will be based upon the amount
of water that flows through the customer's water meter and is measured in
hundred cubic feet (CCF). The flow rate for customers authorized pursuant to
section
9-2C-5 of this chapter to measure wastewater flow will be based upon the amount
of wastewater (sewage) that flows through the customer's wastewater meter and
discharges into the city's sewer system and is measured in hundred cubic feet
(CCF). (Ord. 944, 11-13-2013)
9-2B-2: GENERAL FACILITIES CHARGE:
   A.   Assessment And Payment Of Charge: The applicant for every new
connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be assessed and pay a
general facilities charge as authorized herein pursuant to Revised Code Of
Washington 35.92.025. The general facilities charge for the sanitary sewer
system shall represent payment to the city of the property owner's pro rata
share of the capital costs associated with the sanitary sewer sewage works and
may be assessed upon the property.
   B.   Basis Of Charge: The general facilities charge shall be based upon
equivalent residential units and based upon the city engineer's recommendation;
provided that, general facilities charges that have been paid as a result of
prior development activities on the property, or portion thereof, or through
participation in an LID or ULID shall not be reassessed. The determination of
the number of ERUs for each applicant is based on the intended use of the
building/facility/improvement at full capacity.
   C.   Charge To Be Paid Upon Submission Of Application: The applicant for a
subdivision or planned unit development (resulting in creation of greater than
4 building lots) shall be assessed and pay the general facility charge upon
submission of its application for approval of the final plat or final plan
approval for each phase of the planned unit development; provided that, if the
property is to be subdivided by a subdivision, at the time of submission of a
completed application for final plat approval. The applicant for a binding site
plan shall be assessed and pay the general facilities charge prior to and as a
condition of approval of the binding site plan. The city and applicant may
agree to include a different schedule or method for payment of general
facilities charges in the development agreement. The applicant for a building
permit for single lot construction shall pay the general facility charge at the
time of building permit issuance. (Ord. 907, 6-29-2011)
   D.   Charge Established: The base general facilities charge for each
equivalent residential unit and any additional surcharges shall be set by
ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2016-1002, 12-14-2016, eff.
1-1-2017)
   E.   Equitable Adjustment Of General Facilities Charges: There is hereby
established an equitable adjustment to the general facilities charges
applicable to the applicant, or applicant's successor, for a subdivision,
binding site plan or planned unit development pursuant to subsections A through
D of this section, to be known as the "general facilities equitable adjustment
charge".
The general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be assessed and paid
at the time, and as a condition, of building permit issuance based upon the
number of equivalent residential units assigned to the building/facility/
improvements to be constructed under the building permit. The amount of the
general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be calculated for each
equivalent residential unit as follows:
The difference between the rate for the general facilities charge effective
upon the date that the completed application for the building permit is filed
and the rate for the general facilities charge effective on the date of the
assessment of the general facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of
payment. In the event that there has been no increase in the rate for the
general facilities charge between the date of the assessment of the general
facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of payment, and the date the
completed building permit application is filed, the equitable adjustment will
be zero. In the event that there has been a decrease in the rate for the
general facilities charge between the date of the assessment of the general
facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of payment, and the date the
completed building permit application is filed, the equitable adjustment will
be zero. For purposes of this section, prepaid shall mean general facilities
charges paid prior to the date of assessment.
Payment of the general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be a
precondition to issuance of the building permit and approval of a service
connection to the sewer main; provided that, the applicant and the city may
agree to a different schedule or method for payment of the general facilities
equitable adjustment charge pursuant to a development agreement or other
binding agreement between the city and the property owner relating to
development of the property.
   F.   Application Of General Facilities Equitable Adjustment Charge: General
facilities charges are intended to ensure that historic costs of sanitary
sewerage system development are equitably shared by property owners who have
not contributed to the costs of system development. General facilities charges
assessed upon final plat or binding site plan approval will not include costs
of sanitary sewerage system development, if any, incurred after such assessment
but prior to connection to the sanitary sewerage system. The general facilities
equitable adjustment charge is therefore intended to apply to all applicants,
and their successors, who have paid general facilities charges pursuant to
subsections A through D of this section, whether or not paid before or after
the effective date hereof; provided that, the provisions in this subsection are
not intended to and shall not be construed to amend or alter the provisions set
forth in a binding development agreement or other binding agreement between the
city and the property owner relating to development of the property.
   G.   Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection F of this
section, the general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall not apply to
the property, or any portion thereof, for which a sewerage service connection
is made pursuant to a building or connection permit that was issued on or
before the later of: 1) June 16, 2013; or 2) two (2) years following the date
of assessment of the general facilities charge. (Ord. 907, 6-29-2011)
9-2B-3: CONNECTION CHARGE:
   A.   Connection Fee: In addition to the general facilities charge, each
person connecting property to the sewer system shall pay a connection fee that
shall be based on the city's expense in said connection and inspection. If the
connection fee is not paid, the city will not allow the connection. The
connection fees are hereby established as follows:
 
                        Rate  
In city classification:  
 Residential           $100.00
 Commercial            200.00
Outside city limits classification:    
 Residential           200.00
 Commercial            300.00
 
   B.   Disconnection Charges: There shall be established a disconnection fee
which the property owner shall be required to pay to the city for the cost of
disconnection of sanitary sewer service (when applicable). The disconnection
fees are reflective of the direct and indirect costs associated with
disconnection of sanitary sewer service. The disconnection fee, when
disconnection is requested by the property owner or customer, is to be paid at
the time of the request. The disconnection fees are hereby established as
follows:
 
                        Rate  
In city classification:  
 Residential           $100.00
 Commercial            200.00
Outside city limits classification:
 Residential           200.00
 Commercial            300.00
 
(Ord. 904, 3-9-2011)
9-2B-4: USE CHARGE:
The council by resolution shall provide for periodic user fees for the city's
sewage works. Said resolution may provide for different fees for different
classes of customers. (1973 Code § 13.56.050)
9-2B-5: WATER SHUTOFF FOR NONPAYMENT; RECONNECTION CHARGE:
In the event that any user charge for sewage disposal service fees or
connection charges/fees is not paid by the tenth of the month in which the bill
becomes due, the city may shut off the water furnished the premises to which
the services were rendered or connection made. Water service shall not be
restored until such bill, together with all penalties and interest due thereon,
plus a charge to be set by council resolution for shutting off and turning on
the water, has been paid. (1973 Code § 13.56.060)
9-2B-6: NONPAYMENT OF CHARGES; LIEN ON PROPERTY:
All charges for sanitary sewage disposal service and for connection with or
disconnection from the sewage system, together with the penalties and interest
thereon as provided in this article, shall be a lien upon the property for
which such connection or disconnection is made or sewage disposal service is
furnished, superior to all other liens or encumbrances except those for general
taxes and special assessments. Enforcement of such lien or liens shall be in
the manner provided by law for the enforcement of the same. All delinquent
sanitary sewerage service charges shall bear interest at a rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum computed on a monthly basis, or at the maximum rate
allowed by state law, as amended, whichever is greater. (Ord. 904, 3-9-2011)
ARTICLE C. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
9-2C-1: Permit Required; Classifications
9-2C-2: Owner Liable For Construction Costs
9-2C-3: STEP Sewage System
9-2C-4: Use Of Old Building Sewers
9-2C-5: Construction Requirements
9-2C-6: Connection To Comply With Standard Specifications
9-2C-7: Inspection Prior To Connection
9-2C-8: Barricades And Lighting Of Excavations
9-2C-9: Definitions
9-2C-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
(1973 Code § 13.60.010)
   B.   Permit Classes:
      1.   Description; Application For Permit: There are two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: one for residential and commercial service; and the
other for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either
case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information deemed pertinent in the judgment of the
city engineer.
      2.   Permit And Inspection Fees: A permit and inspection fee for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit, or an industrial building
sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed, or
in the case of a connection outside the city limits, when a letter of sewer
availability is issued. The amount of the fee shall be set by council
resolution. (1973 Code § 13.60.020)
9-2C-2: OWNER LIABLE FOR CONSTRUCTION COSTS:
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
disconnection of a building sewer and service connection shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or disconnection of
the building sewer and service connection. (Ord. 904, 3-9-2011)
9-2C-3: STEP SEWAGE SYSTEM:
Those utility customers connected to the city's sewage works by means of a STEP
system shall comply with the rules and regulations pertaining to the
installation, operation and maintenance of said systems. Under those rules the
city will provide maintenance to the pump and periodically pump the sewage
holding tank on said system. The customer shall provide the power to said
system and access for city employees onto the customer's property for said
maintenance and inspection. (1973 Code § 13.60.040)
9-2C-4: USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS:
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found suitable upon examination and test by the city engineer to meet all
requirements of this article. (1973 Code § 13.60.050)
9-2C-5: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance: Connections to the city's sewage works shall be by gravity
unless some other means is approved by the city engineer. The size, slope,
alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and service connection
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of ASTM and
WSDOT/APWA "Standard Specifications", current edition, shall apply.
   B.   Elevation Below Basement Floor: Whenever possible, the building sewer
shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In
all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
pumped by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
   C.   Sewer Meters: Sewer meters monitor, measure, record and totalize the
flow of wastewater (sewage) discharged into the city sewer system. This
information is then used to generate a sewage bill for the site. Installation
of sewer meters is discouraged by the city; however, the city engineer may
determine that a sewer meter is the only appropriate device that will allow for
the accurate measurement of flow for purposes of determining sewer service
charges that include a flow rate. Sites where a sewer meter may be allowed or
required include, but are not limited to, sites where the water source is not
metered or sites where industrial processes remove a significant amount of
metered water from the waste stream.
   D.   Sewer Service Agreement: If allowed or required by the city engineer,
the sanitary sewer meter shall be installed, maintained, monitored and operated
pursuant to the conditions set forth in a sewer service agreement between the
city and the person having ownership or control over the real property. The
sewer service agreement shall provide for, among other things, the term of the
agreement; ownership of the sewer meter and related equipment; the terms and
conditions upon which the meter and related equipment will be installed,
monitored, and maintained on the property; city access to the property to
monitor the meter and related equipment; calibration of the sewer meter and
related equipment; disconnection of the sewer connection for noncompliance
with, or termination or expiration of, the agreement; a monitoring surcharge to
be paid to the city; and, recording of the agreement. (Ord. 944, 11-13-2013)
9-2C-6: CONNECTION TO COMPLY WITH STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS:
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city, including those technical specifications for the STEP
on site sewage disposal system where applicable, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WSDOT/APWA "Standard
Specifications", current edition. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the city engineer before installation. (1973
Code § 13.60.080)
9-2C-7: INSPECTION PRIOR TO CONNECTION:
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection to the public sanitary sewer shall be made under the supervision of
the city engineer. (1973 Code § 13.60.090)
9-2C-8: BARRICADES AND LIGHTING OF EXCAVATIONS:
All excavations for building sewer and service connection installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard, in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city 1 .
(1973 Code § 13.60.100)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
9-2C-9: DEFINITIONS:
ALTERNATIVE SEWER LINE EXTENSION: For circumstances in which the City relocates
a public sewer line, thereby severing an existing private sewer connection, an
alternative sewer line shall be extended to the shared boundary of the right-
of-way and private property line, and the City shall reconnect any service
lines that it has severed. This extension will enable the City to reconnect to
the property owner's side sewer in compliance with City standards. The City's
public works department shall ensure that the alternative sewer line is
installed up to the boundary, maintaining the continuity and integrity of the
municipal sewer system.
BUILDING SIDE SEWER OWNERSHIP: The building side sewer located in the public
right-of-way or city utility easement shall become the property of the city and
will be maintained, repaired and replaced by the city's public works
department. The portion of the building side sewer located on the customer's
property is owned by the property owner and shall be the owner's responsibility
to keep their portion in good working order and free from extraneous ground
water or surface runoff water. A cleanout shall be provided at the property
line for all new building side sewer installations. At such time the city's
public works department or the property owner makes repairs and/or replaces an
old side sewer that does not have a cleanout at the property line, the party
performing the work shall install a clean-out in accordance with the Orting
Development Specifications and Standard Details in effect at the time.
SIDE SEWER CARDS: Cards documenting the technical and legal specifications of
sewer connections shall be made available in both physical and digital formats
by the city's Public Works Department. A digital copy of each side sewer card
shall be made available in a municipal online database for property owners and
designated Public Works staff, ensuring secure, anytime access. Upon transfer
of property ownership, or significant sewer work completion, property owners
shall be furnished upon request a physical copy of the relevant side sewer
card.
(Ord. 2024- 1129, 5-29-2024)
ARTICLE D. IMPROPER USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
SECTION:
9-2D-1: Discharge Of Surface Runoff And Stormwaters
9-2D-2: Prohibited Wastewater Discharges
9-2D-3: Limitations And Restrictions On Discharges
9-2D-4: City Engineer Authority
9-2D-5: Fats, Oil And Grease
9-2D-6: Facilities Maintenance By Owner
9-2D-7: Installation Of Observation Facilities
9-2D-8: Determination Of Sampling And Testing Methods
9-2D-9: Special Agreements With Industrial Concerns
9-2D-1: DISCHARGE OF SURFACE RUNOFF AND STORMWATERS:
   A.   Discharge Into Sanitary Sewers Prohibited: No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, swimming pool water, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (1973 Code §
13.64.010)
   B.   Discharge Into Storm Sewers Required: Stormwater and all other surface
and ground water drainage shall be discharged to such sewers specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city
engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the city engineer and the state of Washington
department of ecology to a storm sewer or a natural outlet. (1973 Code §
13.64.020)
9-2D-2: PROHIBITED WASTEWATER DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   A.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, gas or petroleum products.
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard
in receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes
as discharged to the public sewer.
   C.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to pipe structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
   D.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   E.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
   F.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l), or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous, at temperatures
between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) (0°C) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
   G.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (9.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city engineer.
   H.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
   I.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works, exceeds the limits established
by the city engineer or department of ecology, for such materials.
   J.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the engineer, as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   K.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the engineer, in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
   L.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
   M.   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved
solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
      2.   Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
      3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, in excess of two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
      4.   Unusual suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams
per liter (250 mg/l).
      5.   Unusual volume of or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as
defined in section
9-2A-1 of this chapter.
   N.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters. (1973 Code § 13.64.030)
9-2D-3: LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the substances, materials,
waters or wastes set out in section
9-2D-2 of this article if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city
engineer, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage lift stations,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, solids size and flow as it affects lift stations, nature of the
sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. (1973 Code § 13.64.040)
9-2D-4: CITY ENGINEER AUTHORITY:
   A.   Authority Upon Detecting Violation: If any waters or wastes are
discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section
9-2D-2 of this article, and which, in the judgment of the city engineer, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitutes a
public nuisance, the city engineer may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by the existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of section
9-2B-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Review And Approval Of Waste Treatment: If the city engineer permits
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city engineer and the state of Washington department of ecology, and subject to
the requirements of applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (1973 Code §
13.64.050)
9-2D-5: FATS, OIL AND GREASE:
   A.   All commercial establishments connected to the city of Orting sewer
system that generate fat, oil, and grease, and dischargers who operate
automatic and coin operated laundries, car washes, filling stations, commercial
garages or a similar business having any type of washing facilities (including
pressure washing and steam cleaning) or any other dischargers producing grit,
sand, oils, lint, or other materials which have the potential of causing
partial or complete obstruction of the building side sewer or other areas in
the system shall:
      1.   Install (or modify existing) grease interceptors, traps, or
biological process that comply with city of Orting standards; provided that all
commercial and/or retail operations, regardless of size, shall install, operate
and maintain a grease interceptor. The system installed shall:
         a.   Discharge effluent containing no more than one hundred milligrams
per liter (100 mg/l) of polar FOG (animal or vegetable) and suspended solids
nonpolar sediments including sand, lint and grit in excess of two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l);
         b.   Provide a suitable location for representative sampling of
effluent accessible to city personnel, and be accessible for sampling, cleaning
and inspection, and it must be maintained in continuously efficient operation.
         c.   If applicable, comply with sizing criteria of either the uniform
plumbing code or with the manufacturer's specifications.
      2.   Prepare a management plan for the city of Orting's review and
approval which plan shall include:
         a.   Identification of staff person in charge of the program;
         b.   Identification of sources of fats, oils, grease, and other
materials of a sedimentary nature;
         c.   An employee training manual with scheduled new employee training
and continuous education program;
         d.   Description of disposal and recycling programs used;
         e.   A list of all required functions related to fats, oils, grease
and sediments housekeeping practices;
         f.   Visual signs or notices posted at specific sites for related
tasks required;
         g.   Contact names and phone numbers for emergencies on a twenty four
(24) hour basis;
         h.   Provision for documentation of actions by date, including
training sign off sheets, maintenance, cleaning, and incident reports; and
         i.   Provide consent to city inspectors to enter the premises during
business hours to inspect, observe, measure, sample, and test the
establishment's wastewater discharge.
      3.   An owner of a commercial establishment shall permit city of Orting
inspectors to enter the premises during the establishment's business hours for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of
the wastewater discharge.
      4.   As a condition of receiving sewer service from the city of Orting,
applicants for new sewer connections shall complete a city of Orting sewer
application form. Any applicant whose business or commercial use will generate
fats, oils or grease, or dischargers of sand, silt or lint, shall comply with
subsections A1 and A2 of this section before the connection will be approved.
      5.   All existing commercial establishments receiving sewer service shall
have until December 31, 2016, to comply with the requirements of this
subsection A.
Beginning January 1, 2017, commercial customers served by the city of Orting
sewer system that fail to comply with this subsection A will be assessed a
service rate surcharge in accordance with the following procedures:
         a.   Upon discovery of a failure to comply with the terms and
conditions of this subsection A, the public works director or public works
director's designee shall notify the commercial establishment and the property
owner (if different) in writing of the violation and give the commercial
establishment thirty (30) days to comply.
         b.   If the commercial establishment fails to correct the violation
within thirty (30) days, then the following monthly service rate surcharge(s)
shall be assessed against the commercial customer receiving service from the
city of Orting for the duration of the noncompliance:
            (1)   Failure to adopt a management plan: One hundred dollars
($100.00).
            (2)   Failure to allow inspection: Two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
            (3)   Failure to install required equipment or process: Five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
            (4)   Failure to meet discharge standards: Five hundred dollars
($500.00).
            (5)   Failure to maintain records: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
The above referenced service rate surcharges shall be subject to collection and
enforcement as any other rates and charges of the city of Orting.
         c.   For each and every subsequent month that a commercial
establishment is in violation of this subsection A, the applicable service rate
surcharge(s) shall double in amount until completion of the third month of
violation. At that time, the city of Orting may terminate sewer service to the
commercial customer until corrective action has been taken and the sewer
service surcharges paid in full, or take such other actions as the city of
Orting deems appropriate to obtain compliance with this subsection A and to
collect the sewer service surcharges.
         d.   The enforcement provided for in this subsection A is not intended
to and does not limit or replace the city of Orting common law, statutory, or
equitable bases for recovery of damages suffered from the discharge of fats,
oils, grease or sediment into the city of Orting sewer system.
   B.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made above shall be determined at the control
manhole in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Sewage", published by the American Public Health
Association (APHA), the American Water Works Association (AWWA), and the Water
Environment Federation (WEF). (Ord. 2016-996, 9-28-2016)
9-2D-6: FACILITIES MAINTENANCE BY OWNER:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner, at his expense. The owners of pretreatment
facilities will be required to obtain a discharge permit from the state of
Washington department of ecology for discharge to the city's sanitary sewer
system. (1973 Code § 13.64.070)
9-2D-7: INSTALLATION OF OBSERVATION FACILITIES:
When required by the city engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the flow rates and waste
concentration. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city
engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him, so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (1973
Code § 13.64.080)
9-2D-8: DETERMINATION OF SAMPLING AND TESTING METHODS:
   A.   Compliance With Statutes; Manhole Accessibility: All measurements,
tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be in the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
   B.   Composite Or Grab Sample: The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD5 and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH is determined from
periodic grab samples. The individual discharges shall be responsible for the
cost of testing, either periodically and/or as requested by the city. (1973
Code § 13.64.090)
9-2D-9: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS WITH INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS:
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern,
whereby an industrial waste or unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.
(1973 Code § 13.64.100)
ARTICLE E. DRAINAGE PLANS
SECTION:
9-2E-1: Purpose
9-2E-2: Definitions
9-2E-3: Applicability To Governmental Entities
9-2E-4: Submission Of Plans And Documents
9-2E-5: Commencement Of Work Upon Plan Approval
9-2E-6: Contents Of Drainage Plan
9-2E-7: Review And Approval; Inspection Schedule
9-2E-8: Fee Schedule, Storm Water (Rep. by Ord. 848, 5-9-2007)
9-2E-9: Bonds And Liability Insurance Required
9-2E-10: Facility Responsibilities Of City And Developer
9-2E-11: Development In Critical Areas
9-2E-12: Protection Of Public And Private Roads
9-2E-13: Drainage Improvements; Mandatory Requirements
9-2E-14: Operation And Maintenance Procedures
9-2E-15: Appeal Engineer Decisions To City Council
9-2E-16: Effective Date
9-2E-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that this article is necessary in order:
   A.   To promote sound development policies and construction procedures which
respect and preserve the city's watercourses;
   B.   To minimize water quality degradation, and control the sedimentation of
creeks, streams, ponds, lakes and other water bodies;
   C.   To protect property owners adjacent to developing and developed land
from increased runoff rates which could cause erosion of abutting property;
   D.   To protect downstream owners;
   E.   To preserve and enhance the suitability of waters for contact
recreation and fishing;
   F.   To preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the waters;
   G.   To maintain and protect valuable ground water resources;
   H.   To minimize adverse effects of alterations in ground water or
quantities, locations, and flow patterns;
   I.   To ensure the safety of city roads and rights of way; and
   J.   To decrease drainage related damage to public and private property.
(1973 Code § 13.72.010)
9-2E-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
COMPREHENSIVE DRAINAGE PLAN: A detailed analysis for each drainage basin which
compares the capabilities and needs for runoff accommodation due to various
combinations of development, land use, structural and nonstructural management
alternatives. The plan recommends the form, location and extent of quantity and
quality control measures which optimally would meet the legal constraints,
water quality standards, and community standards, as well as identifying the
institutional and funding requirements for plan implementation.
COMPUTATIONS: Calculation, including coefficients and other pertinent data,
made to determine the drainage plan, with rates of flow of water given in cubic
feet per second and cubic meters per second (cms).
DESIGN STORM: That rainfall event which is selected by the city engineer for
purposes of design, specifying both the return period in years and duration of
hours.
DETENTION FACILITIES: Facilities designed to hold runoff while gradually
releasing it at a predetermined maximum rate.
DEVELOPER: The individual(s) or corporation(s) applying for the permits or
approvals described in subsection
 9-2E-4A1 of this article.
DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE:
   A.   All developed surface areas within the subject property including, but
not limited to, rooftops, driveways, carports, accessory buildings, parking
areas and any other impervious surfaces.
   B.   During construction, "developmental coverage" shall include the above
in addition to the full extent of any alteration of previously occurring soils,
slope or vegetation due to grading, temporary storage, access areas, or any
other short term causes.
DRAINAGE AREA: The watershed contributing water runoff to and including the
subject property.
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan for collection, transport, treatment, and discharge or
recycling of water within the subject property.
DRAINAGE TREATMENT/ABATEMENT FACILITIES: Any facilities installed or
constructed in conjunction with a drainage plan for the purpose of treatment or
abatement of urban runoff, excluding retention or detention facilities.
NATURAL LOCATION OF DRAINAGE SYSTEMS: The location of those channels, swales,
and other nonmanmade conveyance systems, as defined by the first documented
topographic contours existing for the subject property, either from maps or
photographs or such other means as appropriate.
PEAK DISCHARGE: The maximum surface water runoff rate (cfs and cms) determined
for the design storm.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Residential developments which are planned and/or
developed in several stages but submitted together for approvals, and which
typically consist of clusters of multi-unit structures interspersed with areas
of common open space.
PROCEDURES MANUAL: The manuals of technical and administrative procedures,
"Storm Drainage Control-Requirements and Guidelines" and "Storm Drainage
Control-Stormwater Management Practices," both as prepared by King County,
Department of Public Works, Division of Hydraulics, the most current edition,
which delineate methods to be used, the level of detail of analysis required,
and other details for implementation of the provisions of this Article.
RECEIVING BODIES OF WATER: Creeks, streams, lakes and other bodies of water
into which waters are directed, either naturally, in manmade ditches, or in
closed conduit systems.
RETENTION FACILITIES: Facilities designed to hold water for a considerable
length of time and then consume it by evaporation, plant transpiration or
infiltration into the soil.
SUBJECT PROPERTY: The tract of land which is the subject of the permit and/or
approval action, as defined by the full legal description of all parcels
involved in the proposed development. (1973 Code § 13.72.020)
9-2E-3: APPLICABILITY TO GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES:
   A.   Drainage Plan Required: All municipal corporations and governmental
entities shall be required to submit a drainage plan and comply with the terms
of this Article when developing and/or improving land including, but not
limited to, road building and widening, within the areas of the City.
   B.   Outside Permit Conditions: It is recognized that many other City,
County, State and Federal permit conditions may apply to the proposed action
and that compliance with the provisions of this Article does not constitute
compliance with such other requirements. (1973 Code § 13.72.030)
9-2E-4: SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS:
   A.   Submission Or Resubmission Of Plan:
      1.   All developers applying for any of the following permits and/or
approvals shall submit for approval a drainage plan with their application and/
or request:
         a.   Grading permit;
         b.   Substantial development permit required under RCW 90.58
(Shoreline Management Act);
         c.   Subdivision approval;
         d.   Short subdivision approval;
         e.   Rezones;
         f.   Conditional use permits;
         g.   Building permits where the permit relates to five thousand
(5,000) or more square feet of development coverage within the property, or
where development is in a critical area;
         h.   Planned unit development;
         i.   Mobile home park.
      2.   The same plan submitted during one permit/approval process may be
subsequently submitted with further required applications. The plan shall be
supplemented with such additional information that is requested by the City
Engineer or required by the provisions of the procedures manual. (1973 Code §
13.72.040)
   B.   Exemptions: The plan requirement established in this Section shall
apply except when the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer that the proposed activity or development:
      1.   Will neither seriously nor adversely impact the water quality
conditions of any affected receiving bodies of water; and
      2.   Will not alter the surface discharge location, alter the drainage
pattern on adjoining properties, alter drainage patterns, increase the
discharge, nor cause any other adverse effects in the drainage area; and
      3.   Will not alter the subsurface drainage patterns, flow rates and
discharge points, nor result in any significant adverse effects to property or
residents. (1973 Code § 13.72.050)
9-2E-5: COMMENCEMENT OF WORK UPON PLAN APPROVAL:
Commencement of construction work under any of the above permits or
applications shall not begin until such time as final approval of the drainage
plan is obtained in accordance with Section
9-2E-7 of this Article. (1973 Code § 13.72.060)
9-2E-6: CONTENTS OF DRAINAGE PLAN:
   A.   Scope Of Plan: All persons applying for any of the permits and/or
approvals contained in subsection
9-2E-4A of this Article shall provide a drainage plan for surface and pertinent
subsurface water flows entering, flowing within, and leaving the subject
property, both during and after construction.
   B.   Required Information: The detailed form and contents of the drainage
plan shall be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer, and shall
be prepared in accordance with procedures established by the City Engineer or
in the procedures manual. The procedures manual will set forth the manner of
presenting the following required information:
      1.   Background computations for sizing drainage facilities:
         a.   Depiction of the drainage area on a topographical map of approved
scale and contour interval, with acreage of the site, development and
developmental coverage indicated;
         b.   Indication of the peak discharge and volume of surface water
currently entering and leaving the subject property due to the design storm;
         c.   Indication of the peak discharge and volume of runoff which will
be generated due to the design storm within the subject property if the
development or proposed activity is allowed to proceed.
      2.   Proposed measures for handling the computed runoff at the detail
level specified in the procedures manual.
      3.   Proposed measures for controlling runoff during construction.
      4.   The drainage plan shall also include a temporary erosion
sedimentation control plan (TESCP) which will be instituted prior to on site
construction.
   C.   Modification Of Plan: The requirements of this section may be modified
at the discretion of the city engineer in special cases requiring more
information. (1973 Code § 13.72.070)
9-2E-7: REVIEW AND APPROVAL; INSPECTION SCHEDULE:
   A.   Review And Approval: All storm drainage plans prepared in connection
with any of the permits and/or approvals listed in subsection
9-2E-4A of this article shall be submitted for review by and approval of the
city engineer in accordance with the procedures established in the procedures
manual.
   B.   Inspection Schedule: At the time of approval of the drainage plan for
the subject property, a schedule for inspection of construction and facilities
will be established by the city engineer. (1973 Code § 13.72.080)
9-2E-8: FEE SCHEDULE, STORMWATER:
(Rep. by Ord. 848, 5-9-2007)
9-2E-9: BONDS AND LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   General Surety Requirements: The city engineer is authorized to require
all persons constructing retention/detention facilities to post with the city
treasurer surety and cash bonds. Where such persons have previously posted, or
are required to post, other such bonds with the city treasurer, either on the
facility itself or on other construction related to the facility, such persons
may, with the permission of the city treasurer and to the extent allowable by
law, combine all such bonds into a single bond; provided, that at no time shall
the amount thus bonded be less than the total amount which would have been
required in the form of separate bonds, and provided further, that such a bond
shall on its face clearly delineate those separate bonds which it is intended
to replace.
   B.   Construction Bond: Prior to commencing construction, the person
constructing the facility shall post a construction bond in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of conforming said construction with the approved
drainage plans. After determination by the city engineer that all facilities
are constructed in compliance with the approved plans, the construction bond
shall be released.
   C.   Maintenance Bond: After satisfactory completion of the facilities and
release of the construction bond by the city, the person constructing the
facility shall commence a one year period of satisfactory maintenance of the
facility. A cash bond to be used at the discretion of the city treasurer to
correct deficiencies in maintenance affecting public health, safety and welfare
must be posted and maintained throughout the one year maintenance period. The
amount of the cash bond shall be determined by the city treasurer, but shall
not be in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). In addition, a surety
bond or cash bond to cover the cost of defects or failures of the facilities
shall also be posted and maintained throughout the one year maintenance period.
   D.   Liability Policy: The person constructing the facility shall maintain a
liability policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
per individual, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence,
and fifty thousand dollars' ($50,000.00) property damage, which shall name the
city an additional insured, and which shall protect from any liability up to
those amounts for any accident, negligence, failure of the facility, or any
other liability whatsoever, relating to the construction or maintenance of the
facility. The liability policy shall be maintained for the duration of the
facility by the owner of the facility. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
9-2E-10: FACILITY RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY AND DEVELOPER:
   A.   City Responsibility: In the event that public benefits would accrue due
to modification of the drainage plan for the subject property to better
implement the recommendations of the comprehensive drainage plan, the city
engineer may recommend that the city should assume responsibility for the
further design, construction, operation and maintenance of drainage facilities
on the subject property. Such decision shall be made concurrently with review
and approval of the plan as specified in section
9-2E-7 of this article.
   B.   Contribution By Developer: In the event that the city decides to assume
responsibility for design, construction, operation and maintenance of the
facilities, the developer will be required to contribute a pro rata share to
the construction cost of the facilities. The developer may be required to
supply additional information at the request of the city engineer to aid
determination by the city. (1973 Code § 13.72.110)
9-2E-11: DEVELOPMENT IN CRITICAL AREAS:
   A.   Hazardous Conditions: Development which would increase the volume of
rate of discharge due to a storm from the subject property shall not be
permitted in areas designated as critical areas by the city engineer. "Critical
areas" are those in which existing flooding, drainage, erosion, and/or
instability conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare
and safety of the surrounding community, or to the integrity of the surface or
ground water system. Development shall not be permitted in these critical areas
until such time as the existing community hazard is alleviated and it is
adequately demonstrated that the proposed development will not cause a
recurrence of the problems nor the occurrence of any new drainage related
problem. The city engineer may also designate as critical any area in which
comparable problems would occur in the future due to any increase in volume or
peak discharge.
   B.   Waiver Of Restrictions: The requirements of this section shall apply
regardless of any variance under this article. Where applications of the
provisions of this section will deny all reasonable uses of the property, the
restrictions on development contained in this section may be waived for the
subject property; provided, that the resulting development shall be subject to
all the remaining terms and conditions of this article.
   C.   Basis For Decisions: All decisions based on the provision of this
section shall be compatible with the comprehensive drainage plan (if available)
for the basin in which the subject property is located. For development in
areas designated as critical, the developer shall provide information regarding
volume and rate of discharge for a range of storms as specified in the
procedures manual. (1973 Code § 13.72.120)
9-2E-12: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ROADS:
Implementation of any provision of this article shall not cause nor be
construed as an infringement of the rights of individuals, municipalities or
corporations other than the developer seeking a permit or approval as described
in sections
9-2E-4 and
9-2E-5 of this article. (1973 Code § 13.72.130)
9-2E-13: DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS; MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Surface water entering the subject property shall be received at the
naturally occurring locations, and surface water exiting the subject property
shall be discharged at the natural locations with adequate energy dissipators
within the subject property to minimize downstream damage and with no diversion
at any of these points.
      2.   The design storm peak discharge from the subject property may not be
increased by the proposed development.
      3.   Retention/detention facilities must be provided in order to maintain
surface water discharge rates at or below the existing design storm peak
discharge.
      4.   Where open channel construction is used to handle drainage within
the subject property, a minimum of fifteen feet (15') will be provided between
any structures and the top of the bank of the defined channel.
         a.   In open channel work, the water surface elevation will be
indicated on the plan and profile drawings. The configuration of the finished
grades constituting the banks of the open channel will also be shown on the
drawings.
         b.   Proposed cross section of the channel will be shown with stable
side slopes as approved by the city engineer.
         c.   The water surface elevation of the flow for the design storm will
be indicated on the cross section.
      5.   When a closed system is used to handle drainage within the subject
property, the system will be a minimum of ten feet (10') from all structures.
   B.   Compliance Required: To the extent possible, approved measures for
controlling runoff during construction should comply with the above provisions.
   C.   Variances From Mandatory Requirements:
      1.   Criteria: Variances from the requirements of subsection A of this
section may be permitted only after a determination by the city engineer using
the comprehensive drainage plan (if available) and/or employing the following
criteria:
         a.   Sufficient capacity of downstream facilities under design
conditions;
         b.   Maintenance of the integrity of the receiving waters;
         c.   Possibility of adverse effects of retention/detention;
         d.   Utility of regional retention/detention facilities;
         e.   Capability of maintenance of the system; and
         f.   Structural integrity of abutting foundations and structures.
      2.   Requests: Request for variances shall be filed in writing with the
city clerk and shall adequately detail the basis for granting an exemption.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
9-2E-14: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Responsibility Of Developer: It will be the responsibility of the
developer to make arrangements with the occupants or owners of the subject
property for assumption of operation and maintenance in a manner subject to the
approval of the city engineer or in accordance with the procedures manual.
   B.   City Inspection: The city may inspect the facilities in order to ensure
continued use of the facilities for the purposes for which they were built and
in accordance with these arrangements. Failure to maintain the facilities in
good working order shall be cause for a written request to maintain the
retention/detention facilities after inspection by city forces. If after thirty
(30) days, no remedial measures are taken by the property owner, the city may
initiate legal action against the property owner. (1973 Code § 13.72.170)
9-2E-15: APPEAL ENGINEER DECISIONS TO CITY COUNCIL:
If the property owner feels the requirements imposed by the city engineer are
inconsistent with storm drainage handling procedures for the area, they may
appeal to the city council and present in writing their reasons for a revision
to the requirements as imposed upon their development. The city council's
ruling shall be binding on the property owner. (1973 Code § 13.72.140; amd.
1996 Code)
9-2E-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The requirements of this article shall apply to all plats receiving preliminary
approval subsequent to enactment of the ordinance codified herein. In the case
of additional actions enumerated in subsection
9-2E-4A of this article, the terms of this article shall apply where final
action by the city has not been taken prior to the effective date of this
article. (1973 Code § 13.72.180)
CHAPTER 3
REAL ESTATE OWNERS; WATER OR SEWER FACILITIES AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Latecomer Agreements Authorized
9-3-2: Notice To City Required
9-3-3: Approval By City Council
9-3-4: Agreement Provisions
9-3-1: LATECOMER AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED:
The City is hereby authorized to contract with the owners of real estate in the
manner provided in RCW 35.91, the Municipal Water and Sewer Facilities Act.
(1973 Code § 13.74.010)
9-3-2: NOTICE TO CITY REQUIRED:
The owner desiring to contract with the City shall notify the Mayor in writing
at least thirty (30) days prior to construction of the facilities of his intent
to enter into a latecomer agreement with the City. The notice shall contain the
following information:
   A.   The description of the facilities to be installed.
   B.   The legal and general description of the area where the facilities are
to be installed and a map showing the location thereof.
   C.   The cost estimate of the facilities. (1973 Code § 13.74.020)
9-3-3: APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Submit Final Construction Costs: The owner shall submit the final
construction costs to the Mayor within sixty (60) days from the date of final
approval of the construction by the City. The matter shall then be submitted to
the City Council, which shall have authority to approve or disapprove entering
into the latecomer agreement with the owner. If the project is approved for a
latecomer agreement by the City Council, the City shall have ninety (90) days
thereafter to finalize the agreement.
   B.   Failure To Comply With Time Limitation: In the event the owner fails to
comply with any of the time limitations set forth in this Chapter, then the
owner shall have waived his right to enter into a latecomer agreement with the
City. (1973 Code § 13.74.030)
9-3-4: AGREEMENT PROVISIONS:
The latecomer agreement shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and
shall contain the following provisions:
   A.   Term: The latecomer agreement shall be in effect for a period of up to
ten (10) years from the date thereof.
   B.   City Authority; Costs: The City shall have sole authority to determine
the fair pro rata share of the cost of construction to be collected from
latecomers for reimbursement to the owner.
   C.   Additional Costs: In addition to the amounts agreed to be collected by
the City, the City shall charge a sum equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the
agreed amount to defray the cost of labor, bookkeeping and accounting.
   D.   Deeds And Easements: The ownership of all water and sewer main lines
shall be conveyed to the City and any water or sewer line installation on
private property shall be conveyed with an appropriate easement in a form
acceptable to the City. All deeds and easements for said main lines shall be
submitted to the City within sixty (60) days of the completion of construction.
(1973 Code § 13.74.040)
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS FOR WATER, SEWER AND STREET FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-4-1: When Agreement Required
9-4-2: Predesign Conference
9-4-3: Agreement Provisions
9-4-4: Execution By Certain Developers
9-4-5: Fees
9-4-6: Exclusions
9-4-1: WHEN AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
Whenever any developer of commercial, industrial or residential land desires or
finds it necessary to construct sanitary sewage facilities, water distribution
facilities, storm drainage facilities and streets at his own expense before
connection with, delivery to and operation by the city, such developer shall,
before securing a building permit, enter into a developer's agreement with the
city. (1973 Code § 13.76.010)
9-4-2: PREDESIGN CONFERENCE:
A predesign conference with the mayor shall be held during which the matters
which will be in the development agreement will be discussed. (1973 Code §
13.76.020)
9-4-3: AGREEMENT PROVISIONS:
The development agreement entered into shall contain, but need not be limited
to, the following provisions:
   A.   Preconstruction delivery by the developer to the city of the plans and
specifications, with an appropriate stamp by a professional engineer, for sewer
system, water system, storm drainage system and streets, prior to construction;
and the governing standards for such plans and specifications.
   B.   Inspection requirements.
   C.   Conveyance of necessary property rights, including, but not limited to,
water lines, sewer lines, drainage systems, roads which are to be used as
public roads and any necessary easements.
   D.   Notice of when construction commences.
   E.   Control over execution of construction contracts.
   F.   State and county construction licenses and permits.
   G.   Testing of systems requirements and provisions for reimbursement of the
city for expenses arising out of the agreement.
   H.   Warranty bond for repairs necessary within two (2) years from the date
of acceptance arising from faulty labor, workmanship or materials.
   I.   Indemnity and hold harmless clause.
   J.   Provision that the developer be an independent contractor.
   K.   Limitation on assignment of the agreement.
   L.   Provision for charges, taxes and future assessments applicable to the
property.
   M.   Waiver clause.
   N.   Certification of the consulting engineer/city engineer as a
prerequisite for connection to the city sewer or water lines and acceptance of
streets.
   O.   Submission of monies expended to perform construction.
   P.   Agreements regarding easements and servitudes.
   Q.   Change and correction requirements. (Ord. 750, 3-8-2001)
9-4-4: EXECUTION BY CERTAIN DEVELOPERS:
The developer's agreement shall be executed by a developer presently
constructing any sanitary sewage facility, waste distribution facility, storm
drainage facility or street at his own expense prior to connection with,
delivery to or operation by the city. (1973 Code § 13.76.040)
9-4-5: FEES:
Fees shall be paid by the developer at such rates which the consulting
engineer/city engineer charges the city for his services. (1973 Code §
13.76.050; amd. 1996 Code)
9-4-6: EXCLUSIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms "developer" and "developer's
agreement" shall not apply to construction of two (2) or less single-family
residences by a single individual. (1973 Code § 13.76.060)
CHAPTER 5
STORMWATER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
9-5A-1: Findings Of Fact
9-5A-2: Need
9-5A-3: Purpose
9-5A-4: Definitions
9-5A-5: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-5A-6: Interpretation
9-5A-7: Applicability
9-5A-8: Regulated Activities; Exemptions
9-5A-9: General Requirements
9-5A-10: Approval Standards
9-5A-11: Bonds And Liability Insurance Required
9-5A-12: Facility Responsibilities Of City And Developer
9-5A-13: Development In Special Hazard Areas
9-5A-14: Protection Of Public And Private Roads
9-5A-15: Administration
9-5A-16: Appeals; Variances
9-5A-17: Enforcement
9-5A-18: Administrative Enforcement/Penalty
9-5A-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The city council hereby finds that:
   A.   Stormwater pollution is a problem associated with land utilization and
development and the common occurrence of potential pollutants such as
pesticides, fertilizers, petroleum products, pet wastes and numerous others.
   B.   Land utilization and development is also known to increase both the
volume and duration of peak flows. The resulting erosion, scouring, and
deposition of sediment affect the ecological balance in surface waters.
   C.   Sedimentation and stormwater pollution can cause diversity of species
to decrease and allow more tolerant (and usually less desirable) species to
remain.
   D.   Stormwater pollution can cause or contribute to closures or other
restrictions on public use of the waters within the city.
   E.   An expanding population and increased development of land have led to:
      1.   Water quality degradation through discharge of nutrients, metals,
oil and grease, toxic materials, and other detrimental substances including,
without limitation, insect and weed control compounds;
      2.   Drainage and stormwater and surface water runoff problems within the
city; and
      3.   Safety hazards to both lives and property posed by uncontrolled
water runoff on streets and highways.
   F.   In the future, such problems and dangers will be reduced or avoided if
existing properties and future development of private or public properties
provide for stormwater quality treatment and flow control.
   G.   Stormwater quality treatment and flow control can be achieved when land
is developed or redeveloped by implementing appropriate best management
practices (BMPs).
   H.   BMPs can be expected to perform as intended only when properly
designed, constructed and maintained.
   I.   Sites protected by levees may become temporary closed depressions
because of backwater effects on stormwater drainage systems due to increases in
river elevations.
   J.   The city is a permittee under the western Washington phase II municipal
stormwater permit issued by the Washington state department of ecology under
the federal clean water act and the state of Washington water pollution control
law.
   K.   Not providing for stormwater management practices will lead to water
quality degradation, erosion, property damage, endangerment of the health and
safety of the inhabitants of the city, and/or violation of the provisions of
the phase II municipal stormwater permit. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-2: NEED:
The city finds that this article is necessary in order to:
   A.   Minimize water quality degradation.
   B.   Prevent erosion and sedimentation in creeks, streams, ponds, lakes and
other water bodies.
   C.   Protect property owners on or adjacent to existing and developing lands
from increased runoff rates which could cause erosion or flooding of abutting
property.
   D.   Preserve and enhance the suitability of waters for contact recreation,
fishing, and other beneficial uses.
   E.   Preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the water.
   F.   Promote sound development policies which respect and preserve city
surface water and groundwater.
   G.   Ensure the safety of city roads and rights of way.
   H.   Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-3: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this article are intended to guide and advise all who conduct
land disturbing activities, new development or redevelopment within the city.
The provisions of this article establish the minimum level of compliance which
must be met to permit a property to be developed or redeveloped within the
city.
The purpose of this article is to:
   A.   Minimize water quality degradation and sedimentation in streams, ponds,
lakes, wetlands and other water bodies;
   B.   Minimize the impact of increased runoff, erosion and sedimentation
caused by land development and maintenance practices;
   C.   Maintain and protect surface water and groundwater resources;
   D.   Minimize adverse impacts of alterations on ground and surface water
quantities, locations and flow patterns;
   E.   Decrease potential landslide, flood and erosion damage to public and
private property;
   F.   Promote site planning and construction practices that are consistent
with natural topographical, vegetational and hydrological conditions;
   G.   Maintain and protect the city's stormwater management infrastructure
and those downstream;
   H.   Provide a means of regulating clearing and grading of private and
public land while minimizing water quality and flow impacts in order to protect
public health and safety;
   I.   Provide minimum development regulations and construction procedures
which will preserve, replace or enhance, to the maximum extent practicable,
existing vegetation to preserve and enhance the natural qualities of lands,
wetlands and water bodies. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
stormwater and LID requirements of Title 5 Chapters 1 and 10, Title 6 Chapter
1B, Title 7 Chapters 5 and 6, Title 8 Chapters 2, 4 and 5,Title 9 Chapter 5,
Title 10 Chapter 16, Title 11 Chapters 1 and 4, Title 12 Chapters 2 and 10,
Title 13 Chapters 2, 3, 5 and 6, Title 14 Chapter 1, Title 15 Chapters 5 and 15
of this code. Any term or phrase not defined herein, or in article B or C of
this chapter, shall have the meaning that is given to that term or phrase in
this code or the Stormwater Management Manual. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to
those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law,
regulation or rule referred to herein be renumbered or recodified, then the
reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered or recodified provision:
AKART: All known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and
treatment. See also the state water pollution control act, sections 90.48.010
and 90.48.520 Revised Code Of Washington.
ADJUSTMENT: A variation in the application of a minimum requirement to a
particular project. Adjustments provide substantially equivalent environmental
protection.
APPLICANT: Any person that owns a site, or has been designated or named in
writing by the owner of the site to be the applicant, and executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a regulated activity in order
to carry out development upon a site or any other regulated land disturbing
activity.
APPROVAL: The proposed work or completed work conforms to this article in the
opinion of the director.
BASIN PLAN: As defined in the 2012 Stormwater Management Manual for Western
Washington Volume I Appendix G.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water. BMPs are listed and described in the manual.
   A.   An experimental BMP is a BMP that has not been tested and evaluated by
the department of ecology in collaboration with local governments and technical
experts.
   B.   A source control BMP is a BMP that is intended to prevent pollutants
from entering stormwater. A few examples of source control BMPs are erosion
control practices, maintenance of stormwater facilities, constructing roofs
over storage and working areas, and directing washwater and similar discharges
to the sanitary sewer or a dead end sump.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
CITY: The city of Orting, a municipal corporation created and existing under
the laws of the state of Washington.
CITY STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The entire stormwater drainage system owned by
the utility or over which the utility has control or right of use, or any part
thereof.
CIVIL ENGINEER: A professional engineer licensed in the state of Washington in
civil engineering who is experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of civil
engineering.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CLEARING: Removal of timber, brush, grass, ground cover, or other vegetative
matter from a site that exposes the earth's surface of the site or any actions
that disturb the existing ground surface.
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE: Those activities conducted on lands defined in Revised
Code Of Washington 84.34.020(2), and activities involved in the production of
crops or livestock for wholesale trade. An activity ceases to be considered
commercial agriculture when the area on which it is conducted is proposed for
conversion to a nonagricultural use or has lain idle for more than five (5)
years, unless the idle land is registered in a federal or state soils
conservation program, or unless the activity is maintenance of irrigation
ditches, laterals, canals, or drainage ditches related to an existing and
ongoing agricultural activity. Generally, commercial agriculture is exempt from
the stormwater requirements of this chapter. However, converting from
timberland to agriculture and the construction of impervious surfaces are not
exempt.
DETENTION: The release of stormwater runoff from the site at a slower rate than
it is collected by the stormwater drainage system, the difference being held in
temporary storage.
DETENTION FACILITY: An above or below ground stormwater facility, such as a
pond or tank, that temporarily stores stormwater runoff and subsequently
releases it at a slower rate than it is collected by the stormwater drainage
system. There is typically little or no infiltration of stored stormwater.
DEVELOP: To alter the condition of real property from its natural state for
purposes of development.
DEVELOPED: That condition of real property altered from its natural state by
the addition to or construction on such property of impervious ground cover or
other manmade physical improvements or clearing of native vegetation such that
the hydrology of the property or a portion thereof is affected.
DEVELOPER: The person(s) applying for the permits or approvals described in
subsection
 9-5A-7E of this article.
DEVELOPMENT: New development or redevelopment or both.
DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE:
   A.   All developed surface areas within the subject property including, but
not limited to, rooftops, driveways, carports, accessory buildings, parking
areas, and any other impervious surfaces.
   B.   During construction, "development coverage" shall include the above in
addition to the full extent of any alteration of previously occurring soils,
slope or vegetation due to grading, temporary storage, access areas, or any
other short term causes.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: The "development code" of the city, as that term is
defined in title 1, chapter 13 of this code and such development standards,
promulgated by the city from time to time, that contain the review, design and
submittal requirements for development projects within the city. The
development standards may be modified as required to promulgate the
requirements of this title.
DIRECTOR: The city administrator or his or her designee.
DISCHARGE: To throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit, or pour forth
any matter or to cause or allow matter to flow, run or seep from land or be
thrown, drained, released, dumped, spilled, emptied, emitted or poured into
water.
EARTH MATERIAL: Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.
ECOLOGY: The Washington state department of ecology.
EFFECTIVE IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: Those impervious surfaces that are connected via
sheet flow or by natural conveyance systems or stormwater facilities to a
public or private stormwater drainage system or receiving water. Effective
impervious surfaces include those areas from which:
   A.   Stormwater is routed directly to the stormwater drainage systems or
receiving water via sheet flow or by natural conveyance systems or stormwater
facilities; or
   B.   Stormwater is routed through a public or private stormwater facility
prior to routing to the stormwater drainage system or receiving water.
EQUIVALENT ACREAGE UNIT (EAU): Shall mean and be equal to forty three thousand
five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of surface area and shall be used by
the utility in assessing service charges against undeveloped property.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): Shall mean and be equal to two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of impervious surfaces and is the measure of
impervious ground cover to be used by the utility in assessing services charges
and general facilities charges against each parcel of developed property.
EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or
other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep.
Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or
gravity.
EXCAVATION: The mechanical removal of earth material.
EXCEPTION: Relief from the application of a minimum requirement to a project.
EXISTING SITE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Existing site conditions for sites that have not been developed or
altered since 1997. If in question, existing site conditions shall be
documented by aerial photograph records, or other appropriate means acceptable
to the director.
   B.   Existing site conditions for sites that have been developed or altered
after 1997 if:
      1.   A building or grading permit was issued and includes a stormwater
drainage system that was designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this title in effect at the time the permit was issued; or
      2.   A building or grading permit was issued but received an exemption or
waiver from the city from compliance with this title in effect at the time the
permit was issued.
   C.   Vegetated pervious cover for sites developed or altered after 1997 if:
      1.   A building or grading permit was required but application to the
city was not provided; or
      2.   A stormwater drainage system was not designed and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this title in effect at the time of
construction; or
      3.   Did not receive an exemption or waiver from the city for compliance
with this title in effect at the time of construction.
   D.   Vegetated cover shall be considered one hundred percent (100%) pasture
unless the site or portions thereof were wooded or forested prior to site work
or the site or portions thereof are covered with a tree canopy.
FILL: A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
FLOOD CONTROL ORDINANCE: Title 14 of this code.
FOREST PRACTICE: Any activity conducted on or directly pertaining to forest
land regulated under title 222 Washington administrative code, except for class
IV general forest practices that are conversions from timberland to other uses.
Such nonclass IV general forest practices are exempt from the provisions of
this code.
GENERAL FACILITIES CHARGE: That fee authorized by section
9-5C-8 of this chapter and charged by the utility to property which is
developed, which charge reflects a proportionate share of the utility's capital
costs attributable to the newly developed property.
GROUNDWATER: Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of land
or a surface water body.
HARD SURFACE: An impervious surface as defined in section
9-5A-4, a permeable pavement, decking that has a minimum 3/16" board spacing,
or a vegetated roof.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
HYPERCHLORINATED: Water that contains more than ten milligrams per liter (10
mg/L) chlorine.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any manmade conveyance that is connected to a stormwater
drainage system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type
connections. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains,
channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly
to the stormwater drainage system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to stormwater
drainage systems that cause or contribute to a violation of State water
quality, sediment quality or groundwater quality standards including, but not
limited to, discharges from sanitary sewer connections, industrial process
water, interior floor drains, fuel islands, car washing, and gray water
systems. Illicit discharges are further described in subsection
 9-5A-9F of this article. Discharges from firefighting activities are not
included in this definition.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A non-vegetated surface area which either prevents or
retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions
prior to development. A non-vegetated surface area which causes water to run
off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the
flow present under natural conditions prior to development.
Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, canopies,
building overhangs, structures, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or
storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen
materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the
natural infiltration of stormwater. Open, uncovered retention/detention
facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces for the purposes of
determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are
exceeded. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall be considered
impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling.
INTERFLOW: That portion of rainfall that infiltrates into the soil and moves
laterally through the upper soil horizons until intercepted by a stream channel
or until it returns to the surface for example, in a wetland, spring or seep.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any activity that results in a movement of earth or a
change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or
the existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not
limited to, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. Compaction that is
associated with stabilization of structures and road construction shall also be
considered a land disturbing activity. Vegetation maintenance practices are not
considered a land disturbing activity.
LID: Low Impact Development.
LID MANUAL: The latest edition of the "Low Impact Development Technical
Guidance Manual for Puget Sound" as published by the Puget Sound Partnership/
Puget Sound Action Team, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set
forth herein as the Low Impact Development Manual for the City of Orting and is
hereinafter referred to as the "LID Manual".
LID PRINCIPLES: Land use management strategies that emphasize conservation, use
of on-site natural features, and site planning to minimize impervious surfaces,
native vegetation loss, and stormwater runoff.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): A stormwater and land use management strategy
that strives to mimic pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration,
filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation,
use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater
management practices that are integrated into a project design.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (LID BMPs): Distributed
stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that
emphasize pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration,
storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs include, but are not limited
to, bioretention, rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls,
dispersion, soil quality and depth, vegetated roofs, minimum excavation
foundations, and water re-use.
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS: The minimum requirements for stormwater management
described in the NPDES Phase II permit. The minimum requirements include:
   Minimum Requirement 1, preparation of stormwater site plans
   Minimum Requirement 2, construction stormwater pollution prevention (SWPP)
   Minimum Requirement 3, source control of pollution
   Minimum Requirement 4, preservation of natural drainage systems and outfalls
   Minimum Requirement 5, on site stormwater management
   Minimum Requirement 6, runoff treatment
   Minimum Requirement 7, flow control
   Minimum Requirement 8, wetlands protection
   Minimum Requirement 9, operation and maintenance
MITIGATION: In the following order of preference, "mitigation" means:
   A.   Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or part
of an action;
   B.   Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action
and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking
affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;
   C.   Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the
affected environment;
   D.   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the action; and
   E.   Compensation for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing
substitute resources or environments.
NPDES PHASE II PERMIT: The stormwater permit issued by the Department of
Ecology in accordance with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
as promulgated under the Clean Water Act.
NATURAL CONDITIONS: The conditions that existed prior to development. See
definition of predeveloped condition.
NATURAL CONVEYANCE/DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Such natural landscape features that
collect, contain and convey stormwater which include, by way of example and not
limitation, swales and small drainage courses, streams, rivers, lakes and
wetlands. This system circulates water in a complex hydrological cycle.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activities, including Class IV - general
forest practices that are conversions from timberland to other uses; structural
development, including construction or installation of a building or other
structure; creation of impervious surfaces; and subdivision, short subdivision
and binding site plans, as defined and applied in chapter 58.17 Revised Code of
Washington. Projects meeting the definition of "redevelopment" shall not be
considered new development.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the stormwater drainage system that
is not composed entirely of stormwater.
OMC: The Orting Municipal Code, as now or may be amended.
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMPs: A synonym for Low Impact Development BMPs.
PARCEL: The smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an
identified owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented for Property
Tax purposes and given a tax lot number by the Pierce County Assessor.
PERMANENT STORMWATER QUALITY CONTROL (PSQC) PLAN: A plan which includes
permanent BMPs for the control of pollution from stormwater runoff after
construction and/or land disturbing activity has been completed. Guidance on
preparing a PSQC plan is contained in the manual.
PERMITTED DISCHARGES: The following discharges into any public or private
stormwater facilities that discharge to waters of the State are permitted
unless the Director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in
combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface
waters or groundwaters:
   A.   Discharges that contain stormwater only after said discharge has been
routed through a treatment or flow control facility, where required in
accordance with this article;
   B.   Discharges that are not illicit discharges;
   C.   Diverted stream flows;
   D.   Rising groundwaters;
   E.   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005
(20);
   F.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
   G.   Foundation drains;
   H.   Air conditioning condensation;
   I.   Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with
urban stormwater;
   J.   Springs;
   K.   Water from crawl space pumps;
   L.   Footing drains;
   M.   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   N.   Nonstormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit; and
   O.   Discharges from emergency firefighting activities.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, agency
of the State, or local government unit, however designated, recognized by law
and acting as either the owner of a premises or owner's agent.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: Generally, a surface that does not meet the definition of a
hard surface. Pervious surfaces are vegetated surfaces over undisturbed soils
or soils that have been restored to function to match predeveloped conditions.
Vegetation growing in, on, or through a hard surface does not meet the
definition of a pervious surface. Vegetated surfaces within open, uncovered
retention/detention facilities shall be considered hard surfaces for purposes
of runoff modeling.
PLAN: The stormwater management plan for the City of Orting as adopted by the
City and as amended from time to time.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: The same meaning as given in title 13 of this Code.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and, noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
POLLUTION: Contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or
biological properties of waters of the State, including change in temperature,
taste, color, turbidity, or odor of the waters, or such discharge of any
liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any waters of the
State as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life.
PREDEVELOPED CONDITION: The native vegetation and soils that existed at a site
prior to the influence of Euro-American settlement. The predeveloped condition
shall be assumed to be forested land cover unless reasonable, historic
information is provided that indicates the site was prairie prior to
settlement.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROJECT: A site upon which regulated activities will occur.
RCW: Revised Code of Washington.
REDEVELOPMENT: On a site that is already substantially developed (has thirty
five percent (35%) or more of existing hard surface coverage), the creation or
addition of impervious surfaces; the expansion of a building footprint or
addition or replacement of a structure; structural development including
construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure;
replacement of hard surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity;
and land disturbing activities.
SERVICE CHARGE: The monthly fee levied by the utility upon all developed and
undeveloped real property within the boundaries of the utility as authorized by
section
9-5C-6 of this chapter.
SITE: The portion of a piece of a single parcel, or two (2) or more contiguous
parcels that are under common ownership or documented legal control, which
parcel(s) is directly subject to development, including those areas in which
stormwater facilities will be constructed. For projects located primarily
within dedicated rights-of-way, "site" includes the entire width and length of
that portion of the right-of-way subject to development.
SLOPE: The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal; measured as a
numerical ratio, percent, or in degrees. Expressed as a ratio, the first number
is the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance
(rise), as two to one (2:1). A two to one (2:1) slope is a fifty percent (50%)
slope. Expressed in degrees, the slope is the angle from the horizontal plane,
with a ninety degree (90º) slope being vertical (maximum) and forty five degree
(45º) being a one to one (1:1) or one hundred percent (100%) slope.
SOIL: The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface
of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants.
SOURCE CONTROL BMPS: A structure or operation intended to prevent pollutants
from coming into contact with stormwater through physical separation of areas
or careful management of activities that are sources of pollutants. Operational
source control BMPs are non-structural practices that prevent or reduce
pollutants from entering stormwater. Operational source control BMPs generally
include activities such as inspection, cleaning, and maintenance. Structural
source control BMPs are physical, structural, or mechanical devices or
facilities that are intended to prevent pollutants from entering stormwater or
provide treatment of stormwater. Source control BMPs generally include physical
measures such as coverings and constructed BMPs. Source control BMPs do not
exclusively manage or control stormwater.
STORMWATER: Runoff during and following precipitation and snowmelt events,
including surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Stormwater facilities and natural conveyance
systems which function together as a system in or through which stormwater is
collected, conveyed, channeled, held, inhibited, retained, detained,
infiltrated, diverted, treated, filtered or is returned to the atmosphere
through evapotranspiration.
STORMWATER FACILITY: A constructed component of a stormwater drainage system,
designed or constructed to perform a particular function, or multiple
functions. Stormwater facilities include, but are not limited to, pipes,
swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins,
constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators,
sediment basins, and modular pavement. Stormwater facilities also include low
impact development practices which include, but are not limited to, pervious
pavement, rain gardens, and bioretention cells.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MANUAL (MANUAL OR ECOLOGY MANUAL): The "Stormwater
Management Manual for Western Washington" prepared by the Department of Ecology
and adopted by reference that contains BMPs to prevent or reduce pollution and/
or provide flow control.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SPPP): A document which describes the
BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a premises and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater drainage systems, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
STORMWATER SITE PLAN: A document which includes a Permanent Stormwater Control
Plan (PSCP) for permanent BMPs and a Construction Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for temporary BMPs and meets the minimum requirements
set forth in this article. Guidance on preparing a stormwater site plan is
contained in the Stormwater Management Manual.
SUBJECT PROPERTY: The lot or lots upon which the site is located that is the
subject of the permit and/or approval action, as defined by the full legal
description of all lots involved in the proposed development. "Lot" shall have
the meaning given in title 13 of this Code. This term shall also include the
lot or lots upon which is located or takes place any structure, condition, act
or omission which violates any provision of this article.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION CONTROL: The Groundwater Protection Program administered
by the Department of Ecology under Washington Administrative Code 173-218,
Underground Injection Control Program.
UNDEVELOPED: That condition of real property unaltered by the construction or
addition to such property by man of impervious ground cover or physical manmade
improvements of any kind which change the hydrology of the property from its
natural state.
UTILITY: The City of Orting, Washington, stormwater management utility created
pursuant to article C of this chapter.
VARIANCE: See definition of exception.
VEGETATION: All organic plant life growing on the surface of the earth.
WAC: Washington Administrative Code.
WATER BODY: Surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, marine waters,
estuaries, and wetlands.
WATERSHED: A geographic region within which water drains into a particular
river, stream, or body of water as identified and numbered by the State of
Washington water resource inventory areas (WRIAs) as defined in Washington
Administrative Code 173-500.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands
intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to,
irrigation and drainage ditches, grass lined swales, canals, detention
facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape
amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were
unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or
highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created
from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. (Waterbodies not
included in the definition of wetlands as well as those mentioned in the
definition are still waters of the State.)
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2017-1014, 10-11-2017; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-
2020; Ord. 2020-1063, 8-12-2020; Ord. 2022-1098, 7-27-2022)
9-5A-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended that this article repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
article imposes requirements that provide more protection to human health or
the environment, the provisions of this article shall prevail. (Ord. 911, 8-31-
2011)
9-5A-6: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements in
their interpretation and application and shall be liberally construed to serve
the purposes of this article. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-7: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Conflicts: When any other provision of this Code conflicts with this
article, that which provides more environmental or human health protection
shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this article. If any
provisions of the manual, the SPPP or the "LID Manual" as adopted conflict with
any provisions of this article, those requirements that provide more protection
to human health or the environment shall apply unless specifically provided
otherwise in this article.
   B.   Procedures: The Director is authorized to adopt written procedures for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article. Adopted
administrative procedures will be made available to the public. Prior to the
applicant fulfilling the requirements of this article, the City shall not grant
any approval or permission to an applicant to conduct a regulated activity
including, but not limited to, the grant or approval of one or more of the
following:
      1.   Building permit, commercial or residential;
      2.   Binding site plan;
      3.   Conditional use permit;
      4.   Franchise;
      5.   Right-of-Way permit;
      6.   Right-of-way construction permit;
      7.   Clearing and grading permit;
      8.   Planned unit development; preliminary and final);
      9.   Preliminary plat;
      10.   Shoreline development permit;
      11.   Shoreline variance;
      12.   Shoreline conditional use permit;
      13.   Variance;
      14.   Subdivision vacations and alterations;
      15.   Special use permit;
      16.   Utility and other use permit;
      17.   Flood control development permit;
      18.   Cottage Development permit;
      19.   Short plat;
      20.   Master Plan;
      21.   Boundary Line Adjustment;
      22.   Final Plat;
      23.   Rezone;
      24.   Critical Area Exception;
      25.   Architectural Design Review;
      26.   Manufactured Home Park;
      27.   Site Plan; or,
      28.   Any subsequently adopted permit or required approval not expressly
exempted by this article.
   C.   Regulated Activities: Regulated activities shall be conducted only
after the Director approves a stormwater site plan which includes one or more
of the following as required by this article:
      1.   Erosion and sediment control plan;
      2.   Permanent stormwater quality control (PSQC) plan;
      3.   Calculations; and
      4.   Other information as required by the Director or pursuant to the
manual.
   D.   Municipal Corporations And Governmental Entities:
      1.   Site Plan: All Municipal corporations and governmental entities
shall be required to submit a stormwater site plan for approval and comply with
the terms of this article when development of a site is a regulated activity,
including, but not limited to, road building and widening, within the areas of
the City.
      2.   Outside Permit Conditions: It is recognized that many other City,
County, State and Federal permit conditions may apply to the proposed action
and that compliance with the provisions of this article does not constitute
compliance with such other requirements.
   E.   Submission Or Resubmission Of Plan:
      1.   All persons, including, without limitation, Municipal corporations
and governmental agencies, applying for any of the following permits and/or
approvals shall submit for approval of a stormwater site plan with their
application and/or request:
         a.   Grading permit;
         b.   Substantial development permit required under Revised Code of
Washington 90.58 (Shoreline Management Act);
         c.   Subdivision approval;
         d.   Short subdivision approval;
         e.   Rezones;
         f.   Conditional use permits;
         g.   Building permits where the permit relates to five thousand
(5,000) or more square feet of development coverage within the property, or
where development is in a critical area;
         h.   Planned unit development;
         i.   Mobile home park;
         j.   Development permit pursuant to title 14, "Flood Control", of this
Code; and
         k.   Approval pursuant to title 11, "Critical Areas And Shoreline
Management", of this Code.
      2.   The same stormwater site plan submitted during one permit/approval
process may be subsequently submitted with further required applications. The
stormwater site plan shall be supplemented with such additional information
that is requested by the Director or required by the provisions of the
currently adopted City of Orting development standards and the Stormwater
Management Manual.
   F.   Construction Prohibited: Commencement of construction work under any of
the above permits, approvals or applications shall not begin until such time as
final approval of the stormwater site plan is obtained in accordance with
section
9-5A-15 of this article.
   G.   Exemptions: The stormwater site plan requirement established in this
section shall apply except when the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director that the scope and nature of the proposed land disturbing
activity or development:
      1.   Will neither seriously nor adversely impact the water quality
conditions of any affected receiving bodies of water; and
      2.   Will not alter the surface discharge location, alter the drainage
pattern on adjoining properties, alter drainage patterns, increase the
discharge, nor cause any other adverse effects in the drainage area; and
      3.   Will not alter the subsurface drainage patterns, flow rates and
discharge points, nor result in any significant adverse effects to property or
residents; and
      4.   Is such that review and approval of a stormwater site plan is not
necessary to obtain compliance with this article.
   H.   Stormwater Facilities: Stormwater facilities constructed as required by
this article shall be maintained in accordance with article B of this chapter.
   I.   Illicit Discharge Detection And Elimination Program: The City's Illicit
Discharge Detection and Elimination Program will be implemented in accordance
with this article and article B of this chapter.
   J.   Penalties; Charges And Fees: Except as may be otherwise provided
herein, monetary penalties, charges and fees to administer these regulations
shall be in accordance with article C of this chapter.
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
9-5A-8: REGULATED ACTIVITIES; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Regulated Activities: Land disturbing activities that meet the
thresholds under the manual for application of the minimum requirements, new
development and redevelopment are regulated activities and shall provide for
stormwater management consistent with the minimum requirements unless exempted
in subsection B of this section. The Director has the authority to approve or
disapprove stormwater facilities required based on the minimum requirements;
provided that, compliance with the minimum requirements and related
regulations, standards and manuals adopted by the City does not necessarily
mitigate all impacts to human health and the environment. In such cases, the
applicant must implement additional mitigation to protect human health and the
environment.
      1.   Roadway Redevelopment: The following roadway maintenance practices
are considered redevelopment and are subject to the requirements of this
article:
         a.   Removing and replacing a paved surface to base course or lower,
or repairing the roadway base.
         b.   Extending the pavement edge without increasing the size of the
road prism, or paving graveled shoulders. These are considered new impervious
surfaces.
         c.   Resurfacing by upgrading from dirt to gravel, asphalt, or
concrete; upgrading from gravel to asphalt, or concrete; or upgrading from a
bituminous surface treatment ("chip seal") to asphalt or concrete. These are
considered new impervious surfaces.
   B.   Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the requirements
of this article:
      1.   Commercial Agriculture Practices: Commercial agriculture practices
involving working the land for production are generally exempt. However, the
conversion from timberland to agriculture, and the construction of impervious
surfaces are not exempt.
      2.   Forest Practices: Forest practices regulated under Washington
Administrative Code title 222, except for Class IV general forest practices
that are conversions from timberland to other uses, are exempt from the
provisions of this article.
      3.   Regulations: Development undertaken by the Washington State
Department of Transportation in State highway rights-of-way is regulated by
Washington Administrative Code 173-270, the Puget Sound Highway Runoff Program.
      4.   Road Maintenance: The following road maintenance practices are
exempt: pothole and square cut patching, overlaying existing asphalt or
concrete pavement with asphalt or concrete without expanding the area of
coverage, shoulder grading, reshaping/regrading stormwater drainage systems,
crack sealing, resurfacing with in kind material without expanding the road
prism, and vegetation maintenance.
      5.   Underground Projects: Underground utility projects that replace the
ground surface with in kind material or materials with similar runoff
characteristics. However, stormwater management in accordance with Minimum
Requirement 2, construction stormwater pollution prevention, is still required.
      6.   Exemptions From Flow Control: New development or redevelopment
projects may be exempt from flow control subject to subsection
9-5A-9E of this article.
      7.   New Development/Redevelopment: All other new development and
redevelopment are subject to the general requirements, as a minimum, in section
9-5A-9 of this article.
   C.   Exempt Applicants: An applicant receiving an exemption or whose
activities are exempt from the requirements of this article:
      1.   Is not authorized to cause illicit discharges, including spills, of
oil or hazardous substances;
      2.   Is not relieved from responsibilities and liabilities under State
and Federal laws and regulations pertaining to those illicit discharges; and
      3.   Is not authorized to allow discharges that would violate standards
in the NPDES Phase II permit. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Stormwater Management Manual Adopted: The Department of Ecology 2019
“Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington”, together with the 2019
City of Orting Stormwater Management Manual Amendment, are hereby adopted by
reference, as though fully set forth herein, as the Stormwater Management
Manual for the City of Orting and is hereinafter referred to as the “manual” or
the “Stormwater Management Manual”.
   B.   Low Impact Development Manual Adopted: The Volume 5 of the Ecology 2019
(Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington” is hereby adopted by
reference as though fully set forth herein as the Low Impact Development Manual
for the City of Orting and is hereinafter referred to as the “LID Manual”.
   C.   Rain Garden Handbook: The June 2013 “Rain Garden Handbook for Western
Washington” as published by the Washington State Department of Ecology is
hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein as the Rain Garden
Handbook for the City of Orting and is hereinafter referred to as the “Rain
Garden Handbook”.
   D.   The following hierarchy shall be used in the order listed to determine
applicable requirements:
      1.   The 2019 City of Orting Stormwater Management Manual Amendment;
      2.   The 2019 “Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington”;
      3.   The currently adopted City of Orting Development Standards;
      4.   The 2012 “Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget
Sound”;
      5.   The 2013 “Rain Garden Handbook for Western Washington”.
   E.   Low Impact Development (LID) Practices:
      1.   Projects shall implement LID BMPs and on-site stormwater management
BMPs where such projects exceed the thresholds identified in the Stormwater
Management Manual and Minimum Requirement 5 must be addressed. Constraints that
make LID BMPs or on-site stormwater management BMPs infeasible must be
documented in the project’s Permanent Stormwater Site Plan. The Permanent
Stormwater Site Plan, including constraints to the implementation of LID BMPs
or on-site stormwater management BMPs, are required to be submitted for review
for approval by the City in accordance with applicable submittals required
under OMC Titles 10, 12, 13 and 15.
      2.   Constructed LID BMPs: Constructed LID BMPs for stormwater management
shall be considered based on the order of preference identified in the
Stomwater Management Manual.
      3.   Stormwater BMPs: If LID BMPs are infeasible as documented in the
Permanent Stormwater Site Plan approved by the City, BMPs in subsection D of
this section shall be used.
      4.   Underground Injection Control (UIC): Projects that implement LID
BMPs or permanent Stormwater BMPs that result in a facility considered an
underground injection control well based on 173-218 WAC shall be registered by
the project applicant with the Washington State Department of Ecology. The
Permanent Stormwater Site Plan shall document, based on the requirements of the
Stormwater Management Manual, whether or not LID BMPs or permanent Stormwater
BMPs are UIC wells and documentation that UIC wells have been registered.
   F.   Stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs):
      1.   General: Where LID practices are not feasible or approved, BMPs
shall be used to control stormwater pollution and/or flow rates and volumes.
BMPs shall be used to comply with the standards in this article. BMPs are in
the manual.
      2.   Experimental BMPs: In those instances where appropriate BMPs are not
in the manual, experimental BMPs should be considered. Experimental BMPs are
encouraged as a means of solving problems in a manner not addressed by the
manual in an effort to improve stormwater quality technology. Experimental BMPs
must be approved in accordance with the approval process outlined in the
manual.
   G.   Flow Control: Flow control, where required, shall provide the following
control:
      1.   Flow rates and durations for fifty percent (50%) of the 2-year
through the 50-year flow frequency event for the following conditions:
         a.   Direct connection or connection through a series of stormwater
facilities or natural conveyance systems that discharge to the City stormwater
drainage system that has existing capacity limitations; and
         b.   There are no existing flooding problems between the project site
and the discharge point of the existing City stormwater drainage system.
      2.   Flow rates and durations for fifty percent (50%) of the 2-year
through the 50-year frequency event, flow rates for the 100-year frequency
event, and provide a twenty percent (20%) safety factor for the following
conditions:
         a.   Direct connection or connection through a series of natural
conveyance systems or stormwater facilities that discharge to the City
stormwater drainage system that has existing capacity limitations; and
         b.   There are existing flooding problems between the project site and
the discharge point of the existing City stormwater drainage system that may be
aggravated by the proposed project.
      3.   Complete on site stormwater management must be provided for the
following:
         a.   Infiltration of all stormwater if there is no existing City
stormwater drainage system to connect to and if the site does not currently
drain to the existing City stormwater drainage system.
         b.   An outfall into a flow control exempt waterbody may be
constructed by the project proponent subject to the following requirements:
            (1)   A hydraulic project approval (HPA), if required, is applied
for by the project proponent and is issued by Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife;
            (2)   The outfall does not violate any stormwater diversions as
documented in appendix 1E of volume I of the manual;
            (3)   The project proponent obtains all other permits required by
Federal, State and local laws and regulations; and
            (4)   The project proponent enters into an operations and
maintenance agreement with the City. The operations and maintenance agreement
will be waived provided that the outfall is permitted under the Department of
Ecology’s industrial stormwater general permit or other individual permit that
requires the ongoing maintenance and monitoring of the outfall.
      4.   Projects are exempt from flow control, if the flow control
thresholds for new or redevelopment projects are exceeded; provided that:
         a.   The project has a direct connection or connection through a
series of manmade conveyance systems or stormwater facilities that discharge to
the City stormwater drainage system that has adequate capacity, i.e., does not
exceed the then existing limitations upon capacity as determined by the City;
and
         b.   There are no existing flooding problems between the project site
and the discharge point of the existing City stormwater drainage system.
      5.   Project sites that are located in areas regulated under the flood
control ordinance (codified at title 14 of this Code) and for which flow
control is provided shall set the regulated structure elevations based on the
higher of:
         a.   The elevation required by title 14 of this code, or
         b.   The backwater elevation at the flow control facility caused by
the receiving water. The backwater elevation in the flow control facility shall
be based on:
            (1)   The tailwater elevation based on the 100-year floodplain
elevation in the receiving water floodway published by the federal emergency
management agency for an unbreached levee;
            (2)   Flow rate for the 100-year frequency event through the
stormwater drainage system from the site point of connection to the discharge
location. The flow rate shall include the site and any other contributing
areas; and
            (3)   Flow rate for the 100-year frequency event from the site
point of connection back through the flow control riser.
   H.   Illicit Discharges: Illicit discharges to stormwater drainage systems,
surface water or groundwater are prohibited. “Permitted discharges” are defined
in section
9-5A-4 of this article. Sites are subject to inspection for illicit discharges
in accordance with section
9-5B-10 of this chapter. The following are prohibited discharges to any public
or private stormwater drainage system or natural conveyance system that
discharge to surface or ground waters of the state:
      1.   Discharges from potable water sources, including water line
flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing,
and pipeline hydrostatic test water that are not dechlorinated to the limits
identified herein. Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration
of 0.1 ppm or less, pH adjusted, if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity
controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater drainage
system.
      2.   Discharges from lawn watering and other irrigation runoff that are
not minimized.
      3.   Swimming pool discharges that are not dechlorinated to the limits
identified herein. The discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of
0.1 ppm or less, pH adjusted and reoxygenized if necessary, volumetrically and
velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater
drainage system. Swimming pool cleaning wastewater and filter backwash shall
discharge to sanitary sewer system.
      4.   Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and
routine external building wash down that does not use detergents that are not
minimized. At active construction sites, street sweeping must be performed
prior to washing the street.
      5.   Nonstormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit unless the
permittee is in full compliance with all permit requirements, waiver or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and that written approval by the
director has been granted for the discharge into the city’s stormwater drainage
system.
      6.   Other nonstormwater discharges. The discharges shall be in
compliance with the requirements of the stormwater pollution prevention plan
approved by the director, which addresses control of construction site
dewatering discharges by applying AKART to prevent contaminants from entering
surface water or groundwaters.
   I.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of
illicit connections to a stormwater drainage system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   In addition to violations resulting from other illicit connections,
a person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to a stormwater drainage system, or allows
such a connection to continue.
   J.   Stormwater Source Control:
      1.   The businesses or activities Listed in Table 1, when permitted by
the City, shall implement stormwater source control Best Management Practices
(BMPs) when such business or activities are performed outdoors subject to
rainfall and runoff of pollutants.
   Table 1. Businesses or Activities Subject to Stormwater Source Control:
                                                   North American
Business or Standard Industrial SIC Industry Group Industry
Activity    Code (SIC) Major    No.                Classification
            Group                                  System (NAICS) Major
                                                   Group
                                                           North American
Business or         Standard Industrial SIC Industry Group Industry
Activity            Code (SIC) Major    No.                Classification
                    Group                                  System (NAICS) Major
                                                           Group
Support Activities
for Animal                              074, 075           1152xx,
Production
Construction of     15                                     236
Buildings
Heavy and Civil
Engineering         16                                     237
Construction
Specialty Trade     17                                     238
Contractors
Beverage, Food, and
Tobacco             20                                     311, 312
Manufacturing
Wood Product        24                                     321
Manufacturing
Paper Manufacturing 26                                     3221xx, 3222xx
Printing and
Related Support     27                                     323
Activities
Chemical            28                                     325
Manufacturing
Petroleum and Coal
Products            29                                     3241xx
Manufacturing
Plastics and Rubber
Product             30                                     326
Manufacturing
Leather and Allied
Product             31                                     316
Manufacturing
Nonmetallic Mineral
Product             32                                     327
Manufacturing
Primary Metal       33                                     331
Manufacturing
Fabricated Metal
Product             34                                     332
Manufacturing
Machinery,
Computer, and       35                                     333, 334
Electronic Product
manufacturing
Electrical
Equipment,
Appliance, and      36                                     335
Component
Manufacturing
Transportation
Equipment           37                                     336
Manufacturing
Rail Transportation 40                                     482
Transit and Ground
Passenger           41                                     485
Transportation
Truck
Transportation and  42                                     484, 493
Warehousing
Support Activities                      473, 474, 478      4881xx, 4882xx,
for Transportation                                         4884xx, 4889xx,
Utilities           49                                     2211xx
Wholesale Trade -                       501, 503, 505,506, 423140, 423930,
Durable Goods                           507, 509           423110, 4233xx,
                                                           4237xx, 4238xx,
Wholesale Trade -                       514, 515, 516,517, 424930, 4244xx,
Nondurable Goods                        518, 519           4246xx, 4247xx,
                                                           4248xx,
Building Materials,
Hardware, Garden                        521, 523, 526      444
Supplies Dealers
Food and Beverage   54                                     445
Stores
Automotive Dealers
and Gasoline        55                                     441, 447
Service Stations
Food Services and   58                                     722
Drinking Places
Rental and Leasing                      735                5321xx, 5324xx
Services
Repair and                                                 811192, 8111xx,
Maintenance         75                                     8112xx, 8113xx,
                                                           8114xx,
Ambulatory Health
Care Services and                       806, 807           621910,
Hospitals
Educational         82                                     6111xx, 6112xx,
Services                                                   6113xx, 6115xx
Museums, Historical
Sites, and Similar                      842                712
Institutions
 
   Notes:
   Listing is from Washington State Department of Ecology Western Washington
Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, Appendix 8 - Urban Land Uses and
Pollutant Generating Sources, August 2019. Listing is for consistency with
NPDES Permit and does not imply the business or activity will be permitted by
the City.
   2.   Source control BMPs for new businesses or activities Listed in Table 1
shall be identified in permit application packages. Source control BMPs shall
be identified in the Stormwater Site Plan (SSP) for projects triggering a SSP.
   3.   No later than August 1, 2022, existing businesses or activities listed
in Table 1 shall begin implementing operational source control BMPs where
operational BMPs are not currently provided. The basis of operational source
control BMPs shall be provided to the City if the City finds that the selected
source control BMPs or their implementation are not effective in preventing or
reducing pollutant runoff. Selection and implementation of structural source
control BMPs may be required by the City subject to the enforcement provisions
of Chapters 9-5B-11 and 9-5B-12 OMC. Source control BMPs for existing
businesses or activities listed in Table 1 shall be fully compliant as required
by Chapter 9-5B-11 OMC.
   4.   Source control BMPs shall be selected, implemented and maintained in
accordance with the adopted stormwater manual identified in Chapter 9-5A-9.A
OMC.
   5.   Source control BMPs not identified in the adopted stormwater manual but
which may still be appropriate may be submitted for an adjustment or variance
in accordance with Chapter 9-5A.16 OMC provided that such source control BMPs
provide equivalent protection to the BMPs identified in the adopted stormwater
manual. Permit applications shall document proposed source control BMPs,
identify why BMPs in the adopted stormwater manual are not applicable or
suitable, and state that the proposed BMPs will provide equivalent or better
protection.
   6.   Structural source control BMPs, or treatment BMPs/facilities, or both,
shall be required for pollutant generating sources if operational source
control BMPs do not prevent illicit discharges or violations of surface water,
groundwater, or sediment management standards because of inadequate stormwater
controls. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2017-1014, 10-11-2017; Ord. 2019-
1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2022-1096, 6-29-2022; Ord. 2022-1098, 7-27-2022)
9-5A-10: APPROVAL STANDARDS:
   A.   The development standards set forth the minimum standards for approval
of the submitted stormwater site plan.
   B.   The stormwater site plan shall provide additional stormwater control
measures where the need has been identified through a basin plan, the watershed
ranking process through the Puget Sound partnership under Revised Code Of
Washington 90.71, a total maximum daily load (TMDL) allocation has been
determined for waters listed under section 303(d) of the clean water act, or
through growth management act planning.
   C.   The stormwater site plan shall be prepared by the applicant in
accordance with volume I chapter 3 of the manual and shall include the
following:
      1.   Collect and analyze information on existing conditions.
      2.   Prepare preliminary development layout.
      3.   Perform off site analysis.
      4.   Determine applicable minimum requirements.
      5.   Prepare a permanent stormwater control plan.
      6.   Prepare a construction stormwater pollution prevention plan.
      7.   Complete the stormwater site plan.
      8.   Check compliance with all applicable minimum requirements. (Ord.
911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-11: BONDS AND LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   General Surety Requirements: The director is authorized to require all
applicants, and/or their contractors, constructing stormwater facilities to
post with the city treasurer a surety bond, cash deposit or other security
(hereafter collectively referred to as "financial guarantee") as required in
this article, in the form, amounts and content approved by the director. Where
such persons have previously posted, or are required to post, other such
financial guarantees with the city treasurer, either on the stormwater facility
or on other construction related to the stormwater facility, such persons may,
with the permission of the director and to the extent allowable by law, combine
all such financial guarantees into a single financial guarantee; provided, that
at no time shall the amount thus bonded or otherwise guaranteed be less than
the total amount which would have been required in the form of separate
financial guarantees, and provided further, that such a single financial
guarantee shall on its face clearly delineate those financial guarantees which
it is intended to replace.
   B.   Construction Bond: Prior to commencing construction, the applicant,
and/or its contractor, constructing the stormwater facility shall post a
construction bond in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of
construction of said stormwater facility in conformance with the approved
drainage plans. After determination by the director that all stormwater
facilities are constructed in compliance with the approved plans and that a
maintenance bond has been filed as required below, the city shall release the
construction bond. The construction bond shall be a noncancelable commitment
issued by a surety to the city (obligee) guaranteeing that the applicant and/or
the applicant's contractor will complete construction of the stormwater
facilities in compliance with the approved drainage plans and further
guaranteeing that all subcontractors, labor and material suppliers will be paid
leaving the project lien free.
   C.   Maintenance Bond: After satisfactory completion of the stormwater
facilities and release of the construction bond by the city, the applicant
shall commence a two (2) year period of satisfactory maintenance of the
stormwater facility. A cash deposit, in a form and content approved by the
director, to be used at the discretion of the director to correct deficiencies
in maintenance affecting public health, safety and welfare, must be posted and
maintained throughout the two (2) year maintenance period. The amount of the
cash deposit, and the form of any written instrument governing the same, shall
be determined by the director, but the amount shall not be in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). In addition, a surety bond or cash deposit to
cover the cost of defects or failures of the stormwater facilities shall also
be posted with the city treasurer in an amount, form and content determined by
the director, and maintained throughout the two (2) year maintenance period.
   D.   Liability Policy: The applicant and/or the contractor shall maintain a
liability policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
per individual, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence,
and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage, which shall name the
city an additional insured, and which shall protect from any liability up to
those amounts for any accident, negligence, failure of the facility, or any
other liability whatsoever, relating to the construction or maintenance of the
facility. The liability policy shall be maintained for the duration of
construction of the stormwater facility and the duration of the maintenance
bond. In the event that ownership of the stormwater facilities are to be
conveyed to the city, the liability policy shall be maintained until the
stormwater facilities are accepted by the city.
   E.   Transfers: In the event that during the term of an instrument providing
a financial guarantee, ownership of the site is conveyed, assigned, or
otherwise transferred to another person, the financial guarantee shall remain
in place, until a new bond or other surety instrument is filed with the city
treasurer, in a form, amount and content approved by the director. (Ord. 958,
7-9-2014)
9-5A-12: FACILITY RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY AND DEVELOPER:
   A.   City Responsibility: In the event that the director determines that
public benefits would accrue due to modification of the stormwater site plan
for the subject property to better implement the recommendations of the
stormwater comprehensive plan, the city may assume responsibility for the
further design, construction, operation and maintenance of stormwater
facilities on the subject property. Such determination shall be made
concurrently with review and approval of the stormwater site plan as specified
in section
9-5A-15 of this article.
   B.   Contribution By Developer: In the event that the director determines
that the city will assume responsibility for design, construction, operation
and maintenance of the stormwater facilities, the applicant will be required to
contribute a pro rata share to the construction cost of the stormwater
facilities. The applicant may be required to supply additional information at
the request of the director to aid in the determination by the city.
   C.   City Assumption Of Ownership, Operation And Maintenance: The city may,
but is not required to, assume the ownership, operation and maintenance of
storm facilities located on private property after the expiration of the two
(2) year operation and maintenance period in connection with the subdivision of
land if:
      1.   All of the requirements of section
9-5A-11 of this article have been fully complied with; and
      2.   The stormwater facilities have been inspected and accepted by the
director after two (2) years of operation in accordance with the city of Orting
development standards and the Stormwater Management Manual; and
      3.   All necessary easements, in a form and content approved by the
director, entitling the city to properly maintain and operate the facility have
been conveyed to the city and recorded with the Pierce County auditor; and
      4.   The maintenance warranty bond required in section
9-5A-11 of this article has been extended for one year, covering the city's
first year of operation and maintenance; and
      5.   The applicant has supplied to the city an accounting of capital,
construction, and operation and maintenance expenses or other items for the
stormwater facilities up to the end of the two (2) year period.
      6.   If ownership is conveyed, all documents necessary to convey the
stormwater facility to the city, in a form and content approved by the
director, have been delivered to the city, fully executed and conveying the
stormwater facilities free and clear of any liens or encumbrances of any kind,
except those that may be approved by the director.
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
9-5A-13: DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL HAZARD AREAS:
   A.   Hazardous Conditions: Development which would increase the volume of
rate of discharge due to a storm, shall not be permitted in areas designated by
the director in which existing flooding, drainage, erosion, and/or instability
conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of
the surrounding community, or to the integrity of the surface or ground water
system. Development shall not be permitted in these hazard areas until such
time as the existing community hazard is alleviated and it is adequately
demonstrated that the proposed development will not cause a recurrence of the
problems nor the occurrence of any new drainage related problem. The director
may also designate as a hazard any area in which comparable problems would
occur in the future due to any increase in volume or peak discharge.
   B.   Waiver Of Restrictions: The requirements of this section shall apply
regardless of any variance under section
9-5A-16 of this article. Where applications of the provisions of this section
will deny all reasonable uses of the subject property, the restrictions on
development contained in this section may be waived for the subject property;
provided, that the resulting development shall be subject to all the remaining
terms and conditions of this article.
   C.   Basis For Decisions: All decisions based on the provisions of this
section shall be compatible with the stormwater comprehensive plan (if
available) for the basin in which the subject property is located. For
development in areas designated as critical, the developer shall provide
information regarding volume and rate of discharge for a range of storms as
specified in the city of Orting development standards and the Stormwater
Managment Manual.
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
9-5A-14: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ROADS:
Implementation of any provision of this article shall not cause nor be
construed as an infringement of the rights of individuals, municipalities or
corporations other than the applicant seeking a permit or approval as described
in section
9-5A-7 of this article. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-15: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Authority: The director shall have the authority to develop and
implement administrative procedures to administer and enforce this article.
   B.   Review And Approval: The director may approve, conditionally approve or
deny an application for activities regulated by this article.
   C.   Enforcement Authority: The director shall have authority to enforce
this article.
   D.   Inspection: All activities regulated by this article, except those
exempt in subsection
 9-5A-8B of this article, shall be subject to inspection by the director. All
applicants are deemed to have consented to such inspections as a condition of
approval. The director may inspect projects at various stages of the work
requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised.
Stages of work requiring inspection include, but are not limited to:
preconstruction; installation of BMPs; land disturbing activities; installation
of utilities, landscaping, retaining walls and completion of project. When
required by the director, a special inspection and/or testing shall be
performed.
   E.   Illicit Discharge/Connection Inspections: Inspections for illicit
connections or illicit discharges will be performed by the city in accordance
with section
9-5B-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5A-16: APPEALS; VARIANCES:
   A.   Adjustments: An applicant may apply in writing to the director for an
adjustment to the minimum requirements. All requests for an adjustment shall be
requested as part of and included with the permit or approval application that
is to be reviewed by the city administrator, the hearing examiner, or the
planning commission. The application shall include the application fee; a
written statement addressing the decision criteria set forth in section 2.7 of
volume 1 of the manual; a site plan showing all information relevant to the
request including, but not limited to: location of existing and proposed
structures, roads, property lines, parking areas, landscaping and buffers; data
to be obtained to address feasibility of incorporating LID BMPs; and any other
information the director deems necessary in order to fully consider the
application. The director may, in writing, grant, condition, or deny the
application for an adjustment based upon the criteria set forth in section 2.7,
volume 1 of the manual. The application fee shall be set by the resolution or
ordinance of the city council. In the event no application fee has been so
established, the application fee shall be the same as the fee for a variance
under title 13, "Development Regulations", of this code.
   B.   Variances: An applicant may apply for a variance from the requirements
of this article when there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site
such that strict adherence to the provisions of this article will result in
unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of this article. A written
request for variance shall be provided to the city and shall state the specific
variances sought and reasons for their granting. Variances from the
requirements of this article may be made by permit applicants in accordance
with table 9-5A-16.1 of this section based upon the highest numbered permit
type. All requests for a variance from the city's stormwater management
standards set forth in this article shall be requested as part of and included
with the permit or approval application that is to be reviewed by the city
administrator, the hearing examiner, or the planning commission. Variances
shall not be granted to the city's stormwater management standards after a
permit or approval final decision has been made. Variances requested after a
final decision has been made are subject to judicial appeal in accordance with
section
15-4-1, table
15-4-1 of this code.
TABLE 9-5A-16.1
(Based On Section
15-4-1 Of This Code)
 
Permit Type Recommendation By   Final Decision By   When To Submit Variance
                                                    Request
                                                    With permit application for
1 or 2      Not applicable      City administrator  final decision by city
                                                    administrator
                                                    With permit application for
3           Not applicable      Hearing examiner    final decision by hearing
                                                    examiner
                                                    With permit application for
3a          Not applicable      Planning commission final decision by planning
                                                    commission
                                                    With permit application for
4 or 5      Planning commission City council        recommendation by planning
                                                    commission
 
   C.   Application: Submittal of an application for an adjustment or variance
shall include:
      1.   A completed application form.
      2.   A site plan showing all information relevant to the request
including, but not limited to: location of existing and proposed structures,
roads, property lines, parking areas, landscaping and buffers.
      3.   Mailing labels of all property owners within three hundred feet
(300') of the project site.
      4.   A written statement addressing the decision criteria (see subsection
D of this section) and any other information required by the city at the
preapplication meeting.
      5.   Payment of the application fee as set by the resolution or ordinance
of the city council. In the event no application fee has been so established,
the application fee shall be the same as the fee for a variance under title 13,
"Development Regulations", of this code.
   D.   Variance Permitted: Variances from the requirements of this article may
be permitted only after a determination has been made by the city
administrator, hearing examiner, or planning commission, and the determination
has been made in consideration of the following items. A variance from LID BMPs
is not required if LID BMPs are not feasible based on existing site conditions
or existing site characteristics. If LID BMPs are not restricted by existing
site conditions or existing site characteristics for site development as
allowed based on current zoning, then a variance will not be permitted for more
intensive land use if such land use would then preclude the use of LID BMPs.
      1.   Information is provided by the applicant as required so that the
variance meets the requirements of the NPDES phase II permit appendix 1
sections 5 and 6;
      2.   The variance meets the requirements of sections 1-2.7 and 1-2.8 of
volume 1 of the manual;
      3.   The variance is consistent with the stormwater comprehensive plan
(if applicable);
      4.   There is sufficient conveyance, treatment and flow mitigation
capacity of downstream facilities under design conditions for all contributing
areas;
      5.   The variance will maintain the integrity of the receiving waters,
downstream properties, and/or downstream critical areas;
      6.   The variance would reduce or eliminate the possibility of adverse
effects of retention/detention;
      7.   The variance includes the use of regional retention/detention
facilities that have been designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the NPDES phase II permit, appendix 1, sections 5, 6, and 7,
and the stormwater comprehensive drainage plan (if applicable);
      8.   The applicant has demonstrated that stormwater drainage systems and
stormwater facilities proposed will be able to be maintained; and
      9.   Structural integrity of abutting foundations and structures will be
maintained.
   E.   Public Notice: Public notice shall be required of an application for a
variance in the same manner as public notice is required for an application for
the underlying permit or approval. If no public notice is required for the
underlying permit, reasonable methods of public notice of the application for a
variance shall be provided in conformance with Washington administrative code
197-11-510.
   F.   Appeals:
      1.   A decision pursuant to this article will not be considered a final
and appealable decision until there is a final permit decision or approval;
provided that, this subsection F does not apply to enforcement actions pursuant
to this article or article B of this chapter. Stormwater management
requirements established in final permit decisions or approvals, or
recommendations in table 9-5A-16.1 of this section, may be appealed in
accordance with section
15-4-1, table
15-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Appeals shall be in accordance with title 15, chapter 10 of this
code.
      3.   Appeals may be made by a "party of record" as defined in sections
15-2-17 and
15-10-5 of this code.
      4.   Appeals of stormwater management requirements reflected in SEPA
determinations shall be in accordance with section
15-14-7-5 of this code.
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
9-5A-17: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   General: Except with regard to illicit discharges and illicit
connections or stormwater source control for land uses listed in Chapter
9-5A-9.J.1 Table 1, enforcement action shall be in accordance with this article
and title 1, chapter 13 of this code whenever a person has violated any
provision of this article, or any requirement imposed or order issued pursuant
to this article. The choice of enforcement action and the severity of any
penalty shall be determined by the director, in consultation with the city
attorney when considering criminal penalties, based on the nature of the
violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, and/or the
degree of bad faith of the person subject to the enforcement action, and
whether or not the violation was intentional. Violation of this article
includes any act or omission causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
directing, controlling, suffering or concealing an act or omission in violation
of this article. In addition to the listed enforcement options, the city may
also pursue any other lawful civil, criminal or equitable remedy or relief.
Enforcement options are cumulative and shall not be deemed exclusive. The
definitions set forth in title 1, chapter 13 of this code shall apply
throughout this section.
   B.   Unlawful Activities: Any structure, condition, act or omission which
violates any provision of this article or any provision of a civil regulatory
order shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and is subject to the
enforcement and penalty provisions of this section and section
9-5A-18 of this article and title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
   C.   Nuisance: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful pursuant to this
article shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated using the
procedures for abatement of public nuisances as set forth in this code or as
otherwise allowed by law.
   D.   Criminal Violation: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful
pursuant to this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and punishable by a
fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment up to ninety
(90) days in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   E.   Violation: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful pursuant to this
article shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement by the
director pursuant to title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
   F.   Monetary Penalties: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful
pursuant to this article is subject to administrative enforcement and monetary
penalties pursuant to section
9-5A-18 of this article and title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
   G.   Civil Regulatory Order: The director shall have the authority to issue
and serve a civil regulatory order pursuant to title 1, chapter 13 of this code
that orders the cessation of any activity that is in violation of this article
whether occurring on public or private property. The director shall have the
authority to include in the civil regulatory order, or to issue and serve in a
separate order, an order to take corrective action to bring any noncompliant
activity, structure, or condition into compliance with this article. The
director shall have the authority to serve a person a civil regulatory order if
an action is being undertaken in violation of this article. If a portion of a
project or activity is in violation of this article, the director may issue a
civil regulatory order for the entire project or activity.
      1.   Posting And Notice: The director shall prominently post a civil
regulatory order at the subject property, unless access to the property for
such posting is denied or unsafe, and shall make reasonable attempts to serve
the civil regulatory order pursuant to section
1-13-7 of this code.
      2.   Effect: When a civil regulatory order has been posted on the subject
property or, otherwise served in accordance with the foregoing subsection G1 of
this section, it is a violation of this article for any person with actual or
constructive knowledge of the order to conduct the activity or do the work
covered by the order until such time as the director has removed or authorized
removal of the order. It is further a violation of this article for any person
to fail to take corrective action as required by the director in the stop work/
corrective action order to bring the unlawful activity into compliance with
this article.
      3.   Effective Date: The civil regulatory order issued under this section
shall become effective immediately upon the earlier of posting on the subject
project or receipt by the person to whom the order is directed.
      4.   Extension: Upon written request received prior to the correction
date or time set forth in the civil regulatory order, the director may extend
the date set for correction for good cause. The director may consider
substantial completion of the necessary correction or unforeseeable
circumstances which render completion impossible by the date established as
good cause.
      5.   Removal Or Destruction: It is a violation of this article for any
person other than the director, to remove, relocate, alter, conceal, damage,
deface or destroy a civil regulatory order posted on the subject property
pursuant to this subsection.
      6.   Compliance: Failure to comply with the terms of a civil regulatory
order, including timely completion of requirements for taking corrective
action, may result in enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the
issuance of a notice of civil violation or civil infraction.
   H.   Enforcement: Enforcement regarding illicit connections or illicit
discharges or stormwater source control for land uses listed in Chapter
9-5A-9.J.1 Table 1 will be performed by the city in accordance with section
9-5B-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2022-1098, 7-27-2022)
9-5A-18: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT/PENALTY:
   A.   Monetary Penalties: Any person in violation of this article may, in
addition to any other penalty imposed pursuant to this article, be subject to
monetary penalties per day or portion thereof for each violation of this
article. Monetary penalties imposed, or to be imposed shall be specified in the
notice of violation.
   B.   Penalty: Except as may be otherwise set forth herein, the monetary
penalty assessed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for
each such day that a violation occurs or continues to occur. The monetary
penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of
civil violation is directed.
   C.   Collection Of Penalty: The city attorney, on behalf of the city, is
authorized to collect the monetary penalty by use of appropriate legal
remedies, the seeking or granting of which shall neither stay nor terminate
accrual of additional per diem monetary penalties so long as the violation
continues.
   D.   Failure To Pay Penalty: Failure to timely pay a monetary penalty
imposed herein shall be and constitute a misdemeanor.
   E.   Correction Of Violation: Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this
section does not relieve a person of the duty to cease the unlawful activity or
correct the violation as ordered by the director.
   F.   Application For Remission Or Mitigation: Any person incurring a
monetary penalty may apply for remission or mitigation of such penalty pursuant
to section
1-13-6 of this code. Upon receipt of the application, the city may remit or
mitigate the monetary penalty only upon a demonstration of extraordinary
circumstances, such as the presence of information or factors not considered in
setting the original monetary penalty. The decision may be appealed to the
superior court of Pierce County pursuant to the standards set forth in chapter
36.70C Revised Code Of Washington.
   G.   Penalties Due: Monetary penalties imposed under this section shall
become due and payable pursuant to section
1-13-6 of this code. Whenever an application for remission or mitigation is
made, penalties shall become due and payable thirty (30) days after receipt of
the decision regarding the remission or mitigation. Whenever an appeal of a
monetary penalty is filed, the penalty shall become due and payable after all
review proceedings and a final decision has been issued confirming all or part
of the penalty. If the amount of a penalty owed the city is not paid within the
time specified, the city may take actions necessary to recover such penalty.
   H.   Penalties Imposed: Penalties for illicit connections or illicit
discharges will be imposed by the city in accordance with sections
9-5B-11 and
9-5B-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
ARTICLE B. STORMWATER FACILITIES MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
9-5B-1: Findings Of Fact
9-5B-2: Need
9-5B-3: Purpose
9-5B-4: Definitions
9-5B-5: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-5B-6: Interpretation
9-5B-7: Applicability
9-5B-8: General Requirements
9-5B-9: Administration
9-5B-10: Inspection, Illicit Discharge, And Stormwater Source Control Program
9-5B-11: Enforcement
9-5B-12: Administrative Enforcement/Penalty
9-5B-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The city council hereby finds that:
   A.   Stormwater facilities are a common feature of urban development.
   B.   In order to function properly so that they will perform as designed to
prevent or remove pollution and/or to reduce flooding, stormwater facilities
must be regularly inspected and maintained.
   C.   If not adequately maintained, stormwater facilities can become sources
of pollutants to surface water and groundwater.
   D.   If not adequately maintained, stormwater facilities could fail and
cause considerable damage to the public.
   E.   Maintenance of natural conveyance systems is periodically required to
allow the proper functioning of upstream stormwater drainage systems. (Ord.
911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-2: NEED:
The city council finds that this article is necessary in order to ensure
maintenance of all stormwater facilities and natural conveyance/drainage
systems within the city by setting minimum standards for the inspection and
maintenance of stormwater facilities. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-3: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this article are intended to:
   A.   Provide for inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and
natural conveyance/drainage systems in the city to provide for an effective,
functional stormwater drainage system.
   B.   Authorize the city to require that stormwater facilities be operated,
maintained and repaired in conformance with this article.
   C.   Establish the minimum level of compliance which must be met.
   D.   Guide and advise all who conduct inspection and maintenance of
stormwater facilities.
   E.   Detect and eliminate illicit discharges. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-4: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in section
9-5A-4 of this chapter shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. (Ord. 911, 8-31-
2011)
9-5B-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended that this article repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall
prevail. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-6: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements in
their interpretation and application and shall be liberally construed to serve
the purposes of this article. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-7: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Conflicts: When any other provision of this code conflicts with this
article, that which provides more protection to human health or the environment
shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this article.
   B.   Written Procedures: The director is authorized to adopt written
procedures for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article.
   C.   Responsibility Of Developer: It will be the responsibility of the
applicant to make arrangements with the occupants or owners of the subject
property to transfer stormwater management facility operation and maintenance
requirements from the applicant to the occupants or owners. The transfer of
stormwater management facility operation and maintenance requirements shall be
in a manner subject to the approval of the director or in accordance with the
stormwater facility operations and maintenance manual.
   D.   City Inspection: The city may inspect the stormwater facilities in
order to ensure continued use of the facilities for the purposes for which they
were built and in accordance with these arrangements. Failure to maintain the
stormwater facilities in good working order shall be cause for a written
request to maintain the stormwater facilities after inspection by city forces.
If after thirty (30) days, no remedial measures are taken by the property
owner, the city may initiate legal action against the property owner. (Ord.
911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maintenance Required: All stormwater facilities shall be maintained in
accordance with this article, the manual, the SPPP and the LID manual.
Systematic, routine preventive maintenance is preferred.
   B.   Minimum Standards: The following are the minimum standards for the
maintenance of stormwater facilities:
      1.   Facilities shall be inspected and cleared of debris, sediment and
vegetation when they affect the functioning and/or design capacity of the
facility;
      2.   Where lack of maintenance is causing or contributing to a water
quality problem, action shall be taken to correct the problem. The director
shall revisit the facility to assure that it is being maintained.
   C.   Disposal Of Waste From Maintenance Activities: Disposal of waste from
maintenance activities shall be conducted in accordance with the minimum
functional standards for solid waste handling, Washington administrative code
173-304, guidelines for disposal of waste materials from stormwater maintenance
activities, and where appropriate, the dangerous waste regulations, Washington
administrative code 173-303.
   D.   Compliance: Property owners, and those persons in control of property,
are responsible for the maintenance, operation or repair of stormwater drainage
systems located thereon and BMPs. Property owners, and those persons in control
of property, shall maintain, operate and repair stormwater facilities located
thereon in compliance with the requirements of this article, the manual, and
the LID manual. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011)
9-5B-9: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Director: The director shall administer this article. The director
shall have the authority to develop and implement administrative procedures to
administer and enforce this article.
   B.   Inspection Authority: The director is directed and authorized to
develop and implement an inspection program for stormwater facilities in the
city.
   C.   Enforcement Authority: The director shall enforce this article.
   D.   Illicit Discharge Detection And Elimination Authority: The director is
authorized to develop and implement an illicit discharge detection and
elimination program for stormwater facilities in the city. (Ord. 911, 8-31-
2011)
9-5B-10: INSPECTION, ILLICIT DISCHARGE, AND STORMWATER SOURCE CONTROL PROGRAM:
   A.   Inspection: Whenever implementing the provisions of the inspection
program or whenever there is cause to believe that a violation of this article
has been or is being committed through illicit connection, illicit discharge or
other means, or violation of the stormwater source control requirements, the
director is authorized to inspect during regular working hours and at other
reasonable times all public or private stormwater drainage systems within the
city to determine compliance with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Procedures: Prior to making any inspections, the director shall present
identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection and request
entry.
      1.   If the property or any building or structure on the property is
unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property or portions
of the property and request entry.
      2.   If after reasonable effort, the inspector is unable to locate the
owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property, and has
reason to believe the condition of the stormwater drainage system creates an
imminent hazard to persons or property, the inspector may enter.
      3.   The director may inspect the stormwater drainage system without
consent, if:
         a.   The inspection can be conducted while remaining on public
property or other property on which permission to enter is obtained; or
         b.   A warrant has been lawfully issued.
   C.   Inspection Schedule: The director shall establish a master inspection
and maintenance schedule to inspect appropriate stormwater facilities that are
not owned by the city. Critical stormwater facilities may require a more
frequent inspection schedule.
   D.   Inspection And Maintenance Records: As existing stormwater facilities
or operational source control BMPs are encountered, they shall be added to the
master inspection and maintenance schedule. For existing business or activities
in Chapter 9-5A-9.J.1 Table 1 permitted prior to August 1, 2022, documentation
shall be prepared and retained supporting the basis of the selected operational
control BMPs required per Chapter 9-5A-9.J.3 OMC. Records of new stormwater
facilities shall include the following:
      1.   As built plans and locations;
      2.   Findings of fact from any exemption granted by the local government;
      3.   Operation and maintenance requirements and records of inspections,
maintenance actions and frequencies; and
      4.   Engineering reports, as appropriate.
   E.   Reporting Requirements: The director shall report annually to the
utility committee of the city council about the status of the inspections. The
annual report may include, but need not be limited to, the proportion of the
components found in and out of compliance, the need to upgrade components,
enforcement actions taken, compliance with the inspection schedule, the
resources needed to comply with the schedule, and comparisons with previous
years.
   F.   Illicit Connections, Illicit Discharges, Or Stormwater Source Control
Violations:
      1.   Access For Inspection: Access to the following shall be obtained by
the city in accordance with the provisions of this section:
         a.   Areas known or thought to contain illicit connections or illicit
discharges or activities contributing to illicit discharges or stormwater
source control violations; and
         b.   Locations identified through the city’s illicit discharge
detection and elimination program as documented in the stormwater management
plan developed in accordance with the NPDES phase II permit.
         c.   Businesses or activities identified in
9-5A-9.J.1 OMC requiring stormwater source control BMPs.
      2.   Enforcement: Illicit connections or illicit discharges or stormwater
source control violations shall be corrected in accordance with the provisions
of sections
9-5B-11 and
9-5B-12 of this article.
   3.   Penalties: Penalties for not complying with illicit connection or
illicit discharge or stormwater source control enforcement actions shall be
assessed in accordance with the provisions of sections
9-5B-11 and
9-5B-12 of this article. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2022-1098, 7-27-2022)
9-5B-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   General: Enforcement action shall be in accordance with this article
and title 1, chapter 13 of this code whenever a person has violated any
provision of this article, or any requirement imposed or order issued pursuant
to this article, or any prohibition upon an illicit connection or illicit
discharge or stormwater source control violation pursuant to article A of this
chapter. Businesses or activities that were permitted prior to August 1, 2022
and are identified in Chapter
9-5A-9.J.1 Table 1 for which source control BMPs were not previously required
shall be subject to the full provisions of
Chapter 9-5B-11 and in full compliance with Chapter
9-5A-9.J OMC by January 1, 2023. The choice of enforcement action and the
severity of any penalty shall be determined by the director, in consultation
with the city attorney when considering criminal penalties, based on the nature
of the violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, and/
or the degree of bad faith of the person subject to the enforcement action, and
whether or not the violation was intentional. Violation of this article, or any
prohibition upon an illicit connection or illicit discharge pursuant to article
A of this chapter, includes any act or omission causing, allowing, permitting,
aiding, abetting, directing, controlling, suffering or concealing an act or
omission in violation of this article. In addition to the listed enforcement
options, the city may also pursue any other lawful civil, criminal or equitable
remedy or relief. Enforcement options are cumulative and shall not be deemed
exclusive. The definitions set forth in title 1, chapter 13 of this code shall
apply throughout this section.
   B.   Unlawful Activities: Any structure, condition, act or omission which
violates any provision of this article, or any prohibition upon an illicit
connection or illicit discharge or stormwater source control violation pursuant
to article A of this chapter, or any provision of a civil regulatory order
shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and is subject to the
enforcement and penalty provisions of this section and section 9-5B-12 of this
article and title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
   C.   Nuisance: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful pursuant to this
article shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated using the
procedures for abatement of public nuisances as set forth in this code or as
otherwise allowed by law.
   D.   Criminal Violation: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful
pursuant to this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and punishable by a
fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment up to ninety
(90) days in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   E.   Violation: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful pursuant to this
article shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement by the
director pursuant to title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
   F.   Monetary Penalties: Any act or omission declared to be unlawful
pursuant to this article is subject to monetary penalties pursuant to section
9-5B-12 of this article.
   G.   Civil Regulatory Order: The director shall have the authority to issue
and serve a civil regulatory order pursuant to title 1, chapter 13 of this code
that orders the cessation of any activity that is in violation of this article
or any prohibition upon an illicit connection or illicit discharge or
stormwater source control violation pursuant to article A of this chapter,
whether occurring on public or private property. The director shall have
authority to include in the civil regulatory order, or to issue and serve in a
separate civil regulatory order, an order to take corrective action to bring
any noncompliant activity, structure, or condition into compliance with this
article. The director shall have the authority to serve a person responsible
for the violation a civil regulatory order if an action is being undertaken in
violation of this article, or for any prohibition upon an illicit connection or
illicit discharge or stormwater source control pursuant to article A of this
chapter.
      1.   Posting And Notice: The director shall prominently post a civil
regulatory order at the subject property and shall make reasonable attempts to
serve the civil regulatory order pursuant to section
1-13-7 of this code.
      2.   Effect: When a civil regulatory order has been posted on the subject
property or otherwise served in accordance with subsection G1 of this section,
it is a violation of this article for any person with actual or constructive
knowledge of the order to conduct any activity or work upon the subject
property prohibited by the order until such time as the director has removed or
authorized removal of the order. It is further a violation of this article for
any person to fail to take corrective action, as required by the director in
the stop work/corrective action order, to bring the unlawful activity or
condition into compliance with this article.
      3.   Effective Date: The civil regulatory order issued under this section
shall become effective immediately upon the earlier of posting on the subject
project or receipt by the person to whom the order is directed.
      4.   Extension: Upon written request received prior to the correction
date or time set forth in the civil regulatory order, the director may extend
the date set for correction for good cause. The director may consider
substantial completion of the necessary correction or unforeseeable
circumstances which render completion impossible by the date established as
good cause.
      5.   Removal Or Destruction: It is a violation of this article for any
person other than the director, to remove, relocate, alter, conceal, damage,
deface or destroy a civil regulatory order posted on the subject property
pursuant to this subsection.
      6.   Compliance: Failure to comply with the terms of a civil regulatory
order, including timely completion of requirements for taking corrective
action, may result in enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the
issuance of a notice of civil violation or civil infraction.
(Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2022-1098, 7-27-2022)
9-5B-12: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT/PENALTY:
   A.   Monetary Penalties: Any person in violation of this article, or any
prohibition upon an illicit connection or illicit discharge or stormwater
source control violation pursuant to article A of this chapter, may, in
addition to any other penalty imposed pursuant to this article, be subject to
monetary penalties per day or portion thereof for each civil violation.
Monetary penalties imposed, or to be imposed shall be specified in the notice
of violation.
   B.   Penalty: Except as may be otherwise set forth herein, the monetary
penalty assessed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for
each such day that a violation occurs or continues to occur. The monetary
penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of
violation is directed. The maximum monetary penalty for each violation may be
trebled for:
      1.   Repeat violation, which means an additional violation of a
requirement of this article for which the responsible party has previously
received a notice of civil violation and failed to correct the violation by the
compliance date;
      2.   A violation resulting in physical harm to persons or to private or
public property;
      3.   A knowing or deliberate violation;
      4.   A violation resulting from gross negligence or reckless conduct.
   C.   Collection Of Penalty: The city attorney, on behalf of the city, is
authorized to collect the monetary penalty by use of appropriate legal
remedies, the seeking or granting of which shall neither stay nor terminate
accrual of additional per diem monetary penalties so long as the violation
continues.
   D.   Failure To Pay Penalty: Failure to timely pay a monetary penalty
imposed herein shall be and constitute a misdemeanor.
   E.   Correction Of Violation: Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this
subsection does not relieve a person of the duty to cease the unlawful activity
or correct the violation as ordered by the director.
   F.   Application For Remission Or Mitigation: Any person incurring a
monetary penalty may apply in writing for remission or mitigation of such
penalty pursuant to section
1-13-6 of this code. The decision may be appealed to the superior court of
Pierce County pursuant to the standards set forth in chapter 36.70C Revised
Code Of Washington.
   G.   Penalties Due: Monetary penalties imposed under this section shall
become due and payable pursuant to section
1-13-6 of this code. Whenever an application for remission or mitigation is
made, penalties shall become due and payable thirty (30) days after receipt of
the decision regarding the remission or mitigation. Whenever an appeal of a
monetary penalty is filed, the penalty shall become due and payable after all
review proceedings and a final decision has been issued confirming all or part
of the penalty. If the amount of a penalty owed the city is not paid within the
time specified, the city may take actions necessary to recover such penalty.
   H.   Voluntary Correction Agreement:
      1.   Initiation: Either the person responsible for the violation or the
director may initiate negotiations for a voluntary correction agreement at any
time pursuant to section
1-13-5 of this code and the requirements of this subsection H. The director has
no obligation to enter into any voluntary correction agreement.
      2.   Contents: A voluntary correction agreement shall set forth actions
to be taken by the responsible party that will correct past or existing
violations of this article, or any prohibition upon an illicit connection or
illicit discharge or stormwater source control violation pursuant to article A
of this chapter. It may also set forth actions to mitigate the impacts of
violations. The voluntary correction agreement shall set forth a schedule for
completion of the corrective and mitigating actions. It shall contain a
provision allowing the director to inspect the premises to determine compliance
with the voluntary compliance agreement.
      3.   Effect Of Voluntary Compliance Agreement:
         a.   A voluntary compliance agreement is a binding contract between
the party executing it and the city. It is not enforceable by any other party.
All voluntary compliance agreements shall provide that the responsible party
agrees the city may perform the actions set forth in the voluntary compliance
agreement if the responsible party fails to do so according to the terms and
schedule of the agreement, and the responsible party will pay the costs,
expenses, and damages the city incurs in performing the actions. By entering
into a voluntary compliance agreement, a responsible party admits the violation
and waives the right to an administrative appeal of the stop work/corrective
action order.
         b.   Monetary penalties may be reduced or waived if violations are
corrected or mitigated according to the terms and schedule of a voluntary
correction agreement. If the responsible party fails to perform according to
the terms and schedule of the voluntary compliance agreement, penalties for
each violation addressed in the agreement may be assessed starting from the
date the violation occurred.
      4.   Modification: The terms and schedule of the voluntary compliance
agreement may be modified by mutual agreement of the responsible party and the
director if circumstances or conditions outside the responsible party's
control, or unknown at the time the agreement was made, or other just cause
necessitate such modifications.
   I.   Adherence Required: If the voluntary correction agreement or civil
regulatory order is not adhered to, the city may provide such actions as needed
to repair, restore, or maintain the stormwater drainage system. If at any time
the city determines that the existing stormwater drainage system creates any
eminent threat to public health or welfare, the city may take immediate
measures to remedy said threat. No notice to the owner of the facility shall be
required under such circumstances.
   J.   Responsibility For Cost: The owner and persons in control of stormwater
facilities are responsible for the cost of any maintenance and for repairs to
the stormwater facility. Such responsibility shall include reimbursement to
city within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the invoice for any such work
performed by or on behalf of the city. Overdue payments will require payment of
interest at the current legal rate for liquidated judgments. If legal action
ensues, any costs or fees incurred by city will be borne by the parties
responsible for said reimbursements.
   K.   Failure To Pay Costs: In the event owner or person in control of the
subject property fails to pay the city within thirty (30) days from the date
that the costs were incurred, the city shall have the right to file a lien
against the real property for all charges and expenses incurred. A lien
specifying the expenses incurred and giving a legal description of the premises
sought to be charged shall be filed with the county auditor within ninety (90)
days from the date of the completion of the work. The same may at any time
thereafter be collected in the manner provided for foreclosure of mechanic's
liens under the laws of the state of Washington.
   L.   Businesses or activities that were permitted prior to August 1, 2022
and are identified in Chapter
 9-5A-9.J.1 Table 1 for which source control BMPs were not previously required
shall be subject to the full provisions of Chapter
9-5B-12 and in full compliance with Chapter
9-5A-9.J OMC by January 1, 2023. (Ord. 911, 8-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2022-1098, 7-
27-2022)
ARTICLE C. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
SECTION:
9-5C-1: Definitions
9-5C-2: Creation And Ownership
9-5C-3: Rate Policy
9-5C-4: Classification Of Property
9-5C-5: Undeveloped Real Property
9-5C-6: Service Charge Rates
9-5C-7: Property Exempt From Service Charges
9-5C-8: General Facilities Charge
9-5C-9: Collection
9-5C-10: Annual Review Of Charges And Fees
9-5C-11: Effective Date Of Service Charge
9-5C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in section
9-5A-4 of this chapter shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. (Ord. 911, 8-31-
2011)
9-5C-2: CREATION AND OWNERSHIP:
There is hereby created and established pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington
35A.80 and 35.67, a stormwater and surface water utility to be known as the
stormwater management utility. All references to the "utility" in this article
refer to the stormwater management utility. The utility will have primary
authority and responsibility for carrying out the city's comprehensive drainage
and storm sewer plan, including responsibilities for planning, design,
construction, maintenance, administration, and operation of all city stormwater
and surface water facilities, as well as establishing standards for design,
construction, and maintenance of improvements on private property where these
may affect stormwater and surface water and management. (Ord. 697, 8-14-1997)
9-5C-3: RATE POLICY:
   A.   It shall be the policy of the city that the rate structure to be
applied in establishing the amount of service charges and general facilities
charges assessed against each parcel of developed real property within the
boundaries of the utility shall be based upon the amount of impervious ground
cover contained within each parcel of property as measured by section
9-5C-4 of this article, except for those properties set forth in section
9-5C-7 of this article.
   B.   It shall be the policy of the city that the rate structure to be
applied in establishing the amount of service charges assessed against each
parcel of undeveloped real property within the boundaries of the utility shall
be based upon acre units per parcel. (Ord. 829, 6-14-2006)
9-5C-4: CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY:
The utility shall measure the impervious ground cover of each parcel of
developed real property within the boundaries of the utility to determine the
number of equivalent residential units contained therein; two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet, or less, of impervious ground cover shall equal
one equivalent residential unit. All detached single-family residences and
mobile homes are deemed to contain one equivalent residential unit. For all
other developed real properties within the utility boundaries, the utility
shall determine the number of equivalent residential units contained thereon by
dividing the number of square feet of impervious ground cover on each property
by two thousand five hundred (2,500); the total thus obtained will be rounded
to the nearest whole number representing the equivalent residential unit. (Ord.
697, 8-14-1997)
9-5C-5: UNDEVELOPED REAL PROPERTY:
In accordance with the policy established in subsection
 9-5C-3B of this article that the service charges for undeveloped real property
be determined by the amount of acre units contained on each parcel, the utility
shall determine the acreage of each parcel of undeveloped real property within
the boundaries of the utility to determine the number of acres contained
therein; forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet or less,
of undeveloped real property shall equal one acre unit. For all undeveloped
real property within the utility boundaries, the utility shall determine the
number of equivalent acreage units contained thereon by dividing the number of
square feet of undeveloped real property on each parcel by forty three thousand
five hundred sixty (43,560); the total thus obtained will be rounded to the
nearest whole number representing the equivalent acreage unit. (Ord. 697, 8-14-
1997)
9-5C-6: SERVICE CHARGE RATES:
   A.   In accordance with the rate structure set forth in sections
9-5C-2 and
9-5C-3 of this article, there is hereby levied upon all developed and
undeveloped real property within the boundaries of the utility service area
located in the city, a monthly service charge as established by ordinance of
the city council.
   B.   For all undeveloped real property within the boundaries of the utility,
except for exempt property as set forth in section
9-5C-7 of this article, the monthly service charge shall be multiplied by the
number of equivalent acreage units determined by the utility to be contained in
such parcel pursuant to section
9-5C-5 of this article. (Ord. 936A, 1-9-2013, eff. 1-17-2013)
9-5C-7: PROPERTY EXEMPT FROM SERVICE CHARGES:
The following special categories of property are exempt from service charges
and system development charges:
   A.   City street rights of way, all of which are a part of the system
pursuant to the plan.
   B.   State of Washington highway rights of way, so long as the state shall
agree to maintain, construct, and improve all drainage facilities contained
within such rights of way as required by the utility in conformance with all
utility standards for maintenance, construction, and improvement hereafter
established by the utility and so far as such maintenance, construction, and
improvements shall be achieved at no cost to the utility or to the city.
   C.   All foothills trail rights of way so long as each trail right of way
drainage facility is as required by the utility and in conformance with all
utility standards for the maintenance, construction, and improvements of such
facilities hereafter established by the utility, at no cost to the utility or
to the city, and so long as the city, on behalf of the utility, has a perpetual
easement for the purposes of storm drainage over the entire trail right of way
within the boundaries of the utility.
   D.   Those lands designated as stormwater receiving areas. (Ord. 697, 8-14-
1997)
9-5C-8: GENERAL FACILITIES CHARGE:
   A.   Assessment And Collection Of Charge: Every applicant for a new
connection to the stormwater system of the city and every applicant for a
project permit to develop undeveloped real property, or a portion thereof,
shall pay a stormwater utility general facilities charge to be established
pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 35.92.025 and 35.67.020. The general
facilities charge shall be assessed against, and shall be collected from the
owners of, each parcel of real property or portion to be changed from an
undeveloped to a developed state, or for which a new connection is to be made.
Such general facilities charge shall be assessed for the purposes of assessing
against such previously undeveloped property or portion thereof and such real
property or portion thereof to which a new connection is made, a proportionate
share of the utility's historic capital costs that provide a benefit to each
subsequently developed property or portion thereof, or to each property or
portion thereof subject to a new connection, in order that such property or
portion thereof may bear its fair share of the cost of the utility.
   B.   Determination Of Amount To Be Charged: The general facilities charge
shall be assessed in an amount determined by multiplying the base charge as
established from time to time by the total number of equivalent residential
units contained on that property or portion of property being altered from an
undeveloped to a developed condition, which number shall not be less than one
and shall be determined by the utility at the time of the assessment. Provided
that, general facilities charges that have been paid as a result of prior
development activities on the property, or portion thereof, or through
participation in an LID or ULID shall not be reassessed.
   C.   Payment Of Charge Required: Except as may be otherwise provided in a
binding development agreement or other agreement between the city and property
owner, the general facilities charge shall be assessed and must be paid:
      1.   For a connection or development of property not associated with
development of the property or portion therefor pursuant to an approved
subdivision, a planned unit development, or a binding site plan, at the time a
building, connection or construction permit is issued by the city authorizing
development of the property or a new connection to the stormwater system;
      2.   For a subdivision, at the time of submission of a completed
application for final plat approval;
      3.   For a binding site plan, at the time of submission of a completed
application for approval of the binding site plan; and
      4.   For a planned unit development, prior to and as a condition of final
plan approval for each phase of the planned unit development; provided that, if
the property is to be subdivided by a subdivision or short subdivision, at the
time of submission of a completed application for final plat or short plat
approval.
   D.   Equitable Adjustment Of General Facilities Charges: There is hereby
established an equitable adjustment to the general facilities charges
applicable to the applicant, or applicant's successor, for a subdivision,
planned unit development or binding site plan pursuant to subsection A of this
section, to be known as the "general facilities equitable adjustment charge".
The general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be paid at the time of
building permit issuance based upon the number of equivalent residential units
assigned to the building/facility/improvements to be constructed under the
building permit. The amount of the general facilities equitable adjustment
charge shall be calculated for each equivalent residential unit as follows:
The difference between the rate for the general facilities charge effective
upon the date that the completed application for the building permit is filed
and the rate for the general facilities charge effective at the time of the
assessment of the general facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of
payment. In the event that there has been no increase in the rate for the
general facilities charge between the date of the assessment of the general
facilities charge, or if prepaid, the date of payment, and the date the
completed building permit application is filed, the equitable adjustment will
be zero. In the event that there has been a decrease in the rate for the
general facilities charge between the date of the assessment of the general
facilities charge, or if prepaid, at the time of payment, and the date the
completed building permit application is filed, the equitable adjustment will
be zero. For purposes of this section, prepaid shall mean general facilities
charges paid prior to the date of assessment.
Payment of the general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall be a
precondition to issuance of the building permit and to approval of a service
connection to the stormwater system; provided that, the applicant and the city
may agree to a different schedule or method for payment of the general
facilities equitable adjustment charge pursuant to a development agreement or
other binding agreement between the city and the property owner relating to
development of the property.
   E.   Application Of General Facilities Equitable Adjustment Charge: General
facilities charges are intended to ensure that historic costs of stormwater
system development are equitably shared by property owners who have not
contributed to the costs of system development to the extent such property is
benefited by the stormwater system. General facilities charges assessed upon
final plat, planned unit development or binding site plan approval will not
include costs of stormwater system development, if any, incurred after such
assessment but prior to issuance of the building permit. The general facilities
equitable adjustment charge is therefore intended to apply to all applicants,
and their successors, who have paid general facilities charges pursuant to
subsections A through C of this section, whether or not paid before or after
the effective date hereof; provided that, the provisions in this subsection are
not intended to and shall not be construed to amend or alter the provisions set
forth in a binding development agreement or other binding agreement between the
city and the property owner relating to development of the property.
   F.   Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection E of this
section, the stormwater general facilities equitable adjustment charge shall
not apply to any property, or portion thereof, for which general facilities
charges were paid pursuant to an application for a subdivision, planned unit
development or binding site plan, which property, or any portion thereof, was
developed pursuant to a building permit issued on or before the later of: 1)
June 16, 2013; or 2) two (2) years following the date of assessment of the
general facilities charge. (Ord. 907, 6-29-2011)
9-5C-9: COLLECTION:
   A.   All service charges, general facilities charges, and all other fees or
charges hereafter established by ordinance of the city council shall be deemed
to be levied upon the premises themselves.
   B.   The city shall have a lien for all delinquent and unpaid charges and
fees for stormwater purposes, including, without limitation, service charges
and general facilities charges, assessed against all premises to which service
was furnished, which lien shall have the superiority established by Revised
Code Of Washington 35.67.200 and shall be foreclosed in the manner provided in
Revised Code Of Washington 35.67.220 et seq. (Ord. 843, 1-31-2007)
   C.   The base general facilities charge for each equivalent residential unit
and any additional surcharges shall be set by ordinance or resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 2016-1002, 12-14-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-5C-10: ANNUAL REVIEW OF CHARGES AND FEES:
The charges and fees established by ordinance of the city council shall be
reviewed annually by the utility. Subsequent to such review, the utility shall
present to the city council a yearly budget for the utility and proposed
amendments to any rates and charges necessary to enable the city to pay all
costs to be incurred by the utility. (Ord. 829, 6-14-2006)
9-5C-11: EFFECTIVE DATE OF SERVICE CHARGE:
The service charge herein established shall apply to all developed property
within the utility, as provided herein on or after January 1, 1998, and shall
be billed beginning in February 1998. (Ord. 697, 8-14-1997)
TITLE 10
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1
STATE BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Adopted
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Definitions
10-1-4: Order Of Precedence
10-1-5: Violations
10-1-1: ADOPTED:
   The state building code as defined in this chapter, including the national
model codes incorporated therein, is hereby adopted and made a part hereof as
though fully set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The state legislature has established the state building code applicable
throughout all cities and counties in the state of Washington for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or users of
buildings and structures and the general public. Accordingly, this chapter is
designed to effectuate the following purposes, objectives, and standards of the
state building code:
   A.   To require minimum performance standards and requirements for
construction and construction materials, consistent with accepted standards of
engineering, fire and life safety, including accessibility standards;
   B.   To require standards and requirements in terms of performance and
nationally accepted standards;
   C.   To permit the use of modern technical methods, devices and
improvements;
   D.   To eliminate restrictive, obsolete, conflicting, duplicating and
unnecessary regulations and requirements which could unnecessarily increase
construction costs or retard the use of new materials and methods of
installation or provide unwarranted preferential treatment to types or classes
of materials or products or methods of construction;
   E.   To provide for standards and specifications for making buildings and
facilities accessible to and usable by physically disabled persons; and
   F.   To consolidate within each authorized enforcement jurisdiction, the
administration and enforcement of building codes.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   State Building Code: For purposes of this title, the state building
code shall consist of the following national model codes and the following
standards, as such model codes and standards are adopted and amended from time
to time by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to chapters
19.27 and 70.92 of the Revised Code of Washington and title 51 of the
Washington Administrative Code:
      1.   The 2021 Edition of the International Building Code, as published by
the International Code Council (ICC), including Appendix E, as adopted and
amended by the Washington State Building Code Council (WSBCC) in WAC 51-50-003,
is hereby adopted by reference. Additionally, Appendix B of the 2021
International Building Code is adopted by reference by the City of Orting;
      2.   The 2021 Edition of the International Residential Code as published
by the ICC and as adopted and amended by the WSBCC in WAC 51-51-003.
Additionally, Appendix M of the International Residential Code is adopted by
reference by the city of Orting;
      3.   The 2021 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, as published
by the ICC, as adopted and amended by the WSBCC in WAC 51-52-003, is hereby
adopted by reference by the city of Orting;
      4.   The 2021 Edition of the International Fire Code, as published by the
ICC as adopted by the WSBCC in Chapter 51-54A WAC, is hereby adopted by
reference. Additionally, Appendix B and Appendix C of the International Fire
Code are adopted by reference by the city of Orting, and for streets other than
public streets, Appendix D of the International Fire Code is adopted;
      5.   The 2021 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and as adopted
and amended by the WSBCC in WAC 51-56-003, is hereby adopted by reference;
      6.   The 2021 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code,
Commercial, as adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code
Council in Chapter 51-11C WAC;
      7.   The 2021 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code,
Residential, as adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code
Council in Chapter 51-11R WAC;
      8.   The 2021 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as
published by the ICC;
      9.   The 2021 Edition of the Wildland-Urban Interface Code, as adopted
and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-55 WAC;
      10.   The 2021 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, as
adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council; and
      11.   The 2021 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as
published by ICC.
      All amendments to the state building code adopted by the Washington state
building council from time to time are hereby, upon the effective date of such
amendments, incorporated in this chapter as though fully set forth herein. In
the event that any provisions of the state building code are renumbered or re-
lettered, any reference in this chapter to such provision shall refer to the
provision as renumbered or re-lettered.
   B.   City Building Code: The city building code shall consist of the state
building code as amended from time to time by the provisions of this title.
   C.   International Building Code: A reference to the international building
code in this title shall mean, those portions of the international building
code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended
from time to time and made a part of the state building code by the Washington
state building code council pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 70.92 of the Revised
Code Of Washington and title 51 of the Washington Administrative Code.
   D.   Building Code: A reference to building code in this title shall refer
to the international building code, as amended by the provisions of this title.
   E.   International Residential Code: A reference to the international
residential code in this title shall mean, those portions of the international
residential code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted
and amended from time to time and made a part of the state building code by the
Washington state building code council pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 70.92 of
the Revised Code Of Washington and title 51 of the Washington Administrative
Code.
   F.   Residential Code: A reference to residential code in this title shall
refer to the international residential code, as amended by the provisions of
this title.
   G.   International Mechanical Code: A reference to the international
mechanical code in this title shall mean, those portions of the international
mechanical code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted
and amended from time to time and made a part of the state building code by the
Washington state building code council pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 70.92 of
the Revised Code Of Washington and title 51 of the Washington Administrative
Code.
   H.   Mechanical Code: A reference to mechanical code in this title shall
refer to the international mechanical code, as amended by the provisions of
this title.
   I.   International Fuel Gas Code And The National Fuel Gas Code: A reference
to the international fuel gas code or the national fuel gas code in this title
shall mean, those portions of the international fuel gas code and the national
fuel gas code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., that are made
a part of the international mechanical code, and as are adopted and amended
from time to time and made a part of the state building code by the Washington
state building code council pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 70.92 of the Revised
Code Of Washington and title 51 of the Washington Administrative Code.
   J.   International Fire Code: A reference to the international fire code in
this title shall mean, those portions of the international fire code, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended from time to
time and made a part of the state building code by the Washington state
building code council pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 70.92 of the Revised Code
Of Washington and title 51 of the Washington Administrative Code.
   K.   Fire Code: A reference to fire code in this title shall refer to the
international fire code, as amended by the provisions of this title.
   L.   Uniform Plumbing Code And Uniform Plumbing Code Standards: A reference
to the uniform plumbing code and/or uniform plumbing code standards in this
title shall mean, those portions of the uniform plumbing code and uniform
plumbing code standards, published by the International Association Of Plumbing
And Mechanical Officials, as adopted and amended from time to time and made a
part of the state building code by the Washington state building code council
pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 70.92 of the Revised Code Of Washington and
title 51 of the Washington Administrative Code.
   M.   Plumbing Code And Plumbing Code Standards: A reference to plumbing code
and/or plumbing code standards in this title shall refer to the uniform
plumbing code and uniform plumbing code standards, as amended by the provisions
of this title.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2024-1128, 5-29-2024; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-
29-2025)
10-1-4: ORDER OF PRECEDENCE:
   Conflicts within the state building code shall be resolved in accordance
with the provisions of chapters 19.27 and 19.27A of the Revised Code Of
Washington and title 51 of the Washington Administrative Code.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-1-5: VIOLATIONS:
   In addition to those remedies set forth in the building code, any person who
fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. Any violation of the building
code that, pursuant to such code is a civil violation is deemed to be a civil
infraction and subject to the provisions of section
1-4-2 of this code.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 2
STATE BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Amendments To Building And Residential Codes
10-2-2: Amendments To Mechanical Code
10-2-3: Amendments To Fire Code
10-2-4: Amendments To Plumbing Code And Plumbing Standards
10-2-1: AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES:
The following amendments and additions to the International Building Code and
the International Residential Code are hereby adopted:
   A.   Test Pressure Measurement: Subsection G2417.4 of the international
residential code is amended by replacing the text therein with the following:
      G2417.4 (406.4) Test Pressure Measurement. The test pressure for gas
piping systems less than 14 inch (356 mm) water column shall be 15 psig. The
test gauge shall have a pressure range of 30 psig. The test pressure shall be
held for a length of time satisfactory to the code official, but in no case
less than fifteen minutes, with no perceptible drop in pressure.
      For welded pipe and for pipe carrying gas at pressures in excess of 14
inch (356 mm) water column, the test pressure shall be 60 psig (413.4 mm). The
test gauge shall have a pressure range of 100 psig. The test pressure shall be
held for a length of time satisfactory to the code official, but in no case
less than 30 minutes.
   B.   Building Foundation Elevation: Notwithstanding provisions to the
contrary in the international building code, the top of any exterior foundation
shall extend above the elevation of the adjacent street gutter a minimum of
twelve inches (12") plus two percent (2%). The building inspector shall have
discretion to approve alternative elevations if it is demonstrated that
drainage is provided to all locations on the site.
   C.   Building Valuation Data: Section 109.3 of the international building
code and section R108.3 of the international residential code are not adopted;
and in place of those two (2) sections, the following shall be used:
      The building inspector shall utilize one of two methodologies to
determine valuation. The greater of the two methods (the square footage method
vs. the total valuation method) shall be used to determine the construction
valuation for the purpose of computing the permit fees. Value or valuation of a
building shall be:
      1.   The estimated cost to construct or replace the building and
structure in kind based on current construction or replacement costs, as
determined in this section. A current construction or replacement cost includes
fees for all architectural, engineering and construction management services,
and includes all structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical equipment and
labor, including all contractors’ profits and all on-site preparation costs; or
      2.   A flat value per square foot as published by the International Code
Council. This value shall be computed by using the per square foot value
adjusted by the area modifier published in the value table (1.09).
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce the
winning contractor’s bid for project construction when so requested by the
building inspector.
   D.   Permits: Section 105.2 (Work Exempt From Permit) of the international
building code and the international residential code is hereby amended by
increasing the size of exempt one- story detached accessory structures used as
tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses from one hundred twenty
(120) square feet to two hundred (200) square feet, by replacing the first
numbered paragraph with the following:
      1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200
square feet.
   E.   Minimum Design Requirements: The following climatic and geographic
design criteria are adopted pursuant to section R301.2 of the international
residential code:
Seismic design category         D1
Weathering                      Moderate
Frost line depth                12"
Termite                         Slight
Decay                           Moderate
Winter design temperature       27 degrees
Ice shield underlay requirement No
Flood hazard                    1985
Air freeze index                160
Mean annual temperature         51.2 degrees F
Ground snow load                25 psf
Wind speed gust                 110 mph
 
   F.   Single Room Occupancy Sleeping Unit:
      1.   Definition. A single room occupancy sleeping unit (“sleeping unit”)
is a structure that provides living units that have separate sleeping areas,
must be at least 120 square feet, and must have unencumbered access to both
sanitary facilities and a full common kitchen facility, subject to the
following:
         a.   Sanitary Facilities shall include:
            i.   At least one flush toilet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower must be supplied for each eight sleeping units.
            ii.   Each sleeping unit must have access to a flush toilet.
            iii.   Each sleeping unit must have access to a lavatory basin and
bathtub, or shower supplied at all times with an adequate quantity of hot and
cold running water.
            iv.   All sanitary facilities must be in proper operating condition
and be adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. The
facilities must utilize an approvable public or private disposal system.
      2.   Space and security:
         a.   Each sleeping unit must have 120 square feet of floor space and
at least 4 square feet of closet space.
         b.   Exterior doors and windows accessible from the outside must be
lockable.
      3.   Access:
         a.   Residents must be able to access their sleeping unit without
passing through another sleeping unit.
         b.   Residents must be able to access sanitary and kitchen facilities
with no encumbrances that could prevent access. Access to these facilities
cannot be through another sleeping unit but may be located in a detached
community building located on the same site.
      4.   Use and Location:
         a.   Sleeping units may be located within the Public Facilities Zone,
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit by the City. Sleeping units
are prohibited in all other zones within the City.
         b.   Sleeping units shall not be for transitory housing (the rental of
any building or portion thereof used for the purpose of providing lodging for
periods of less than 30 days, for compensation).
         c.   Sleeping units shall either be owner-occupied, or shall provide
housing for a tenant, pursuant to one Lease Agreement.
         d.   The following uses are not considered single room occupancy
sleeping units: Boarding houses; hotels and motels, extended stay hotels or
motels, Assisted Living Facilities, Convalescent/Nursing Homes, Correctional
Institutions, Diversion Facilities, Diversion Interim Services Facilities,
Dormitories, and facilities which provide short-term or long- term care for
tenants suffering from physical, mental or other disabilities.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2018-1023, 4-25-2018; Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-
2025)
10-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO MECHANICAL CODE:
The following amendments and additions to the International Mechanical Code are
hereby adopted:
   A.   Administrative Authority: The administrative authority as set forth in
the international mechanical code shall be deemed to refer to the city building
official or his or her duly authorized designee.
   B.   Reserved.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-2-3: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
The following amendments and additions to the International Fire Code are
hereby adopted:
   A.   Permit Fees: All applicable permits or fees required by the
international fire code shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule
of the international building code and if no fee schedule is applicable, in
accordance with such fee schedule as established by resolution or ordinance of
the city council.
   B.   Map: The entire incorporated area of the city is established as a fire
district, and the fire district shall be known and designated as district 18,
and shall include such territory or portions of the city as illustrated,
outlined and designated on that certain map on file in the office of the city
clerk, being marked and designated as “Community Wildfire Protection Plan FPD
#18 Orting Fire District”, which is adopted as the fire zoning map of the city
for the application of the regulations included in the international fire code.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-2-4: AMENDMENTS TO PLUMBING CODE AND PLUMBING STANDARDS:
The following amendments and additions to the Uniform Plumbing Code and uniform
plumbing standards are hereby adopted:
   A.   Reserved.
(Ord. 862, 3-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 3
MECHANICAL CODE AND FUEL GAS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 862, 3-12-2008)
CHAPTER 4
STATE RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL ENERGY CODES
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 5
VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 862, 3-12-2008)
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
10-7-1: Property Maintenance Code Adopted
10-7-2: Officials Defined; Amendments
10-7-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
   The 2021 edition of the international property maintenance code, as
published by the International Code Council, is adopted by this reference, as
though fully set forth herein, as the city’s property maintenance code.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-7-2: OFFICIALS DEFINED; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Hearing Examiner: Appeals of decisions of the building official are to
be heard by the city hearing examiner.
   B.   City Administrator: The designated “building official” is the city
administrator or his or her designee. Any reference in the property maintenance
code to the “building official” or “code official” shall mean and refer to the
city administrator or his or her designee.
(Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 8
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD, BRIDGE AND MUNICIPAL CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
10-8-1: Standard Specifications Adopted
10-8-1: STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   In order of precedence:
      1.   The City of Orting Development Standards, Special Provisions and
Standard Details, as adopted by resolution, shall be the standard
specifications for all municipal construction standards of the city.
      2.   WSDOT Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal
Construction, current edition, are adopted as standard specification for
municipal construction standards of the city.
   B.   Projects that occur on state highways shall follow the WSDOT Standard
Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction, current edition.
(Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 9
BARRIER FREE DESIGN
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 10
HISTORIC BUILDING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 11
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS IN BUILDINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 791, 7-8-2004, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2004)
CHAPTER 12
ARCHITECTURAL THEME FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 886, 9-8-2010)
CHAPTER 13
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 14
PARKING AND OCCUPYING RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
10-14-1: Unlawful Parking Or Occupation Of Recreational Vehicles
10-14-2: Emergency Or Temporary Stopping Or Parking
10-14-3: Permissible Parking Of Recreational Vehicles
10-14-4: Violation; Penalty
10-14-1: UNLAWFUL PARKING OR OCCUPATION OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful, within the City limits, for any person to
park or occupy any recreational vehicle within the City except as provided in
this Chapter.
   B.   Exception: This Section shall not apply to manufactured homes as
defined in OMC 132-14.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, “recreational vehicle” shall have the
same meaning as stated in OMC 13-2.
(1973 Code § 14.40.010; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-
2024; Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-14-2: EMERGENCY OR TEMPORARY STOPPING OR PARKING:
   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of a recreational vehicle is
permitted on any street, alley or highway for a period of no longer than
twenty-four (24) hours in a 180-day period, and subject to any other regulation
or ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking.
(1973 Code § 14.40.020; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-
2024; Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-14-3: PERMISSIBLE PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
No person shall park or occupy a recreational vehicle within the City outside
of an approved manufactured home park, or recreational vehicle park/campground,
except:
   A.   Within A Building: The parking of one unoccupied recreational vehicle
in a private garage building is permitted, provided no living quarters shall be
maintained or any business practiced in said recreational vehicle;
   B.   Selling or Renting: The parking of an unoccupied recreational vehicle
in a lot devoted for the purpose of selling, renting or otherwise disposing of
recreational vehicles is permitted provided each recreational vehicle is ten
feet (10') or more from any other recreational vehicle, building or structure;
   C.   Temporary Parking for a Recreational Vehicle: Recreational Vehicles on
Private Property: A recreational vehicle may stand or be parked and used or
occupied on private property with the permission of the lawful owner of the lot
upon which it will be placed, for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) days within a twelve (12)-month period. The temporary occupation of the
recreational vehicle shall be accessory to an active building or remodel permit
that has been issued for construction located on the same lot where the
recreational vehicle is placed and is subject to the following:
      1.   The lawful occupant of the recreational vehicle shall register with
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to occupying the recreational vehicle on the
premises, and pay required permit fees as established by resolution of the City
Council;
      2.   The recreational vehicle shall be inspected by the City if connected
to sewer or to a Tacoma-Pierce County health department approved septic system;
      3.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on a lot in a residential
zoning district in accordance with the provisions of OMC Title 13, Chapter 5;
      4.   Such use or occupancy shall not create a public health hazard or
nuisance, as determined by the City;
      5.   The recreational vehicle shall not be parked on or overhanging a
public right of way (street or sidewalk); and
      6.   The recreational vehicle shall not leak or cause illicit discharges
to stormwater drainage systems, surface water or groundwater in accordance with
OMC
9-5A-9:H; sites are subject to inspection for illicit discharges in accordance
with OMC
9-5B-10.
      7.   Once a recreational vehicle is registered for occupation on private
property for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the one hundred eighty
(180) day period may be extended by the Code Enforcement Officer, upon written
request setting forth the need of extending the time, but such extension shall
not exceed one hundred eighty (180) additional days.
   D.   Outdoor Storage Of Recreational Vehicles: The outdoor storage of
unoccupied recreational vehicles in the residential zones is permitted without
a permit, pursuant to OMC
13-5-3.
(1973 Code § 14.40.040; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-
2024; Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-14-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of
a civil infraction with penalties, plus statutory assessments in accordance
with OMC
1-4-2.
   B.   Joint and Several Responsibility And Liability: Responsibility for
violations subject to enforcement under this chapter is joint and several, and
the city is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other
persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the city
required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for
compliance.
(1973 Code § 14.40.080; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-
2024; Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
CHAPTER 15
SIGNS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 886, 9-8-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13, chapter 7 of this code.
CHAPTER 16
GRADING/FILLING OF LAND
SECTION:
10-16-1: Permit Required
10-16-2: Application For Permit
10-16-3: Approval By Building Inspector
10-16-4: Fill Material
10-16-5: Inadvertent Discovery Of Human Skeletal Remains
10-16-6:   Definitions
10-16-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall fill, clear, excavate, or grade any private property within the
City without first obtaining a clear and grade permit from the Administrator,
unless the application is exempt as per OMC 10-16-1(A). As used in this chapter
of the code, the “Administrator” shall be the City Administrator or his or her
designee.
   A right-of-way permit application is required for fill, clear, excavation,
and grading activities on public property or public right-of-way and shall be
reviewed by the Administrator for consistency with OMC Title 8, Public Ways and
Property and germane City of Orting Development Standards.
   A.   Exemptions. Fill, clear, excavation, or grading activities are not
subject to the provisions of this chapter, provided that:
      1.   The activities filling, excavating, or grading are less than 25
cubic yards;
      2.   The activities propose clearing less than 5,000 square feet;
      3.   The activities otherwise subject to this chapter are proposed as
part of a building permit, civil permit, or site plan review application,
provided that the land clearing activity does not occur until approval of the
building permit, civil permit, or site plan review, and provided further that
the land clearing activity is completed in a manner compliant with the approved
permit;
      4.   The activities propose the removal of noxious weeds as defined by
the Washington State Noxious Weed Control Board;
      5.   The activities support a bona fide agricultural practice.
      6.   The activities are to remove hazard trees. The tree removal
exemption under this provision may only be allowed if the applicant provides a
determination by a qualified arborist who has evaluated and determined that the
subject trees are hazard trees.
      7.   The activities are emergency grading to prevent the loss of property
or life due to natural hazards. All such emergency grading shall be removed
after the threat to life or property subsides as determined and directed by the
City.
   B.   Expiration. Any permit issued under this chapter is valid for 12
months, and thereafter expires.
(1973 Code § 14.46.010; amd. Ord 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-16-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The person requesting a clear and grade permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Building Inspector or City Engineer. Such application shall
be processed as a Type 2 permit application and shall include the following
items:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant.
   B.   The name and address of the owner of the property where the fill,
clear, excavation, or grading activity is to occur. C. The exact location of
the proposed fill, giving the street address or legal description of the
property involved.
   C.   If proposing fill activity, the type of fill material to be used.
   D.   A scaled drawing of the entire area to be filled, showing:
      1.   The dimensions of the property.
      2.   The dimension and location of all existing and proposed and
temporary and permanent stormwater BMPs if required based on Title 9, Chapter 5
of this code.
      3.   The location of any buildings or other structures or improvements or
permanent stormwater BMPs.
      4.   The existing elevations and final finished grades of the project
area.
      5.   The disposition of all water from the fill area.
(1973 Code § 14.46.020; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord 2025-1148, 10-29-
2025)
10-16-3: APPROVAL BY BUILDING INSPECTOR:
No clear and grade permit shall be issued unless the application has been
approved by the Administrator. The Administrator shall approve a clear and
grade permit if the permit application is consistent with the criteria of
approval set forth in subsection A of this section.
   A.   Criteria of Approval.
      1.   The application does not propose placement of fill which exceeds a
three to one (3:1) slope from the property line.
      2.   If placing fill, excavating, or grading immediately adjacent to a
street, alley, road, accessway, or other driving surface, the application is
consistent with approach standards adopted in the Orting Development Standards.
      3.   The application proposes filling or grading compliant with OMC Title
14, Flood Control.
      4.   The application proposes filling or grading compliant with Erosion
Hazard Area provisions set forth in OMC Title 11, Critical Areas and Shoreline
Management.
      5.   If proposing fill activity, the applicant proposes fill material
consistent with OMC Section 10-16-4, Fill Material.
(1973 Code § 14.46.040; amd. Ord 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-16-4: FILL MATERIAL:
   The fill material will be of a quality which will permit the construction of
buildings thereupon. No fill will be approved which contains a substantial
amount of decomposable materials. No filling shall be permitted which
interferes with any drainage or existing permanent stormwater BMPs unless
mitigation is documented in a Stormwater Site Plan approved by the City. No
hydraulic fill shall be permitted unless it is first approved by the City
Engineer.
(1973 Code § 14.46.030; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord 2025-1148, 10-29-
2025)
10-16-5: INADVERTENT DISCOVERY OF HUMAN SKELETAL REMAINS:
   If during the course of construction ground disturbing activities encounter
or reveal human skeletal remains, then all activity shall cease that may cause
further disturbance to those remains. The area of the find shall be secured and
protected from further disturbance until the arrival of local law enforcement.
No work at the site may continue until the Washington Department of Archeology
and Historic Preservation (DAHP) provides notice to proceed. The discovery of
human skeletal remains shall be reported to the county medical examiner/coroner
and local law enforcement in the most expeditious manner possible. The remains
shall not be touched, moved, or further disturbed. The county medical examiner/
coroner shall assume jurisdiction over the human skeletal remains and make a
determination of whether those remains are forensic or non-forensic. If the
county medical examiner/coroner determines the remains are non-forensic, then
they shall report that finding to DAHP who shall then take jurisdiction over
the remains. The DAHP shall notify any appropriate cemeteries and all affected
tribes of the find. The State Physical Anthropologist shall make a
determination of whether the remains are Indian or NonIndian and report that
finding to any appropriate cemeteries and the affected tribes. The DAHP shall
handle all consultation with the affected parties as to the future
preservation, excavation, and disposition of the remains.
(Ord. 2024-1127, 4-10-2024; amd. Ord 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
10-16-6: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this chapter. Terms used
in this chapter that are otherwise undefined in this section shall be
interpreted to mean the term’s definition in the then-current definition of the
Merriam Webster dictionary, or as otherwise interpreted via an Administrative
Interpretation issued by the City Administrator as per OMC
15-3-2.
ADMINISTRATOR: The City Administrator or his/her designee.
BMP: Best Management Practice
BONA FIDE: Genuine, legitimate, or in good faith.
BONA FIDE AGRICULTURAL PRACTICE: A land use that derives income from growing
plants or trees on land, including but not limited to, land used principally
for timber production, and not including land used principally for another use
and incidentally used for growing trees or plants for income.
CLEAR: To cut or remove of standing or fallen timber (including stumps), or the
cutting or removal of brush, grass, ground cover, or other vegetative matter
from a site in a way which exposes the earth’s surface of the site.
EXCAVATE: The removal by a person of sand, sediment, or other earthen material
from an area of land or water.
FILL: The placement by a person of sand, sediment or other material to create
new uplands or raise the elevation of the land.
GRADING: Any excavating, filling, or creating of land surfaces or combination
thereof.
HAZARD TREE: Any tree posing a threat to life, property, or public safety.
(Ord. 2025-1148, 10-29-2025)
TITLE 11
CRITICAL AREAS AND SHORELINE MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose And Intent
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Applicability
11-1-4: Exemptions
11-1-5: Reasonable Use Exception
11-1-6: Maps And Inventories
11-1-7: Relationship To Other Regulations
11-1-8: Variances
11-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to designate and protect the functions and values
of ecologically sensitive and hazardous areas without violating any citizen's
constitutional rights. Landslide, erosion, volcanic and seismic hazards,
wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas,
and flood hazard areas constitute critical areas that are of special concern to
Orting. The city finds that these critical areas perform a variety of valuable
and beneficial biological and physical functions that benefit the city and its
residents; certain critical areas may also pose a threat to human safety or to
public and private property. By limiting development and alteration of these
critical areas, and by incorporating best available science into those limited
instances of development and alteration of critical areas, this chapter seeks
to:
   A.   Protect members of the public and public resources and facilities from
injury, loss of life, or property damage due to flooding, erosion, volcanic
eruptions, landslides, seismic events, or steep slope failures;
   B.   Protect and designate unique, fragile and valuable elements of the
environment, including wildlife and its habitat;
   C.   Mitigate unavoidable impacts to environmentally critical areas by
regulating alterations in and adjacent to critical areas;
   D.   Prevent cumulative adverse environmental impacts to water quality and
wetlands;
   E.   Implement the requirements of the Washington state growth management
act 1  with regard to the protection of critical area lands;
   F.   Coordinate environmental review and permitting of proposals to avoid
duplication and delay.
   G.   Implement the goals, policies, guidelines, and requirements of the city
of Orting comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2016-985, 7-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-1143,
6-30-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. Chapter 36.70A RCW
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALTERATION: Any human induced activity that changes the existing condition of a
critical area. Alterations include, but are not limited to: grading; filling;
dredging; draining; channelizing; clearing or removing vegetation; discharging
pollutants; paving; construction; demolition; or any other human activity that
changes the existing landforms, vegetation, hydrology, wildlife, or wildlife
habitat of a critical area.
ANADROMOUS FISH: Species, such as salmon, which are born in fresh water, spend
a large part of their lives in the sea, and return to fresh water rivers and
streams to procreate.
APPLICANT: The person, party, firm, corporation, or other entity that proposes
any activity that could affect a critical area.
AQUIFER: A saturated geologic formation that will yield a sufficient quantity
of water to serve as a private or public water supply.
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood.
BEST AVAILABLE SCIENCE: Current scientific information used in the process to
designate, protect, or restore critical areas that is derived from a valid
scientific process as defined in WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925, as
applicable.
BOG: A wetland with limited drainage generally characterized by extensive peat
deposits and acidic waters. Vegetation includes sedges, sphagnum moss, shrubs
and trees.
BUFFER OR BUFFER AREA: A naturally vegetated and undisturbed or revegetated
zone surrounding a critical area that protects the critical area from adverse
impacts to its integrity and value, or is an integral part of the resource's
ecosystem.
CITY: The city of Orting.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Orting or any other
city official appointed by the mayor to administer this title, including the
community development director.
CLEARING: The removal of timber, brush, grass, ground cover, or other
vegetative matter from a site that exposes the earth's surface of the site or
any actions that disturb the existing ground surface.
CRITICAL AREAS: Include wetlands, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas,
critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, and geologically
hazardous areas including erosion hazard areas, seismic hazard areas, landslide
hazard areas, and volcanic hazard areas.
Critical areas to be designated and protected using the best available science,
consistent with RCW 36.70A.172. As used in this title, the term “critical area”
shall also encompass any required buffer or setback associated with that
critical area. The departments of fish and wildlife and ecology, and various
federal agencies, offer online mapping tools to help define general critical
area locations and may be used for illustrative and informational purposes
only.
CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS: Areas with a critical recharging effect on
aquifers used for potable water, including areas where an aquifer that is a
source of drinking water is vulnerable to contamination that would affect the
potability of the water, or is susceptible to reduced charge. Critical aquifer
recharge areas are classified as follows:
   A.   High significance aquifer recharge areas: Areas with slopes of less
than fifteen percent (15%) that are underlain by coarse alluvium or sand and
gravel.
   B.   Moderate significance aquifer recharge areas:
      1.   Areas with slopes of less than fifteen percent (15%) that are
underlain by fine alluvium, silt, clay, glacial till, or deposits from the
electron mudflow; and
      2.   Areas with slopes of fifteen percent (15%) to thirty percent (30%)
that are underlain by sand and gravel.
   C.   Low significance aquifer recharge areas:
      1.   Areas with slopes of fifteen percent (15%) to thirty percent (30%)
that are underlain by silt, clay, or glacial till; and
      2.   Areas with slopes greater than thirty percent (30%).
CRITICAL HABITAT: Critical habitats are those habitat areas which meet any of
the following criteria:
   A.   The documented presence of species listed by the federal government or
state of Washington as endangered, threatened, or critical.
   B.   Those streams identified as "shorelines of the state" under the city of
Orting shoreline master program.
   C.   Those wetlands identified as class I wetlands, as defined in this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHT: Any specific right to use real property which inures to an
owner of real property through the common law, statutory law of real property,
the United States and Washington constitutions and as further defined and
delineated herein.
ECOSYSTEM FUNCTIONS: The products, physical and biological conditions, and
environmental qualities of an ecosystem that result from interactions among
ecosystem processes and ecosystem structures, including but not limited to
sequestered carbon, attenuated peak streamflow, aquifer water level, reduced
pollutant concentrations in surface and ground waters, cool summer in-stream
water temperatures, and fish and wildlife habitats.
EROSION: A process whereby wind, rain, water, and other natural agents mobilize
and transport soil particles.
EROSION HAZARD AREAS: Those areas containing soils which, according to the
United States department of agriculture natural resources conservation service
soil survey program, may experience significant erosion. Erosion hazard areas
also include coastal erosion-prone areas and channel migration zones. Erosion
hazard areas are classified according to the criteria set forth in OMC 11-3-3.
EXISTING AND ONGOING AGRICULTURE: Those activities conducted on lands defined
in Revised Code Of Washington 84.34.020(2), and those existing activities
involved in the production of crops or livestock. Activities may include the
operation and maintenance of farm and stock ponds or drainage ditches;
operation and maintenance of existing ditches or irrigation systems; changes
from one type of agricultural activity to another agricultural activity; and
normal maintenance, repair, and operation of existing serviceable structures,
facilities, or improved areas. Activities which bring a nonagricultural area
into agricultural use are not part of an ongoing operation. An operation ceases
to be ongoing when the area on which it is conducted is converted to a
nonagricultural use or has lain idle for more than five (5) years.
FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION: Land management for maintaining
populations of species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic
distribution so that the habitat available is sufficient to support viable
populations over the long term and isolated subpopulations are not created.
This does not mean maintaining all individuals of all species at all times, but
it does mean not degrading or reducing populations or habitats so that they are
no longer viable over the long term. Counties and cities should engage in
cooperative planning and coordination to help assure long term population
viability.
Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas contribute to the state's
biodiversity and occur on both publicly and privately owned lands. Designating
these areas is an important part of land use planning for appropriate
development densities, urban growth area boundaries, open space corridors, and
incentive based land conservation and stewardship programs.
FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS: Areas that serve a critical role
in sustaining needed habitats and species for the functional integrity of the
ecosystem, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species
will persist over the long term. These areas may include, but are not limited
to, rare or vulnerable ecological systems, communities, and habitat or habitat
elements including seasonal ranges, breeding habitat, winter range, and
movement corridors; and areas with high relative population density or species
richness. Counties and cities may also designate habitats of local importance
and species of local importance. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas
do not include such artificial features or constructs as irrigation delivery
systems, irrigation infrastructure, irrigation canals, or drainage ditches that
lie within the boundaries of, and are maintained by, a port district or an
irrigation district or company.
FISH HABITAT: Habitat that is used by fish at any life stage at any time of the
year, including potential habitat likely to be used by fish that could be
recovered by restoration or management and includes off channel habitat.
FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS: Lands in the floodplain subject to at least one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year (“100-year
flood”), or within areas subject to flooding due to high groundwater. These
areas include, but are not limited to, streams, rivers, lakes, coastal areas,
wetlands, and areas where high groundwater forms ponds on the ground surface.
These areas also consist of the following components, as determined by the
city:
   A.   Floodplain: The total area subject to inundation by the base flood.
   B.   Flood fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway which
is generally covered by floodwaters during the base flood. It is generally
associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water.
   C.   Floodway: The channel of the stream and that portion of the adjoining
floodplain that is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow
without increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot (1').
GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS: Lands or areas characterized by geologic, hydrologic,
and topographic conditions that render them susceptible to potentially
significant or severe risk of landslides, erosion, or volcanic or seismic
activity and unsuitable for the unmitigated siting of commercial, residential,
or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns.
GRADING: Any excavating, filling, clearing, leveling, or contouring of the
ground surface by human or mechanical means.
GROUNDWATER: All water found beneath the ground surface, including slow moving
subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
HABITATS OF LOCAL IMPORTANCE: "Habitats of local importance" designated as fish
and wildlife habitat conservation areas include those areas found to be locally
important by counties and cities.
HAZARD TREE: Any tree posing a threat to life, property, or public safety.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE PROCESSING OR HANDLING: The use, storage, manufacture or
other land use activity involving hazardous substances, but does not include
individually packaged household consumer products or quantities of hazardous
substances of less than five (5) gallons in volume per container.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE(S): Any liquid, solid, gas or sludge, including any
materials, substance, product, commodity or waste, regardless of quantity, that
exhibits any of the characteristics of hazardous waste; and including waste oil
and petroleum products.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: All dangerous waste and extremely hazardous waste as
designated pursuant to chapter 70A.300 Revised Code Of Washington, chapter 173-
303, Washington administrative code.
   A.   "Dangerous waste" means any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned
substances including, but not limited to, certain pesticides, or any residues
or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or
concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, wildlife, or the environment because such wastes or constituents or
combinations of such wastes:
      1.   Have short lived, toxic properties that may cause death, injury, or
illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic, or carcinogenic properties; or
      2.   Are corrosive, explosive, flammable, or may generate pressure
through decomposition or other means.
   B.   "Extremely hazardous waste" means any waste which:
      1.   Will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a
disposal site and which in its persistent form presents a significant
environment hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food
chain or may affect the genetic makeup of humans or wildlife, and
      2.   Is disposed of at a disposal site in such quantities as would
present an extreme hazard to humans or the environment.
HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT AND STORAGE FACILITY: A facility that treats and
stores hazardous waste and is authorized pursuant to chapter 70A.300 Revised
Code Of Washington, chapter 173-303 Washington administrative code. It includes
all contiguous land and structures used for recycling, reusing, reclaiming,
transferring, storing, treating, or disposing of hazardous waste.
HYDRIC SOILS: A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. The
presence of hydric soil shall be determined by the following methods described
in the approved federal "Wetland Delineation Manual" and applicable regional
supplements.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: As defined in Title 9 Chapter 5A Section 4 of this code.
LAHAR: Mudflows and debris flows originating from the slopes of a volcano.
LANDSLIDE: Episodic downslope movement of a mass of soil or rock.
LANDSLIDE HAZARD AREAS: Areas that, due to a combination of slope inclination,
relative soil permeability and hydrologic factors, are susceptible to varying
risks of landsliding. Landslide hazard areas are classified according to the
criteria set forth in OMC 11-3-3.
LIQUEFACTION: A process by which a water saturated granular (sandy) soil layer
loses strength because of ground shaking commonly caused by an earthquake.
LOT SLOPE: A measurement by which the average slope of the lot is calculated as
a percentage. The lowest elevation of the lot is subtracted from the highest
elevation, and the resulting number is divided by the horizontal distance
between these two (2) points. The resulting product is multiplied by one
hundred (100).
MAGNITUDE: A quantity characteristic of the total energy released by an
earthquake. Commonly, earthquakes are recorded with magnitudes from zero to
eight (0 - 8).
MITIGATION: Avoiding, minimizing, reducing, rectifying, eliminating, or
compensating for adverse impacts.
NATIVE VEGETATION: Plant species that are indigenous and naturalized to the
Orting region and which can be expected to naturally occur on a site. Native
vegetation does not include noxious weeds.
NO NET LOSS: The actions taken to achieve and ensure no overall reduction in
existing ecosystem functions and values or the natural systems constituting the
protected critical areas.
NOXIOUS WEED 1 : Any plant which, when established, is highly destructive,
competitive, or difficult to control by cultural or chemical practices. The
state noxious weed list in chapter 16-750 is the officially adopted list of
noxious weeds by the state noxious weed control board.
PRIORITY HABITAT: A habitat type with unique or significant value to one or
more species. An area classified and mapped as priority habitat must have one
or more of the following attributes:
   A.   Comparatively high fish and wildlife density;
   B.   Comparatively high fish and wildlife species diversity;
   C.   Important fish and wildlife breeding habitat;
   D.   Important fish and wildlife seasonal ranges;
   E.   Important fish and wildlife movement corridors;
   F.   Limited availability;
   G.   High vulnerability to habitat alteration; or
   H.   Unique or dependent species.
A priority habitat may be described by a unique vegetation type or by a
dominant plant species that is of primary importance to fish and wildlife (such
as, oak woodlands, eelgrass meadows). A priority habitat may also be described
by a successional stage (such as, old growth and mature forests).
Alternatively, a priority habitat may consist of a specific habitat element
(such as, consolidated marine/estuarine shorelines, talus slopes, caves, snags)
of key value to fish and wildlife. A priority habitat may contain priority and/
or nonpriority fish and wildlife. Priority habitats are listed by the state
department of fish and wildlife in the priority habitats and species program.
PRIORITY SPECIES: Fish and wildlife species requiring protective measures and/
or management guidelines to ensure their perpetuation. Priority species are
those that meet any of the criteria listed below:
   A.   Criterion 1: State listed or state candidate species. State listed
species are those native fish and wildlife species legally designated as
endangered (WAC 232-12-014), threatened (WAC 232-12-011), or sensitive (WAC
232-12-011). State candidate species are those fish and wildlife species that
will be reviewed by the department of fish and wildlife (POL-M-6001) for
possible listing as endangered, threatened, or sensitive according to the
process and criteria defined in Washington administrative code 232-12-297.
Federal candidate species are evaluated individually to determine their status
in Washington and whether inclusion as a priority species is justified.
   B.   Criterion 2: Vulnerable aggregations. Vulnerable aggregations include
those species or groups of animals susceptible to significant population
declines, within a specific area or statewide, by virtue of their inclination
to congregate. Examples include heron rookeries, seabird concentrations, marine
mammal haul outs, shellfish beds, and fish spawning and rearing areas.
   C.   Criterion 3: Species of recreational, commercial and/or tribal
importance. Native and nonnative fish, shellfish, and wildlife species of
recreational or commercial importance and recognized species used for tribal
ceremonial and subsistence purposes that are vulnerable to habitat loss or
degradation.
   D.   Criterion 4: Species listed under the endangered species act as either
threatened or endangered.
QUALIFIED ARBORIST: An international society of arboriculture certified
arborist with a current tree risk assessment qualification, or similar
equivalent certification and qualification as determined by the city
administrator.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person with experience and training in the pertinent
scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise
appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with
Washington administrative code 365-195-905(4). A qualified professional must
have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering,
environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology or related field, and a minimum
of two (2) years of related work experience. Professional engineers must be
licensed in the state of Washington.
   A.   A qualified professional for habitats or wetlands must be certified as
a professional wetland scientist or a noncertified professional wetland
scientist with at least two (2) years of full time work experience as a
wetlands professional including experience delineating wetlands using the state
or federal manuals, preparing wetland critical area reports, conducting
function assessments, and developing and implementing mitigation plans. The
person should be familiar with the approved federal "Wetland Delineation
Manual" and applicable regional supplements.
   B.   A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional
engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington.
   C.   A qualified professional for aquifer recharge areas must be a
hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist with experience in
preparing hydrogeologic assessments.
RECEIVING PARCEL: A parcel of land on which a development right is used.
SALMONID FISH USE: Those waters used by salmonid or anadromous fish for
spawning, rearing or migration. If salmonid fish use has not been determined,
salmonid fish use shall be presumed for waters having the following
characteristics:
   A.   Stream segments having a defined channel of two feet (2') or greater
within the bankfull width and having a gradient of sixteen percent (16%) or
less;
   B.   Stream segments having a defined channel or two feet (2') or greater
within the bankfull, and having a gradient greater than sixteen percent (16%)
and less than or equal to twenty percent (20%), and having greater than fifty
(50) acres in contributing basin size, based on hydrographic boundaries;
   C.   Ponds or impoundments having a surface area of less than one acre at
seasonal low water and having an outlet to a fish stream;
   D.   Ponds of impoundments having a surface area greater than 0.5 acre at
seasonal low water.
The city may waive or modify the characteristics of this definition where:
   A.   Waters have confirmed, long term, naturally occurring conditions that
make them incapable of supporting fish; or
   B.   Sufficient information is available to support a departure from the
characteristics of this definition, as determined in consultation with the
department of fish and wildlife, affected tribes and interested parties.
SEISMIC HAZARD AREAS: Areas that, due to a combination of soil and groundwater
conditions, are subject to severe risk of ground shaking, subsidence, debris
flows, lahars, or liquefaction of soils during earthquakes. These areas are
typically underlain by soft or loose saturated soils (such as alluvium), have a
shallow groundwater table and are typically located on the floors of river
valleys.
SENDING PARCEL: A parcel of land from which a development right has been
severed, in accordance with this chapter.
SEVER: The removal or separation of some specified right or use from the
"bundle of rights" possessed by an owner of real property. The term connotes a
removal or separation in perpetuity as distinguished from a restriction or
limitation which may be overridden, deleted or subject to a time limitation.
SLOPE: An inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the
ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
SLUDGE: A semisolid substance consisting of settled solids combined with
varying amounts of water and dissolved materials generated from a wastewater
treatment plant or system or other sources, including septage sludge, sewage
sludge, or industrial sludge.
SLUDGE LAND APPLICATION SITE: A site where stabilized sludge, septage, and
other organic wastes are applied to the surface of the land in accordance with
established agronomic rates for fertilization or soil conditioning.
SPECIES: Any group of animals classified as a species or subspecies as commonly
accepted by the scientific community.
SPECIES, ENDANGERED: Any fish or wildlife species that is threatened with
extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and is listed
by the state or federal government as an endangered species.
SPECIES OF LOCAL IMPORTANCE: Those species of local concern due to their
population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation, or that are
game species.
SPECIES, THREATENED: Any fish or wildlife species that is likely to become an
endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant
portion of its range without cooperative management or removal of threats, and
is listed by the state or federal government as a threatened species.
TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL: On site and off site control measures that are
needed to control conveyance or deposition of earth, turbidity, or pollutants
during development, construction, or restoration.
UTILITY LINE: Pipe, conduit, cable or other similar facility by which services
are conveyed to the public or individual recipients. Such services shall
include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric power, gas,
communications and sanitary sewers.
VOLCANIC HAZARD AREAS: Areas that are subject to pyroclastic flows, lava flows,
and inundation by debris flows, mudflows, or related flooding resulting from
geologic and volcanic activity on Mount Rainier. Volcanic hazard areas are
classified according to the criteria set forth in OMC 11-3-3.
WETLAND: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands
intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to,
irrigation and drainage ditches, grass lined swales, canals, detention
facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape
amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were
unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or
highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created
from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands. (Ord. 2016-
985, 7-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
 
Notes
1 Chapter 36.70A RCW.
11-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Prior to fulfilling the requirements of this title, Orting shall not
grant any approval or permission to alter the condition of any land, water or
vegetation, or to construct or alter any structure or improvement including,
but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Building permit.
      2.   Conditional use permit.
      3.   Shoreline conditional use permit.
      4.   Shoreline substantial development permit.
      5.   Shoreline variance.
      6.   Short subdivision.
      7.   Subdivision.
      8.   Variance.
      9.   Zone reclassification.
      10.   Any other adopted permit or required approval not expressly
exempted by this title.
   B.   Orting shall perform a critical area review for any Orting permit
approval requested for a proposal on a site which includes or is adjacent to
one or more critical areas unless otherwise provided in this title. As part of
all applications, Orting shall verify the information submitted by the
applicant to:
      1.   Confirm the nature and type of the critical areas and evaluate any
required critical areas study.
      2.   Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this
title.
      3.   Determine whether any proposed alterations to critical areas are
necessary.
      4.   Determine if the mitigation plans proposed by the applicant are
sufficient to protect the public health, safety and welfare consistent with the
goals, purposes, objectives and requirements of this chapter. (1973 Code §
15.12.010; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-1-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Agricultural Activities: Existing and ongoing agricultural activities,
provided no alteration of flood storage capacity or conveyance occurs.
   B.   Damaged Structures: Remodeling of structures in existence on the
effective date of July 13, 2016. When such structures are damaged by fire,
explosion, or other unforeseen circumstances, they may be reconstructed or
replaced within one year; provided, that the new construction or related
activity does not further intrude into a critical area or established buffer
and is subject to flood hazard areas reconstruction restrictions.
   C.   New Accessory Structures And Additions: New accessory structures and
additions to structures provided that the lot coverage does not exceed a
cumulative additional seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of impervious
surface after the effective date July 13, 2026; provided, that the new
construction or related activity does not further intrude into a critical area
or established buffer and is subject to flood hazard areas reconstruction
restrictions.
   D.   Artificially Created Wetlands: Activities involving artificially
created wetlands or streams intentionally created from nonwetland sites,
including, but not limited to, grass lined swales, irrigation and drainage
ditches, detention facilities, and landscape features, except wetlands,
streams, or swales that provide critical habitat for anadromous fish.
   E.   Small Wetlands: The following wetlands may be exempt from the
requirement to avoid impacts and they may be filled if the impacts are fully
mitigated. If available, impacts should be mitigated through the purchase of
credits from an in lieu fee program or mitigation bank, consistent with the
terms and conditions of the program or bank. In order to verify the following
conditions, a critical area report for wetlands must be submitted.
      1.   All isolated category IV wetlands less than four thousand (4,000)
square feet that:
         a.   Are not associated with riparian areas or their buffers;
         b.   Are not associated with shorelines of the state or their
associated buffers;
         c.   Are not part of a wetland mosaic;
         d.   Do not score six (6) or more points for habitat function based on
the "Washington State Wetland Rating System For Western Washington" (ecology
publication #23-06-009, or as revised).
         e.   Do not contain a priority habitat or a priority area for a
priority species identified by the Washington department of fish and wildlife,
do not contain federally listed species or their critical habitat, or species
of local importance.
      2.   Wetlands less than one thousand (1,000) square feet that meet the
above criteria and do not contain federally listed species or their critical
habitat are exempt from the buffer provisions contained in this chapter.
   F.   Existing Roads: Maintenance, operation and reconstruction of existing
roads, streets, utilities and associated structures.
   G.   Emergency Activities: Emergencies are those activities necessary to
prevent an immediate threat to public health, safety, or welfare, or that pose
an immediate risk of damage to private property and that require remedial or
preventative action in a time frame too short to allow for compliance with the
requirements of the critical areas regulations. Emergency actions are required
to use reasonable methods to address the emergency with the least possible
impact to the critical area. The administrator will require review of the
action to determine whether it was beyond the scope of the exemption and may
require permits after the fact, which may include restoration or compensatory
mitigation.
   H.   Removal Of Hazard Trees: Removal of hazard trees, provided that hazard
tree removal shall not adversely affect ecologic functions to the extent
practicable, creates snags rather than complete removal of trees where
possible, avoid and minimize damage to remaining trees and vegetation within a
riparian zone. Tree removal exempted other this provision may only be allowed
if the applicant provides a determination by a qualified arborist who has
evaluated and determined the subject trees to be hazard trees. (Ord. 2016-985,
7-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-1-5: REASONABLE USE EXCEPTION:
   A.   Allowing Exception: If the application of this chapter would deny all
reasonable use of the property, development may be allowed which is consistent
with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest.
   B.   Application For Exception: An application for a critical areas
reasonable use exception shall be filed with the city and shall be heard by the
hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall issue a final decision.
   C.   Determination; Conditions: The hearing examiner must determine that:
      1.   Application of this title would deny all reasonable use of the
property; and
      2.   There is no other reasonable use with less impact on the critical
area; and
      3.   The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the
public health, safety or welfare on or off the development proposal site; and
      4.   Any alterations permitted to these critical areas shall be the
minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; and
      5.   The inability to derive reasonable economic use is not the result of
the applicant’s actions or that a previous property owner, such as by
segregating or dividing the property and creating an undevelopable condition.
   D.   Alterations: Any authorized alteration of a critical area under this
section shall be subject to conditions established by the city of Orting and
shall require mitigation under an approved mitigation plan. (1973 Code §
15.12.030; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-1-6: MAPS AND INVENTORIES:
   A.   Critical Area Mapping: The approximate location and extent of critical
areas in the city are shown on a series of maps, including the extent of land
subject to the Shoreline Master Program, to Title 14 of this code, and to areas
mapped in publicly available critical areas resources which include, but are
not limited to, those resources set forth in section 11-2-6 of this code. These
areas may be used by the public and by the city to inform of the potential
presence of critical areas. Boundaries are generalized; the actual type,
extent, and boundaries of critical areas shall be determined in the field by a
qualified professional according to the procedures, definitions, and criteria
established by this chapter.
   B.   Changes In Critical Area Mapping: Authority is hereby delegated to the
city administrator to subsequently effect changes in city critical area maps as
appropriate in the light of changed circumstances or newly acquired
information. (1973 Code § 15.12.040; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-1-7: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS:
   A.   These critical area regulations shall apply as an overlay and in
addition to zoning, land use and other regulations established by the city. In
the event of any conflict between these regulations and any other regulations
of the city, the regulations that provide greater protection to environmentally
critical areas shall apply.
   B.   Areas characterized by particular critical areas may also be subject to
other regulations established by this chapter due to overlap or multiple
functions of some critical resources or critical areas. Wetlands, for example,
may be defined and regulated according to the wetland and habitat provisions of
this title. In the event of any conflict between regulations for any particular
critical areas in this title, the regulations which provide greater protection
to environmentally critical areas shall apply. (1973 Code § 15.12.050; amd.
Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-1-8: VARIANCES:
Variances from the standards of this title may be authorized by the hearing
examiner in accordance with the procedures set forth in title 15 of this code.
A decision may not be issued by the hearing examiner on a requested variance
from this title until a complete application, including all fees, is submitted
by the applicant. In granting such a variance, the hearing examiner shall find:
   A.   Because of the special circumstances applicable to the subject
property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, or the
size or nature of the critical area, the strict application of this title would
deprive the property owner of reasonable use of their property;
   B.   The granting of the variance is the minimum necessary to accommodate
reasonable use based on the parcel’s underlying zoning and will not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or
improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated, or
contrary to the goals and purposes of this title.
   Variances from mitigation requirements set forth in this chapter cannot be
authorized. Mitigation for adverse impacts to functions or values of critical
areas shall be provided consistent with the mitigation requirements of this
chapter, regardless of whether the adverse impact relates to relief afforded
via an approved critical area variance. (1973 Code § 15.28.010; amd. Ord. 2025-
1143, 6-30-2025)
CHAPTER 2
CRITICAL AREA DETERMINATIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Scope
11-2-1-1: Critical Area Report Required
11-2-2: Exceptions To Report Requirements
11-2-3: Contents Of Critical Area Report
11-2-4: Wetlands Classification
11-2-5: Geologic Hazard Classifications
11-2-6: Fish And Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas Classification
11-2-7: Critical Aquifer Recharge Classification
11-2-1: SCOPE:
To promote consistent application of the standards and requirements of this
title, critical areas within the city shall be determined, rated, and
classified according to their characteristics, function and value, and/or their
sensitivity to disturbance. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-2-1-1: CRITICAL AREA REPORT REQUIRED:
When an applicant submits an application for any development proposal, the
application shall indicate whether any environmentally critical area or buffer
is located on the site.
The city administrator or the administrator's designee shall visit the subject
property and review the information submitted by the applicant along with any
other available information.
If the city administrator determines that the site potentially includes or is
adjacent to critical areas, or that the proposed project could have potential
adverse impacts to critical areas, the administrator shall notify the applicant
that a critical area study(ies) is required and the applicant shall submit
critical area reports which, at a minimum, address potential adverse impacts to
the critical areas and address how those potential impacts will be mitigated.
Required critical area reports governed by this chapter shall be prepared to
include a no net loss analysis and a discussion of mitigation sequencing as
governed by OMC Chapter 11-3. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-2-2: EXCEPTIONS TO REPORT REQUIREMENTS:
No critical areas report is required for the following development proposals:
   A.   Development that is exempt from the provisions of this chapter, as set
forth in section
11-1-4 of this title; and
   B.   A development permit for a lot that was subject to a previous critical
areas report; provided, that the previous critical areas report adequately
identified the probable adverse effects associated with the current development
proposal and identified mitigation to achieve no net loss of ecologic function,
as needed and as consistent with OMC 11-3-2. Amendments to the classification
and/or rating of a critical area or its buffer may amend the extent with which
previously studied development could adversely affect a critical area; in such
an event, a new critical area report will be required. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-
2025)
11-2-3: CONTENTS OF CRITICAL AREA REPORT:
   A.   Wetland Critical Area Report: Required wetland critical area report
shall be conducted by a qualified professional and shall include:
      1.   A map, of a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), of the surveyed wetland delineation as determined by following the
methods described in the approved federal "Wetland Delineation Manual" and
applicable regional supplements in accordance with Washington Administrative
Code (WAC) 173-22-035.
      2.   The site plan for the proposed activity at the same scale as the
wetland map, showing the extent of the proposed activity in relationship to the
surveyed wetland.
      3.   Discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development,
and specific measures designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the
proposal consistent with OMC
11-3-2.
      4.   The name and contact information of the applicant; the name,
qualifications, and contact information of the primary author(s) of the report;
a description of the proposal; identification of all local, state, and/or
federal wetland-related permit(s) required for the project; and a vicinity map
for the project.
      5.   A statement specifying the accuracy of the report and all
assumptions made and relied upon.
      6.   Documentation of any fieldwork performed on the site, including
field data sheets for delineations, rating system forms, baseline hydrologic
data, and similar documentation.
      7.   A description of the methodologies used to conduct the wetland
delineations, wetland ratings, and impact analyses, including references.
      8.   Identification and characterization of all critical areas, water
bodies, shorelines, floodplains, and buffers on or adjacent to the proposed
project area. For areas off the project site, estimate conditions within 300-
feet of the project boundaries using all reliable available information.
Existing wetlands shall be classified according to section
11-2-4 of this title. The written analysis must also classify wetlands
according to the "Washington State Wetland Rating System For Western
Washington" (ecology publication #23-06-029, or as revised).
       9.   A description of the proposed actions, including an estimation of
area of impacts to wetlands and buffers based on the field delineation, and an
analysis of site development alternatives.
      10.   A description of the potential impacts to the wetland(s) as a
result of the proposed project.
      11.   A description of how mitigation sequencing has been followed,
pursuant to OMC
11-3-3.
   B.   Landslide Critical Area Report: Required critical area reports shall be
prepared by a qualified professional.
      1.   A contour map of the proposed site, at a scale no smaller than one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'). The site and the extent of the
critical landslide hazard area as determined by the city's landslide hazard map
and the criteria in section
11-2-5 of this title shall be clearly delineated.
      2.   A discussion of surface and subsurface geologic conditions of the
site.
      3.   Review of site history regarding landslides.
      4.   Discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development on
the following elements of the subject site and adjoining properties, and
specific measures designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the
proposal consistent with OMC
11-3-2:
         a.   Slope stability;
         b.   Drainage;
         c.   Springs or seeps or any other surface water;
         d.   Existing vegetation.
      5.   Recommended surface water management controls during construction.
   C.   Erosion Hazard Area Critical Area Report: Required erosion hazard
critical area reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional.
      1.   A map, of a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), of the site and the extent of the critical erosion hazard area as
determined by the city's erosion hazard map and the criteria in section
11-2-5 of this title.
      2.   Review site history regarding erosion.
      3.   Identification of surface water management, erosion, and sediment
controls appropriate to the site and proposal.
      4.   Discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development,
and specific measures designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the
proposal consistent with OMC
11-3-2.
   D.   Seismic Hazard Area Critical Area Report: Required seismic hazard
critical area reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional.
      1.   A map, of a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), of the site and the extent of the seismic hazard area as
determined by the city's seismic hazard map and the criteria in section
11-2-5 of this title.
      2.   Discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development,
and specific measures designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the
proposal consistent with OMC 11-3-2.
   E.   Fish And Wildlife Habitat Conservation Area Critical Area Report:
Required fish and wildlife habitat conservation area critical area reports
shall be prepared by a qualified professional.
      1.   A map of a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), of the site and the extent of the fish and wildlife habitat
conservation area as determined by the city's priority habitat map and the
criteria in section
11-2-6 of this title.
      2.   Discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development,
and specific measures designed to mitigate for any potential adverse impacts of
the proposal consistent with OMC
11-3-2.
   F.   Critical Aquifer Recharge Area Critical Area Report: Required critical
aquifer recharge area reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional.
      1.   A map of a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), of the site and the extent of the high significance aquifer
recharge area as determined by the city's aquifer recharge map and the criteria
in section
11-2-7 of this title.
      2.   Discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development,
and specific measures designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the
proposal consistent with OMC
11-3-2. A map of Orting's critical aquifer recharge areas (AHBL, 2024) is on
file with the city and can be provided, on request. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-2-4: WETLANDS CLASSIFICATION:
Wetlands shall be rated (classified) as either category I, category II,
category III, or category IV according to the criteria found in the "Washington
State Wetland Rating System For Western Washington" (ecology publication #23-
06-029, or as revised). Wetland rating categories shall not change due to
illegal modifications to the wetland. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-2-5: GEOLOGIC HAZARD CLASSIFICATIONS:
Geologic hazard areas shall be classified according to the criteria in this
section.
   A.   Landslide Hazard Areas: Landslide hazard areas are classified as class
I, class II, or class III as follows:
      1.   Class I/High: Areas of greater than thirty percent (30%) slope with
soils designated by SCS as moderate, severe or very severe erosion hazard.
      2.   Class II/Moderate: Areas of fifteen percent (15%) to thirty percent
(30%) slopes with soils designated by the SCS as moderate or severe erosion
hazard.
      3.   Class III/Low: Areas with slopes less than fifteen percent (15%).
Class III/low hazard areas are not designated critical areas, and are exempt
from critical areas review.
   B.   Erosion Hazard Areas: Erosion hazard areas are classified as class I,
class II, or class III as follows:
      1.   Class I/High Hazard: All sites classified with soil types designated
as "severe" or "very severe" erosion hazard.
      2.   Class II/Moderate Hazard: All sites classified with soil types
designated as "moderate" erosion hazard.
      3.   Class III/Low Hazard: All sites classified with soil types
designated by the department of agriculture soil conservation service (SCS) as
having "no" or "slight" erosion hazard. Class III/low erosion hazard areas are
not designated critical areas, and are exempt from critical areas review.
   C.   Seismic Hazard Areas: Seismic hazard areas are as follows:
      All areas with lands designated as alluvium and recessional outwash
surficial geologic units (as identified in "Groundwater Occurrence And
Stratigraphy Of Unconsolidated Deposits, Central Pierce County, WA, Water
Supply Bulletin #22, Plates One And Two, U.S. Dept. Of Interior, Geological
Survey, Water Resources Division"), or slopes greater than thirty percent
(30%).
   D.   Volcanic Hazard Areas: The classification system for defining areas at
risk to volcanic hazards from Mount Rainier is as follows:
      1.   Class I/High Hazard: Valley floor areas in which there could be a
high degree of danger from mudflows of similar magnitude to the electron
mudflow (as identified in "map showing potential hazards from future eruptions
of Mount Rainier, WA, USGS").
      2.   Class II/Moderate Hazard: Valley floor areas which could be covered
by a mudflow as large as the electron mudflow, in valleys in which mudflows
have been relatively frequent (as identified in "map showing potential hazards
from future eruptions of Mount Rainier, WA, USGS").
      3.   Class III/Low Hazard: Valley floor areas which could be covered by a
mudflow of similar magnitude to the electron mudflow, in valleys where mudflows
have been relatively infrequent, and areas in the other valleys which might be
subject to flooding (as identified in "map showing potential hazards from
future eruptions of Mount Rainier, WA, USGS"). Class III/low volcanic hazard
areas are not designated critical areas, and are exempt from critical areas
review. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-2-6: FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS CLASSIFICATION:
All of the following habitat areas are classified critical areas:
   A.   Areas With Primary Association: Areas with which state or federally
designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary
association.
   B.   Priority Habitats: State priority habitats and areas associated with
state priority species, including, but limited to, riparian areas associated
with waterways.
   C.   Habitats And Species Of Local Importance: Habitats and species of local
importance are those designated by the city, including those habitats and
species that, due to their population status or sensitivity to habitat
manipulation, warrant protection through possible retention or recovery of
connectivity of habitat features.
   D.   Waters Of The State: Waters of the state includes lakes, rivers, ponds,
streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters, and all other surface
waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington, as
per RCW 90.48.020.
   E.   Waters Planted With Fish: Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted
with game fish by a governmental or tribal entity.
   F.   Those Areas As Determined By Best Available Science: Best available
science shall be consulted when determining critical areas. In addition to any
guidance determined in the city's application of WAC 365-195, the following
resources can be used by the city to determine critical areas subject to this
title:
      1.   Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) Priority Habitats
and Species list, map, and management recommendations;
      2.   Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Natural Heritage Program;
      3.   DNR's Aquatic Resources Program;
      4.   WDFW's Aquatic Habitat Guidelines for Freshwater Projects;
      5.   Puget Sound Kelp Conservation and Recovery Plan (May 2020, or as
revised);
      6.   WDFW's Threatened and Endangered Species List;
      7.   U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Information for Planning and
Consultation Resources list; and
      8.   Puget Sound Partnership's Salmon Recovery website for Water Resource
Inventory Areas (WRIA) Plans in Puget Sound. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-2-7: CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE CLASSIFICATION:
Critical aquifer recharge areas are classified as high, moderate, or low
significance aquifer recharge areas according to the following criteria:
   A.   High Significance Aquifer Recharge Areas: High significance aquifer
recharge areas are areas with slopes of less than fifteen percent (15%) that
are underlain by coarse alluvium or sand and gravel.
   B.   Moderate Significance Aquifer Recharge Areas: Moderate significance
aquifer recharge areas are:
      1.   Areas with slopes of less than fifteen percent (15%) that are
underlain by fine alluvium, silt, clay, glacial till, or deposits from the
electron mudflow; and
      2.   Areas with slopes of fifteen percent (15%) to thirty percent (30%)
that are underlain by sand and gravel. (1973 Code § 15.20.050)
   C.   Low Significance Aquifer Recharge Areas: Low significance aquifer
recharge areas are:
      1.   Areas with slopes of fifteen percent (15%) to thirty percent (30%)
that are underlain by silt, clay, or glacial till; and
      2.   Areas with slopes greater than thirty percent (30%). Low
significance aquifer recharge areas are not designated critical areas and are
exempt from critical areas review requirements. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
CHAPTER 3
NO NET LOSS, MITIGATION SEQUENCING, AND BEST AVAILABLE SCIENCE
SECTION:
11-3-1: No Net Loss Of Ecologic Impact
11-3-2: Mitigation Sequencing
11-3-3: Best Available Science
11-3-1: NO NET LOSS OF ECOLOGIC IMPACT:
In no instance shall development, alterations, or activities occur in any
critical area or its buffer that causes harm to the function or value of the
critical area or its buffer. Any harm caused to critical areas or their buffer
shall be fully mitigated so that no net loss of the critical area or its buffer
occurs. Compensatory mitigation may be necessary to achieve no net loss of
critical area functions or values in instances where avoidance or minimization
of impacts to the critical area is infeasible or insufficient to fully mitigate
harm to the critical area function or value. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-3-2: MITIGATION SEQUENCING:
Alteration to critical areas may be allowed when all adverse impacts to
functions and values of the critical area can be shown to be fully mitigated.
The applicant should mitigate for impacts following the sequence of mitigation
set forth in WAC 197-11-768. Mitigation sufficient to achieve no net loss of
critical area function or value may include a combination of mitigation
measures following the sequence of mitigation, and may occur concurrently.
(Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-3-3: BEST AVAILABLE SCIENCE:
In determining an application's compliance with the provisions of this section,
the City shall rely on the best available science (BAS). Methods and practices
for determining whether information is the BAS, obtaining BAS, including BAS in
developing policies and development regulations, addressing inadequate
scientific information, and demonstrating that special consideration has been
given to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance
anadromous fisheries shall align with the guidance set forth in WAC 365-195, or
as revised. (Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
CHAPTER 4
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CRITICAL AREAS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Wetlands
11-4-2: Landslide Hazard Areas
11-4-3: Erosion Hazard Areas
11-4-4: Seismic Hazard Areas
11-4-5: Volcanic Hazard Areas
11-4-6: Fish And Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas
11-4-7:Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas
11-4-8: Flood Hazard Areas (Rep. by Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-1: WETLANDS:
   A.   Allowed Activities Within Wetlands: The following uses shall be allowed
within a wetland, provided they are conducted using best management practices:
      1.   Outdoor non-motorized recreational activities, including fishing,
birdwatching, hiking, swimming, and canoeing.
      2.   The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to
natural reproduction of such crops.
      3.   Existing and ongoing agricultural activities, as defined in this
chapter.
      4.   The maintenance of drainage ditches.
      5.   Nature trails. Trails in wetlands or buffers should be limited to
permeable surfaces no more than five feet (5') in width for pedestrian use
only. Trails should be located only in the outer twenty five percent (25%) of a
wetland buffer, and should be located to avoid removal of significant trees.
      6.   The installation of utility lines, provided that no other location
is feasible and utilities do not degrade the function and values of such
wetlands.
   B.   Allowed Activities Within Wetland Buffers: In addition to those
activities allowed in subsection A of this section, the following activities
are allowed within wetland buffers; provided, that buffer impacts are minimized
and that disturbed areas are immediately restored:
      1.   Normal maintenance and repair of existing serviceable structures or
improved areas. Maintenance and repair does not include modifications that
change the character, scope or size of the original structure or improved area.
      2.   Stormwater management facilities, limited to stormwater dispersion
outfalls and bioswales, may be allowed within the outer twenty five percent
(25%) of the buffer of category III and IV wetlands only, provided that no
other location is feasible and facilities do not degrade the function and
values of such wetlands.
   C.   Required Buffers:
      1.   Buffer Requirements: The following table establishes the standard
buffer width that shall apply to each wetland category, depending on the
intensity of the potential land use on the upland side of the buffer and the
habitat score of the wetland as determined on the 2014 Western Washington
ration form, or as revised, completed by a qualified professional. The city may
allow buffer averaging as set forth in subsection C3 of this section.
WETLAND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
Overall        Wetland         Intensity Land Use On
Wetland Rating Characteristics The Upland Side Of The Buffer
                               High1 Moderate2 Low3
WETLAND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
Overall        Wetland                            Intensity Land Use On
Wetland Rating Characteristics                    The Upland Side Of The Buffer
                                                  High1 Moderate2 Low3
Category I     Habitat score of 8 - 9 points      300'  225'      150'
Category I     Habitat score of 6 - 7 points      150'  110'      75'
               Water quality score of 8 - 9
Category I     points and a habitat score of less 100'  75'       50'
               than 6 points
               Wetlands that do not meet the
Category I     characteristics described above    100'  75'       50'
               for category I wetlands
Category II    Habitat score of 8 - 9 points      300'  225'      150'
Category II    Habitat score of 6 - 7 points      150'  110'      75'
               Water quality score of 8 - 9
Category II    points and a habitat score of less 100'  75'       50'
               than 6 points
               Wetlands that do not meet the
Category II    characteristics described above    100'  75'       50'
               for category II wetlands
Category III   Habitat score of 8 - 9 points      300'  225'      150'
Category III   Habitat score of 6 - 7 points      150'  110'      75'
Category III   Habitat score of 3 - 5 points      80'   60'       40'
Category IV    Scores for all 3 basic functions   50'   40'       25'
               are less than 16 points
 
   Notes:
      1.    High intensity land uses include commercial, industrial, and retail
developments; institutional use; residential developments at more than 1 unit
per acre; high intensity recreation areas (golf course, ball fields, etc.); and
solar farms.
      2.    Moderate intensity land uses include residential developments at
less than 1 unit per acre; moderate intensity open space (parks with biking,
jogging, etc.); and paved trails and utility corridors with maintenance roads.
      3.    Low intensity land uses include low intensity open space (hiking,
birdwatching, preservation of natural resources, etc.); and unpaved trails and
utility corridors without maintenance roads.
      2.   Removal Of Vegetation Within The Buffer: Removal or alteration of
existing vegetation in the buffer areas shall be prohibited or limited as
necessary to preserve the wetland. Removal of hazard trees, as determined by a
qualified arborist who has evaluated and determined the subject trees to be
hazardous to life, limb, or property on the subject property or surrounding
properties is also allowed, provided that in any given year, no more than one
percent (1%) of trees within the continuous critical area is demonstrated to be
affected by the tree removal. Any disturbance of the buffer area shall be
replanted with a diverse plant community of native vegetation appropriate for
the site and approved by the city.
      3.   Buffer Averaging: The city administrator may allow modification of
the standard wetland buffer width in accordance with an approved critical area
report and the best available science on a case by case basis by averaging
buffer widths. Averaging of buffer widths may only be allowed where a qualified
wetlands professional demonstrates that:
         a.   It will not reduce wetland functions or values;
         b.   The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing
physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils,
or vegetation, and the wetland would benefit from a wider buffer in places and
would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;
         c.   The total area contained in the buffer area after averaging is no
less than that which would be contained within the standard buffer; and
         d.   The buffer width is not reduced to less than seventy five percent
(75%) of the standard width.
   D.   Wetland Mitigation And Restoration:
      1.   Mitigation: All adverse impacts to wetlands shall be mitigated to
achieve no net loss of ecologic function, consistent with OMC
11-3-1. Mitigation actions by an applicant or property owner shall occur in
accordance with OMC
11-3-2. If mitigation is required for the proposed project to achieve no net
loss of ecologic function, the applicant shall submit a Mitigation Plan
prepared by a qualified professional to the city. The Mitigation Plan shall
include the following, at minimum:
         a.   Scaled mitigation plan sheets containing: mapped areas of
existing and proposed wetlands and buffers; location of proposed compensation
actions; existing topography with 2-foot contour intervals if grading is
proposed; cross-sections of existing and proposed site conditions; proposed
planting plan including species, spacing of plants, total number of each
species, and timing of installation; and any areas proposed for wetland buffer
width averaging.
         b.   The name, qualifications, and contact information of the primary
author(s) of the mitigation plan; a description of the development proposal; a
summary of the impacts and proposed compensation concept; and a vicinity map.
         c.   Description of how the development project has been designed to
avoid, minimize, or reduce adverse impacts to wetlands.
         d.   Description of the existing wetland and buffer areas proposed to
be altered. Include acreage or square footage, vegetation and landscaping,
functions, and surrounding land uses.
         e.   Description of the compensatory mitigation site, including
location and rationale for selection. Include an assessment of existing
conditions including acreage or square footage, vegetation and landscaping,
functions, and surrounding land uses.
         f.   A description of the proposed actions for compensation of wetland
and buffer areas affected by the project. Include overall goals of the proposed
mitigation, including description of the targeted functions and expected
categories of wetlands.
         g.   A description of the proposed mitigation construction activities
and timing of activities.
         h.   Performance standards (measurable standards for years post-
installation) for wetland and buffer areas, a monitoring schedule, and
maintenance schedule, and actions proposed by year.
         i.   A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect
wetlands after the development project has been implemented, including proposed
monitoring and maintenance programs.
         j.   A bond estimate for the entire compensatory mitigation project,
including the following elements: site preparation, plant materials,
construction materials, installation and oversight, maintenance at least twice
per year for up to five (5) years, monitoring field work and reporting,
contingency actions for a maximum of five (5) years, and removal of all non-
natural site implements (e.g., irrigation equipment, construction fencing,
plant protectors, weed barrier fabric) by the end of the monitoring period.
         k.   Proof of establishment of Notice on Title for the remaining
wetlands and buffers on the development project site (if any).
      2.   Monitoring Program And Contingency Plan: A monitoring program shall
be implemented by the applicant to determine the success of the mitigation and
any necessary actions to achieve the objectives of the mitigation plan. The
monitoring program shall also include annual monitoring of the mitigation area
by a qualified professional for five (5) years, unless determined otherwise by
the city administrator.
         a.   A contingency plan shall be established for indemnity in the
event that the mitigation project is inadequate or fails. A performance and
maintenance bond or other acceptable security device or financial guarantee is
required to ensure the applicant's compliance with the terms of the mitigation
and monitoring plan. The amount of the performance and maintenance bond shall
equal one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost of the mitigation
project for a minimum of five (5) years. The bond may be reduced in proportion
to work successfully completed over the period of the bond at the discretion of
the city. The bonding period shall coincide with the monitoring period.
         b.   Monitoring programs prepared to comply with this section shall
reflect the following guidelines:
         (1)   Scientific procedures based on best available science shall be
used to establish the success or failure of the project.
         (2)   For vegetation determinations, permanent sampling points shall
be established.
         (3)   Vegetative success shall, at a minimum, equal eighty percent
(80%) survival of planted trees and shrubs and eighty percent (80%) cover of
desirable understory or emergent plant species at the end of the required
monitoring period. Additional standards for vegetative success, including, but
not limited to, minimum survival standards following the first growing season,
may be required after consideration of a report prepared by a qualified
professional.
         (4)   Monitoring reports on the current status of the mitigation
project shall be submitted to the city against the schedule set forth in
subsection OMC
11-4-1(D)(2)(b)(5).
         (5)   The reports are to be prepared by a qualified professional and
reviewed by the city or a consultant retained by the city and should include
monitoring information on wildlife, vegetation, water quality, water flow,
stormwater storage and conveyance, and existing or potential degradation, as
applicable, and shall be produced on the following schedule: at the time of
construction; thirty (30) days after planting; early in the growing season of
the first year; at the end of the growing season of the first year; twice
during the second year; and annually thereafter.
         (6)   Monitoring programs shall be established for a minimum of five
(5) years.
         (7)   Failures identified in the mitigation project shall be replaced
to meet the minimum vegetative success rate set forth in OMC
11-4-1(D)(2)(b)(3).
         (8)   Dead or undesirable vegetation shall be replaced with
appropriate plantings to meet the minimum vegetative success rate set forth in
OMC
11-4-1(D)(2)(b)(3).
         (9)   Damage caused by erosion, settling, or other geomorphological
processes shall be repaired.
         (10)   The mitigation project shall be redesigned (if necessary) and
the new design shall be implemented and monitored.
      3.   Mitigation Ratios:
         a.   Equivalent Areas: Where wetland development is permitted by the
city, the applicant shall create or enhance wetland areas to compensate for
wetland losses. Equivalent areas shall be determined according to acreage,
function, type, location, timing factors and projected success of restoration
or creation.
         b.   Acreage Replacement Ratio: When creating or enhancing wetlands,
the following acreage replacement ratios shall be used where the first number
specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second number specifies
the acreage of wetlands altered:
 
                      Wetland Creation                  Wetland Preservation or
Wetland Type          Replacement Ratio  Rehabilitation Enhancement Ratio
                      (Area)                            (Area)
Category I: Bogs,     Not considered     Case by case   Case by case
natural heritage site possible
Category I: Mature    6:1                12:1           24:1
forested
Category I: Based on  4:1                8:1            16:1
functions
Category II           3:1                6:1            12:1
Category III          2:1                4:1            8:1
Category IV           1.5:1              3:1            6:1
 
         c.   Increased Replacement Ratios: The city administrator may increase
the ratios under the following circumstances:
         (1)   Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed
restoration or creation;
         (2)   A significant period of time will lapse between impact and
replication of wetland functions;
         (3)   Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category wetland or
reduced functions relative to the wetland being impacted;
         (4)   The impact was an unauthorized impact; or
         (5)   Where mitigation is to occur off site.
      4.   Restoration: Restoration is required when a wetland or its buffer
has been altered in violation of this title. The following minimum performance
standards shall be met for the restoration of a wetland, provided that if it
can be demonstrated by the applicant that greater functional and habitat values
can be obtained, these standards may be modified:
         a.   The original wetland configuration should be replicated including
depth, width, and length at the original location;
         b.   The original soil types and configuration shall be replicated;
         c.   The wetland and buffer areas shall be replanted with native
vegetation which replicates the original in species, sizes and densities; and
         d.   The original functional values shall be restored, including water
quality and wildlife habitat functions.
      5.   Wetland Mitigation Actions: Mitigation shall be in the same drainage
basin as the altered wetland. Wetland mitigation actions shall be conducted in
the same subbasin unless a higher level of ecological functioning would result
from an alternate approach.
      6.   Wetland Mitigation Banks:
         a.   Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as
compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:
         (1)   The bank is certified under state rules;
         (2)   The city administrator determines that the wetland mitigation
bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and
         (3)   The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and
conditions of the certified bank instrument.
         b.   Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be
consistent with replacement ratios specified in the certified bank instrument.
         c.   Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to
compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the
certified bank instrument. In some cases, the service area of the bank may
include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland
functions.
      7.   In Lieu Fee: To aid in the implementation of off site mitigation,
the city may develop an in lieu fee program. This program shall be developed
and approved through a public process and be consistent with federal rules,
state policy on in lieu fee mitigation, and state water quality regulations. An
approved in lieu fee program sells compensatory mitigation credits to
permittees whose obligation to provide compensatory mitigation is then
transferred to the in lieu program sponsor, a governmental or nonprofit natural
resource management entity. Credits from an approved in lieu fee program may be
used when subsections D7a through D7f of this subsection apply:
         a.   The approval authority determines that it would provide
environmentally appropriate compensation for the proposed impacts.
         b.   The mitigation will occur on a site identified using the site
selection and prioritization process in the approved in lieu fee program
instrument.
         c.   The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and
conditions of the approved in lieu fee program instrument.
         d.   Land acquisition and initial physical and biological improvements
of the mitigation site must be completed within three (3) years of the credit
sale.
         e.   Projects using in lieu fee credits shall have debits associated
with the proposed impacts calculated by the applicant's qualified professional
using the method consistent with the credit assessment method specified in the
approved instrument for the in lieu fee program.
         f.   Credits from an approved in lieu fee program may be used to
compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the
approved in lieu fee instrument.
   E.   Transfer Of Development Rights: If a site contains a regulated wetland
and/or buffer, a property owner may transfer residential development rights
from the regulated wetland and/or buffer to another site or sites within the
city. The transfer of development rights (TDR) shall meet the following
criteria:
      1.   The idea of transfer of development rights is based upon the legal
concept of property law that the right to develop real estate is one of the
"bundle of rights" included in fee simple ownership of land. Fee simple
ownership of real estate allows the owner to sell, lease, or trade any one or
all of the "bundle of rights" to his property which includes the right to use,
lease, sell, or abandon the property or any of its components of ownership not
retained by a previous owner such as mineral, oil, gas, air, and/or development
rights. These rights of ownership are subject to the limitation and legislative
powers of the local government.
      2.   A development right is a simple extension of the rights normally
associated with land ownership. When legally established, a development right
has value separate from the land itself. It can be subject to reasonable
regulation by local government under the police power. The development right
can be transferred by the owner, by means of gift or sale, to another property.
The landowner may sell the development rights and still retain the title to the
land and the right to use the surface of the land on a limited basis.
      3.   The planning commission shall consider the request for TDR at the
public hearing for the land use proposal for the receiving parcel.
      4.   To assure that the sending parcel is adequately protected, a
restriction shall be placed on the deed which expressly prohibits all regulated
activities within the wetland and/or buffer. This restriction shall be required
regardless of the number of dwelling units for which the development rights are
transferred. A memorandum of agreement (MOA) between the applicant and the city
shall be recorded with the county auditor and city clerk. The MOA shall refer
to all deed restrictions related to the property.
      5.   If the wetland and/or buffer is degraded as a result of human or
agricultural activity in violation of this code, the matter shall be addressed
by the city administrator or the code enforcement officer to remedy the code
violation as per section
11-5-1 of this chapter.
      6.   Except for required enhancement, the buffer and wetland shall remain
in a natural condition. This shall be indicated by a note on the face of any
final plat, final site plan, or other final approval for activity on the
sending site. In the case of a formal subdivision, the wetland and buffer shall
be placed in a separate tract.
      7.   TDR shall not exceed the number of dwelling units which would be
allowed on the sending parcel according to the zoning designation of the
sending parcel, if there were no development restrictions tied to wetland
areas. This number of dwelling units shall be equal to the number of dwelling
units that could be produced on the wetland and/or buffer if the sending parcel
were subdivided in terms of the minimum requirements of the underlying zone as
evidenced by a preliminary plan sketch.
      8.   TDR may go to more than one receiving parcel; however, this shall
not increase the total number of transferred dwelling units which are allowed.
      9.   The increased number of dwelling units on the receiving parcel shall
not be more than twenty five percent (25%) above the number of dwelling units
allowed according to the zoning designation on the receiving parcel(s).
      10.   TDR shall be allowed only if the land use proposal on the receiving
parcel(s) is designed in such a way that the increased density:
         a.   Is consistent with any land use plan associated with the
receiving parcel and with goals, purposes, and intents of the zoning
designation of the receiving parcel; and
         b.   Is compatible with the existing and likely future developments in
the vicinity; and
         c.   Adequately addresses infrastructure, natural and other
constraints, and does not result in significant environmental impacts.
      11.   TDR shall not be approved until final plat approval or other final
approval for the receiving parcel is granted by the city council. (Ord. 2016-
985, 7-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-2: LANDSLIDE HAZARD AREAS:
Development proposals on sites containing class I and class II landslide
hazards shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Buffer Requirement: A buffer shall be established from all edges of
landslide hazard areas. The size of the buffer shall be determined by the city
administrator to eliminate or minimize the risk of property damage, death, or
injury resulting from landslides caused in whole or part by the development,
based upon review of and concurrence with a critical landslide areas study. The
buffer shall be equal to the height of the slope or fifty feet (50'), whichever
is greater. The buffer may be reduced when a qualified professional
demonstrates to the city administrator's satisfaction that the reduction will
adequately protect the proposed development, adjacent developments, and uses
and the subject critical area. The buffer may be increased where the city
administrator determines a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage
to proposed and existing development.
   B.   Alterations: Alterations of a landslide hazard area and/or buffer may
only occur for activities for which a critical areas report is submitted and
certifies that:
      1.   The development will not increase surface water discharge or
sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;
      2.   The development will not decrease slope stability on adjacent
properties; and
      3.   Such alterations will not adversely impact other critical areas.
   C.   Impervious Surface Ratio: Impervious surfaces are defined in Title 9,
Chapter 5A, Section 4 of this code. The maximum impervious surface ratios for
class I and class II landslide hazard areas are set forth in table 2 of this
section.
   D.   Native Vegetation: The minimum percentage of native vegetation, as
defined in chapter 1 of this title, that must be retained on sites including
class I or class II landslide hazard areas is set forth in table 2 of this
section.
TABLE 2
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AND NATIVE VEGETATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LANDSLIDE HAZARD
AREAS
 
Landslide Hazard Class Maximum Impervious Surface Minimum Percentage Of Native
                       Ratio                      Vegetation Retained
      Class II   0.30                       65%
      Class I    0.20                       75%
 
   E.   Development Design:
      1.   Structures and improvements shall be clustered to retain as much
open space as possible and to preserve the natural topographic features of the
site.
      2.   Structures and improvements shall conform to the natural contour of
the slope.
      3.   Structures and improvements shall be located to preserve the most
critical portion of the site and its natural landforms and vegetation.
      4.   The use of retaining walls which allow the maintenance of existing
natural slope area is preferred over graded artificial slopes.
   F.   Additional Standards For Class I Landslide Hazards:
      1.   Alteration of class I landslide hazard areas is permitted only if
the development proposal can be designed so that the landslide hazard to the
project and the adjacent property is eliminated or mitigated and the
development proposal on that site is certified by a geotechnical engineer
licensed in the state of Washington.
      2.   Development or alteration shall be prohibited on parcels with a lot
slope of greater than forty percent (40%). These parcels shall be eligible for
transfer of development rights as set subsection
11-4-1(E) of this code. (Ord. 806, 6-30-2005; amd. Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; Ord.
2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-3: EROSION HAZARD AREAS:
Alteration of a site containing a critical erosion hazard area shall meet the
following requirements:
   A.   All alteration proposals shall submit an erosion control plan
consistent with this section prior to receiving approval.
   B.   Clearing on erosion hazard areas is allowed from April 1 to November 1
only.
   C.   Only that clearing necessary to install temporary sedimentation and
erosion control measures shall occur prior to clearing for roadways or
utilities.
   D.   Clearing limits for roads, water, wastewater, and stormwater utilities,
and temporary erosion control facilities shall be marked in the field and
approved by Orting prior to any alteration of existing native vegetation.
   E.   The authorized clearing for roads and utilities shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish project specific engineering designs and shall remain
within approved rights of way.
   F.   All trees and understory shall be retained on lots or parcels provided
that understory damaged during approved clearing operations may be pruned or
replaced. (1973 Code § 15.24.030; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-4: SEISMIC HAZARD AREAS:
Development proposals on sites containing mapped seismic hazard areas may make
alterations to a seismic hazard area only when the applicant demonstrates and
Orting concludes that:
   A.   Evaluation of site specific subsurface conditions shows that the site
is not located in a seismic hazard area; or
   B.   Mitigation is implemented which renders the proposed development as
safe as if it were not located in a seismic hazard area, as certified by a
qualified professional licensed by the state of Washington. (1973 Code §
15.24.040; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-5: VOLCANIC HAZARD AREAS:
   A.   Title Notification:
      1.   All title documents for existing and proposed parcels located within
both the Orting city boundary and those areas designated as class I or class II
volcanic hazard areas, as identified in subsection
11-2-5(D) of this title shall contain the following notice:
      This property is located in an area which may be subject to mudflows
caused by seismic or volcanic activity and originating on Mount Rainier.
   B.   Public Facility Notification:
      1.   Public facilities located both within the Orting city boundary and
those areas designated as class I or class II volcanic hazard areas, as defined
in subsection 11-2-5(D) of this title shall provide the following notification
as part of their admittance or registration agreements:
      This facility is located in an area which may be subject to mudflows
caused by seismic or volcanic activity and originating on Mount Rainier.
      2.   These public facilities include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Hospitals and other medical facilities having surgery and
emergency treatment areas;
         b.   Buildings for colleges or adult education schools;
         c.   Medical facilities with fifty (50) or more resident incapacitated
persons. (1973 Code § 15.24.050; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-6: FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS:
   A.   Performance Standards: All development sites containing wetlands shall
conform to the wetland development performance standards set forth in section
11-4-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Buffers: All development sites adjacent to the Puyallup or Carbon
Rivers shall retain a one hundred fifty foot (150') buffer of native vegetation
measured from the ordinary high water mark of the river.
   C.   Nonfish Species: Where nonfish species have been classified as
endangered or threatened by the department of fish and wildlife or applicable
state or federal agency, the applicant shall provide a special study
identifying the required habitat and recommending appropriate buffers based on
the best available science.
   D.   Anadromous Fish:
      1.   All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in
water bodies used by anadromous fish or in areas that affect such water bodies
shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of
anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, adhering to the
following standards:
         a.   Activities shall be timed to occur only during the overlapping
allowable work window as designated by the Washington department of fish and
wildlife (WDFW) and the United States Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) for the
applicable species, unless authorization to work outside these allowable work
windows is provided by either WDFW or the Corps:
         b.   An alternative alignment or location for the activity is not
feasible;
         c.   The activity is designed so that it will not degrade the
functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas and will ensure
no net loss of critical area functions or values;
         d.   Shoreline erosion control measures shall be designed to use
bioengineering methods or soft armoring techniques according to an approved
critical area report;
         e.   Any impacts to the functions or values of the habitat
conservation area are mitigated in accordance with an approved critical area
report; and
         f.   Best available science is consulted and implemented in accordance
with WAG 365-190, as per OMC
11-3-3.
      2.   Man-made structures that prevent the migration of salmonids shall
not be allowed in the portion of water bodies currently or historically used by
anadromous fish.
      3.   Fills, when authorized by the adopted shoreline master program,
shall not adversely impact anadromous fish or their habitat or shall mitigate
any unavoidable impacts, and shall only be allowed for a water dependent use.
(Ord. 2016-985, 7-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-7: CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS:
   A.   Requirement For Hydrogeologic Assessment: The following uses of land
shall require a hydrogeologic assessment of the proposed site if the site is
located within a high significance aquifer recharge area:
      1.   Hazardous substance processing or handling.
      2.   Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility.
      3.   Disposal of on site sewage for subdivisions, short plats, and
commercial and industrial sites.
      4.   Feedlots.
      5.   Landfills.
      6.   Sludge land application sites over forty (40) acres or with an
annual application rate of greater than two (2) dry tons of sludge per acre.
   B.   Contents Of The Hydrogeologic Assessment:
      1.   The hydrogeologic assessment shall be submitted by a geotechnical
engineer licensed by the state of Washington.
      2.   The hydrogeologic assessment must show that the use does not pose a
threat to the aquifer system and that the proposed use will not cause
contaminants to enter the aquifer.
      3.   Uses requiring a hydrogeologic assessment may be conditioned or
denied based upon the city's evaluation of the hydrogeologic assessment. Any
project denied a permit based on the city's evaluation shall receive a written
explanation of the reason(s) for the denial and an explanation of the measures
required, if any, to comply with these regulations.
      4.   The hydrogeologic assessment shall include, but is not limited to:
         a.   Information sources.
         b.   Geologic setting.
         c.   Background water quality.
         d.   Location and depth to perched water tables.
         e.   Recharge potential of the facility site.
         f.   Groundwater flow direction and gradient.
         g.   Currently available data on wells within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the site.
         h.   Currently available data on springs within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the site.
         i.   Surface water location and recharge potential.
         j.   Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the
groundwater resource.
         k.   Other information as may be required by the city. (1973 Code §
15.24.070; amd. Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-4-8: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
CHAPTER 5
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-5-1: Enforcement; Penalties
11-5-2: Appeals
11-5-1: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES:
   A.   Site Inspections: The city administrator or designee, and the
designated code enforcement officer(s), are authorized to make site inspections
and take such actions as reasonably necessary to enforce this title, including
informing of violations under this chapter to other local and state agencies. A
city representative shall present proper credentials and make a reasonable
effort to contact any property owner before entering onto private property.
   B.   Order Remedial Action: The city shall have the authority to order
abatement or mitigation measures to compensate for the destruction or
degradation of critical area lands at the owner's expense, and may force
compliance by suit filed in a court having jurisdiction and through such other
remedial actions as are available to the city.
   C.   Penalty; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this title, any
provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, a civil regulatory
order issued pursuant to this title, or any provision or condition of a project
permit or approval issued or granted pursuant to this title, shall constitute a
violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, “Code Enforcement,” and 4,
“Penalties,” of this code. Any act or omission by a person responsible for
compliance that constitutes a failure to obtain a project permit or approval
required pursuant to this title, shall constitute a violation and shall be
subject to enforcement as a civil infraction or civil violation pursuant to
title 1, chapters 13, "Code Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code.
   D.   Penalty; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful to wilfully fail to comply
with any provision of this title, wilfully fail to comply with any provision of
a rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, wilfully fail to comply with a
civil regulatory order issued pursuant to this title, wilfully fail to obtain a
permit or approval required by this title, wilfully fail to comply with a
provision of a project permit or approval issued under authority of this title.
Such wilful failure shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd.
Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
11-5-2: APPEALS:
Any decision to approve, condition or deny a development or alteration proposal
based on the requirements of this title may be appealed in accordance with the
procedures and standards applicable to the subject development or alteration
proposed set forth in Title 15 of this code. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord.
2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
CHAPTER 6
SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-1143, 6-30-2025)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Authority
12-1-4: Scope
12-1-5: Exemptions
12-1-6: Effect Of Filing Completed Application
12-1-7: [Reserved]
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ORTING SUBDIVISION CODE. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
The general purposes of this title are:
   A. To regulate the subdivision of land;
   B.   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare in accordance
with standards established by the state including the growth management  act 1
and boundaries and  plats 2 ;
   C.   To promote effective use of land;
   D.   To facilitate adequate provision for water, sewage, utilities,
drainage, parks and recreation areas, sites for schools and school grounds and
other public requirements;
   E.   To provide for proper ingress and egress;
   F.   To provide for the expeditious review and approval of proposed
subdivisions which conform to zoning standards and local plans, minimum
development standards and policies;
   G.   To require that land subdivisions are uniformly monumented and are
conveyed by accurate legal description. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 36.70A et seq.
2 2. RCW 58.17 et seq.
12-1-3: AUTHORITY:
The city council delegates the responsibility for making final determinations
on boundary line adjustments and short plats to the administrator. The city
council shall have the authority to make final decisions on preliminary plats,
final plats, preliminary planned unit developments (PUDs), binding site plans,
and final PUDs. The planning commission shall conduct public hearings and
submit recommendations for approval or denial of preliminary plats, binding
site plans, and PUDs to the city council for final decisions and shall make
final decisions on final plat vacations and alterations. Further description of
the land subdivision permit authorities is in title 15, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-1-4: SCOPE:
Any division, redivision, platting, subdivision, or any division of land
containing a dedication of any part thereof to any public purpose (such as a
public street or a highway), shall comply with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-1-5: EXEMPTIONS:
This Title shall not apply to divisions and activities described in Revised
Code of Washington 58.17.040; provided, that in order to determine whether a
boundary line adjustment meets the requirements for an exempt action, approval
must be received as set forth in section
12-3-3  of this title. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-1-6: EFFECT OF FILING COMPLETED APPLICATION:
   A.   Ordinances In Effect: A proposed division or subdivision of land, as
defined in chapter 2 of this title, shall be considered under the subdivision
code; and zoning or other land use control ordinances in effect at the time
that a fully completed application for preliminary plat approval or short plat
approval of the subdivision has been submitted.
   B.   Restrictive Conditions Imposed: The limitations imposed by this section
shall not restrict conditions imposed under the state environmental policy act
("SEPA"), Revised Code of Washington chapter 43.21C, and the city's SEPA
regulations set forth in title 15, chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-1-7: [RESERVED]:
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: General Provisions
12-2-2: A
12-2-3: B
12-2-4: C
12-2-5: D
12-2-6: E
12-2-7: F
12-2-8: G
12-2-9: H
12-2-10: I
12-2-11: J
12-2-12: K
12-2-13: L
12-2-14: M
12-2-15: N
12-2-16: O
12-2-17: P
12-2-18: Q
12-2-19: R
12-2-20: S
12-2-21: T
12-2-22: U
12-2-23: V
12-2-24: W
12-2-25: X
12-2-26: Y
12-2-27: Z
12-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
As used in this title, unless otherwise specifically stated, the words or
phrases defined in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below. (Ord.
792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-2: A:
 ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator, chief supervisory staff person or his/
her designee.
ALLEY: A minor public right of way used primarily for vehicular service access
to the rear or side of properties.
APPLICANT: A person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity seeking
development approval from the city by submitting an application for any of the
activities covered by these regulations.
ARTERIAL: A street or highway of great continuity which serves or is intended
to provide capacity for fast or heavy traffic. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-3: B:
BINDING SITE PLAN: An alternative method of land division for the sale or lease
of commercial or industrial properties, condominiums and manufactured home
parks that is more flexible than traditional subdivision procedures.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well defined and fixed
boundaries.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: The adjustment of a boundary line between existing
lots which results in no more lots than existed before the adjustment.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof for the shelter of persons or property.
BUILDING AREA, BUILDING SITE: An area within a lot upon which a building to
accommodate the principal use of the lot could be practicably built, bound by
the setbacks.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The total ground coverage of all buildings, structures, roof
overhangs, and eaves measured from the outside edges, external walls,
supporting members or roof edges.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance
between the property line and the building. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
830, 6-28-2006; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-4: C:
CITY: The city of Orting.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Orting.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The Director of the City of Orting’s Department
of Community Development.
CLOSED RECORD HEARING: A hearing, conducted by a single hearing body or officer
authorized by the local government to conduct such hearings, that creates the
local government's record through testimony and submission of evidence and
information, under procedures prescribed by the local government by ordinance
or resolution. A closed record hearing may be held prior to a local
government's decision on a project permit to be known as a "closed record
predecision hearing." A closed record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be
known as a "closed record appeal hearing," if no closed record predecision
hearing has been held on the project permit.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Orting comprehensive plan adopted in 1996, as amended.
CRITICAL AREAS: Areas of environmental sensitivity, which include the following
areas and ecosystems: a) wetlands; b) areas with a critical recharging effect
on aquifers used for potable water; c) fish and wildlife habitat conservation
areas; d) frequently flooded areas; and e) "geologically hazardous areas", as
defined by title 11 of this code.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way, ten feet (10') or more in width between
property lines, which provides pedestrian access to adjacent properties.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street intersecting with another street at one end and
terminated by a vehicular turnaround at the other end. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-5: D:
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land or rights in land by its owner
for any general and public use, reserving to himself or herself no other rights
than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public
use to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be
evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or short
plat showing the dedication thereon; and the acceptance by the public shall be
evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city.
DESIGN STANDARDS: Dimensional and other quantitative standards, including, but
not limited to, lot sizes and dimensions, setbacks, building placement and
design requirements for improvements such as streets, sidewalks, storm drainage
facilities and other standards used by the city to control physical
development.
DEVELOPER: See definition of Applicant in this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT: Any land use permit or action regulated by this title and titles
13 and 15 of this code, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, planned
unit developments, binding site plans, rezones, conditional use permits, or
variances.
DEVELOPMENT CODE: Orting municipal code, this title and titles 13 and 15.
DWELLING, ATTACHED MULTIFAMILY: A dwelling unit constructed in a group of two
(2) or more units attached by common walls or walls in which each unit extends
from foundation to roof.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping
facilities for one household. Dwelling unit does not include recreation
vehicles or mobile homes. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-
2024)
12-2-6: E:
EASEMENT: A grant by the owner of land, to others, of the use of a portion of
the land for specific purposes. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
12-2-7: F:
FINAL DECISION: The final action by the administrator, planning commission,
hearing examiner, or city council.
FINAL PLAT: See definition of Plat, Final in this chapter. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-8: G:
12-2-9: H:
HEARING EXAMINER: The official appointed by the mayor to adjudicate land use
decisions as set forth in this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-2-10: I:
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch,
permanent best management practice (BMP) for stormwater treatment or control,
water main, roadway, parkway strip, sidewalk, planting strip, crosswalk, off
street parking area, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume
the responsibility for ownership, maintenance, and operation. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-11: J:
12-2-12: K:
12-2-13: L:
LOT: A fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of
sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and
area. The term shall include tracts or parcels.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and bordered by two (2)
intersecting city streets, alleys and driveways are not considered public
streets for the purposes of determining corner lots.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured in the general direction of the side lot line(s).
LOT, FLAG OR PIPESTEM: A large lot not meeting minimum street frontage
requirements where access to the street is provided by a narrow, private
driveway. Development on flag lot created after November 1, 2005, shall be
subject to review and approval standards.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot located within a group of lots other than on intersecting
streets having only one street frontage.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: See definition of Boundary Line Adjustment in this
chapter.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line separating any lot or parcel of land from a street
right of way. On a through lot, the line abutting the street providing primary
access to the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the front line shall be
considered to be along both street lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line,
and in the case of a triangular, irregular or other odd shaped lot, the line
bordering the lot, generally parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT LINES OR PROPERTY LINES: The boundary lines of a parcel of land.
LOT OF RECORD: An area or parcel of land as shown on an officially recorded
plat or subdivision, or an area or parcel of land to which a deed or contract
is officially recorded as a unit of property, or which is described by metes
and bounds or as a fraction of a section.
LOT, PARENT: Legal lot which establishes the exterior boundary of a unit lot
subdivision.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot fronting on two (2) streets that is not a corner lot.
LOT, UNIT: Portion of a parent parcel, the fee of which may be independently
transferred upon recording of a unit lot subdivision.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to
the line establishing the lot depth at a point midway between the front lot
line and the rear lot line. Any area used as an access easement shall be
excluded from the computation of the lot width.
LOT, ZERO LINE: The common property line separating two (2) lots upon which the
dwelling on one of the lots may be located without a setback providing a proper
firewall rating is utilized. All other aspects are the same as in conventional
development. When lots are proposed for this type of development, site plan
approval shall be required as part of a subdivision approval. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 812, 10-26-2005; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
12-2-14: M:
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-15: N:
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lawfully established lot which does not conform to the
current provisions of the development code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-16: O:
12-2-17: P:
PARTY OF RECORD: Any person who has testified at a hearing or has submitted a
written statement related to a development action and who provides the city
with a complete address.
PERSON: Any person, firm, business, corporation, partnership or other
association or organization, marital community, municipal corporation, or
governmental agency.
PLAN, FINAL: The final drawing of a subdivision and dedication, containing all
elements and requirements set forth in this title for approval by the city and
recording by the county auditor.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Orting city planning commission as appointed by the
city council.
PLAT: A scale drawing of a subdivision showing lots, blocks, streets or tracts
or other divisions or dedications of land to be subdivided.
PLAT, FINAL: A precise drawing of a subdivision and dedications which conforms
to the approved preliminary plat, meets all the conditions of preliminary
approval and meets the requirements of the Pierce County auditor for recording.
PLAT, FINAL SHORT: A precise drawing of a short subdivision and dedications
which conforms to the approved preliminary short plat, meets all the conditions
of approval and meets the requirements of the Pierce County auditor for
recording.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A neat and approximate scale drawing of a proposed
subdivision, showing the existing conditions and the proposed layout of
streets, lots, blocks and other information needed to properly review the
proposal.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY SHORT: A neat and approximate scale drawing of a proposed
short subdivision, showing the existing conditions and the proposed layout of
streets, lots, blocks and other information needed to properly review the
proposal.
PLAT, SHORT: The plat of a short subdivision.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A paved or graveled surface a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
in width that provides access to a lot from a public or private right-of-way.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND UTILITIES: Land or structures owned or operated for the
benefit of the public use and necessity, including, but not limited to, public
facilities defined in Revised Code of Washington 36.70A.030, as amended.
PUBLIC HEARING, OPEN RECORD: An open record hearing at which evidence is
presented and testimony is taken.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned land, including, but not limited to,
parks, playgrounds, waterways, and trails.
PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS: Those specifications and standard design details, as
adopted and amended by the City Department of Public Works, that are intended
to regulate the construction of public works, or improvements that will be
dedicated to the public, that are associated with public and private
development within the City. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-
2024)
12-2-18: Q:
12-2-19: R:
ROADWAY: The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs
are laid, the portion between curbs; where no curbs are laid, that portion
between the edges of the shoulder.
ROADWAY BUFFER/CUTTING PRESERVE: A greenbelt lying outside and adjacent to the
right-of-way line of collector and arterial roadways. Roadway buffers/cutting
preserves shall be separate, designated tracts and depicted on the face of a
plat or binding site plan as required by the City as a condition of approval.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-20: S:
SHORT PLAT: See definition of Subdivision, Short in this chapter.
SIDEWALK: The portion of a street or crosswalk, paved or otherwise surfaced,
intended for pedestrian use only.
SITE PLAN: A scale drawing which shows the areas and locations of all
buildings, streets, roads, improvements, easements, utilities, open spaces and
other principal development features for a specific parcel of property.
SITE PLAN, BINDING: A site plan reviewed and approved pursuant to title 13 of
this code, containing the inscriptions or attachments setting forth the
limitations and conditions of use for a specific parcel of property and meeting
the requirements of the Pierce County auditor for recording.
STREET, COMMUNITY ARTERIAL: A street used to collect and distribute traffic
from higher capacity arterials to local access streets.
STREET, LOCAL COMMERCIAL ACCESS: A street used to provide access to properties
in commercial or industrial areas.
STREET, LOCAL RESIDENTIAL ACCESS: A street used to provide access to
residential property.
STREET, NEIGHBORHOOD COLLECTOR: A street used to collect and distribute traffic
from residential access streets within residential neighborhoods.
STREET, PRIMARY ARTERIAL: A street or highway used to expedite through traffic
between communities.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of land into ten (10) or more lots,
tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer
of ownership, including resubdivision of previously subdivided land, except as
provided in this title.
SUBDIVISION, SHORT: The division or redivision of land into nine (9) or fewer
lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or
transfer of ownership, except as provided in this title. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004;
amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021)
12-2-21: T:
TRACT OR PARCEL: A portion of a subdivision having fixed boundaries, not
including a lot. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-2-22: U:
UNIT LOT SUBDIVISION: The division of a parent parcel (the initial parcel from
which unit lots are subdivided) into several unit lots (one of the individual
divisions created from the subdivision of a parent lot). Sites developed or
proposed to be developed with single family, townhouses, rowhouses, and cottage
housing may be subdivided into individual unit lots to allow the separate
ownership of each residential unit (together with the land below it), as
permitted in the applicable zones. (Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-23: V:
12-2-24: W:
12-2-25: X:
12-2-26: Y:
YARD: The lot area between lot lines and the building area.
YARD, FRONT: The area between the front lot line and the building line
extending the full width of the lot. On a through lot, the front yard shall be
the area between the front lot line from which primary access is taken and the
building setback line. On a corner lot there shall be two (2) front yards.
YARD, REAR: The area between the rear lot line and the building area extending
the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: The side setback area between the side lot lines and the building
area, extending the full length of the building area. On corner lots the side
yard is that which is opposite from the front yard, except when a corner lot is
also a through lot, then the side yard shall be the area along the interior
side lot line. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-2-27: Z:
ZONE, ZONE DISTRICT: A defined area of the city within which the use of land is
regulated and certain uses are permitted and other uses are excluded as set
forth in title 13 of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
12-3-1: Requirements For Complete Application
12-3-2: Type Of Application
12-3-3: Criteria For Approval
12-3-4: Recording
12-3-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETE APPLICATION:
An applicant for a boundary line adjustment shall submit the following:
   A.   Map; Scale: A map at a scale of not less than one inch equal to fifty
feet (1" = 50'), which depicts the existing property configuration, including
all lot line dimensions. Digitally submitted plans shall be a digital portable
document filed (PDF).
   B.   Legal Description: A legal description of the existing property
configuration and proposed property configuration, prepared by a licensed
professional land surveyor.
   C.   Application: A completed application form, as described in title 15 of
this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-3-2: TYPE OF APPLICATION:
A boundary line adjustment is an administrative decision, made by the
administrator. The application shall be processed as set forth in title 15,
chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-3-3: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
The administrator shall approve an application for a boundary line adjustment
if it is determined that:
   A.   Additional Lot Or Division: No additional lot, tract, parcel, site or
division shall be created by the proposed adjustment;
   B.   Insufficient Area And Dimensions: No lot is modified which contains
insufficient area and dimensions to meet the minimum requirements of the zone
in which the affected lots are situated;
   C.   Drainage; Utilities: No lot is created or modified which does not have
adequate drainage, water supply and sanitary sewage disposal, and access for
vehicles, utilities and fire protection, and no existing easement in favor of
the public is rendered impractical to serve its purpose;
   D.   Consistent With Zoning Regulations: The boundary line adjustment is
consistent with the applicable provisions of title 13 of this code;
   E.   Straight Line: The adjusted boundary line shall run in a straight line
over its entire length except when natural boundaries, existing structures, or
existing rights of way preclude such a straight line. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-3-4: RECORDING:
The applicant shall be responsible for recording the boundary line adjustment
with the Pierce County auditor. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
CHAPTER 4
SHORT SUBDIVISIONS (PLATS)
SECTION:
12-4-1: Requirements For Complete Application
12-4-2: Type Of Application
12-4-3: Criteria For Approval
12-4-4: Special Requirements For Unit Lot Subdivision
12-4-5: Construction Of Improvements
12-4-6: Prohibition On Further Division
12-4-7: Time Frame For Approval
12-4-8: Recording
12-4-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETE APPLICATION:
   A.   Short Plat Drawing: Standard drawing size is eighteen inches by twenty-
four inches (24"). Digitally submitted plans shall be a portable document file
(PDF).
   B.   Pertinent Data: A proposed short plat must include pertinent survey
data compiled as a result of a survey made by or under the supervision of a
professional land surveyor registered in the state and engaged in land
surveying.
   C.   Application Contents: In addition to the requirements for a completed
application set forth in Title 15 of this code, an applicant for a short plat
shall submit the following:
      1.   A sketch or map using a scale of not less than one inch equal to
fifty feet (1" = 50') or larger of the entire contiguous tract owned by the
applicant which shall show:
         a.   The owners of adjacent land and the names of any adjacent parcels
or subdivisions;
         b.   Lines marking the boundaries of the proposed lots;
         c.   Approximate locations of existing streets and ways or easements
for such streets and ways within and adjacent to the tract and other
improvements on and adjacent to the subject parcel;
         d.   Legal description of the tract and legal descriptions of any
proposed lots;
         e.   Name and address of the owner(s) of the parcels and/or tracts;
      2.   A certificate giving full and complete description of the lands
divided as they appear on the short plat, including a statement that the short
subdivision has been made with free consent and in accordance with the desires
of the owner(s). If the short plat includes a dedication, the certificate shall
also contain the dedication of any streets and other areas to the public, and
individual(s), religious society or societies or to any corporation, public or
private, as shown on the short plat and a waiver of all claims for damages
against any governmental authority which may be occasioned to the adjacent land
by the established construction, drainage, and maintenance of the road. The
certificate shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all
parties having any interest in the lands subdivided.
      3.   All short plats must be accompanied by a title report confirming
that the title of the lands as described and shown on the plat is in the name
of the owner signing the certificate. Roads not dedicated to the public must be
clearly marked on the face of the plat. Any dedication, donation, or grant as
shown on the face of the plat shall be considered to all intents and purposes
as a quitclaim deed to the donee(s), grantee(s) for his, her or their use for
the purpose intended by the donors or grantors as aforesaid. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-4-2: TYPE OF APPLICATION:
A short plat is a Type 2 (Administrator) decision, with the final decision
being made by the administrator. The application shall be processed with
procedures for such applications as set forth in Title 15, Chapter 9 of this
code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021)
12-4-3: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
The administrator shall only approve the short subdivision and short plat after
making a determination of:
   A.   Compliance: Whether the application complies with Chapter 8 of this
Title and Title 15 of this code;
   B.   Specific Provisions: If appropriate provisions are made for, but not
limited to, the public health, safety and general welfare, for open spaces,
drainageways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops,
potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds,
schools and school grounds, and shall consider all other relevant facts,
including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking
conditions for students who walk to and from school;
   C.   Extension Agreement: A developer extension agreement, in accordance
with Title 9, Chapter 4 of this code, has been executed;
   D.   Public Interest: Whether the public interest will be served by the
subdivision and dedication; and
   E.   Development Agreement: As part of the approval, the city and the
applicant may enter into a development agreement in accordance with Title 15,
Chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021;
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-4-4: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR UNIT LOT SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Purpose: This subsection complies with RCW 58.17.060 as amended by the
state legislature in 2023 and sets out procedures for unit lot short
subdivisions. These procedures allow the division of a parent lot into nine (9)
or fewer separately owned unit lots. Portions of the parent lot not subdivided
for individual unit lots shall be owned in common by the owners of the
individual unit lots, or by a homeowners' association comprised of the owners
of the individual unit lots. A unit lot short subdivision provides for fee-
simple ownership of lots of which dwellings are place which can advance
affordable housing opportunities and increase housing options.
   B.   Applicability: The process for a unit lot short subdivision can be used
for existing development including duplexes, cottage developments, multifamily
attached dwellings such as townhouse developments, or a combination thereof.
The provisions of this section apply exclusively to the unit lot short
subdivision of land proposed to be developed with dwellings in which the
proposed building type and use is permitted. In all instances, unit lot short
subdivisions shall apply to the division or redivision of land into nine (9) or
fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease,
or transfer of ownership.
   C.   General Requirements.
      1.   Unit lots shall be subject to all applicable requirements of the
Titles 11 and 13 of this code, except as otherwise modified by this section.
      2.   Development on individual unit lots within the unit lot subdivision
need not conform to the minimum lot area, minimum density, or dimensional
requirements, provided, however, that any structure located upon a unit lot
shall comply with the maximum building height requirements; provided further
that unit lot short subdivisions shall comply with the dimensional standards
set forth in OMC 12-4-4D2. The overall development of the parent parcel shall
meet the development and design standards of the underlying Land Use District.
      3.   Setbacks or buffers shall be required from any critical area or
shoreline features per Title 11 of this code.
      4.   Within the parent parcel, required parking for an attached
multifamily dwelling unit may be provided on a different unit lot than the lot
with the dwelling unit if the right to use that parking is formalized by an
easement or covenant recorded with the Pierce County auditor.
      5.   A unit lot subdivision shall make adequate provisions through
easements for ingress, egress, emergency services, and utilities access to and
from each unit lot created by reserving such common areas or other areas over,
under, and across the parent parcel as necessary to comply with all applicable
development standards. Such easements shall be recorded with the Pierce County
auditor.
      6.   Access easements, joint use agreements, covenants, and maintenance
agreements identifying the rights and responsibilities of property owners and
any homeowners association shall be established for the use and maintenance of
common garage, parking, and vehicle access areas, landscaping, underground
utilities, common open space, exterior building facades and roofs, any portions
of the parent parcel not subdivided for individual unit lots, and other similar
features, and shall be recorded with the Pierce County auditor.
   D.   Requirements And Limitations For Unit Lot Short Subdivision Plats:
      1.   Notes shall be included on the short plat recorded with the Pierce
County auditor as follows:
         a.   The short plat shall be clearly labeled with the phrase “Unit Lot
Short Subdivision.”
         b.   The individual unit lots are not separate buildable sites.
Additional development of the individual unit lots may be limited per the
development standards applicable to the parent parcel.
         c.   Approval of the design and layout of the development was granted
through review of the development of the parent parcel.
         d.   Subsequent platting, additions, or modifications to buildings or
appurtenant structures and uses may not create a nonconformity of the parent
parcel.
      2.   A unit lot short subdivision shall comply with the following:
         a.   The parent parcel of a unit lot short subdivision shall comply
with all applicable standards of the underlying zoning district.
         b.   All duplexes shall comply with OMC 13-5-1H.
         c.   All cottage housing development shall comply with OMC 13-6-5.
         d.   Maximum impervious area of all combined buildings and other hard
surfaces located on the parent parcel shall not exceed the maximum building
coverage and maximum hard surface coverage permitted by the underlying zone.
         e.   Structures abutting the perimeter lot lines of the parent parcel
are subject to the setback requirements of OMC 13-5-1 Table 1 as measured from
the parent parcel lot line.
         f.   Setbacks between structures on the parent parcel shall meet
building code separation requirements.
   E.   Type Of Approval: Unit lot short subdivisions shall be administered
following the same process as short plats or short subdivisions, set forth as a
Type 2 process in Title 15 of this code. (Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-4-5: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
An approved short plat shall not be filed for record until the applicant has
constructed or bonded for all improvements required by the city in the final
decision on the short plat. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-4-6: PROHIBITION ON FURTHER DIVISION:
Property in short subdivisions may not be further divided in any manner within
a period of five (5) years without the filing of a final subdivision, except
that when the short plat contains less than nine (9) parcels, nothing in this
section shall prevent the owner who filed the short plat from filing an
alteration within the five (5) year period to create up to a total of nine (9)
lots within the original short plat boundaries. This requirement shall be
stated on the face of the short plat. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-
1073, 3-10-2021)
12-4-7: TIME FRAME FOR APPROVAL:
The administrator shall make a decision on approval or denial of a short plat
application within thirty (30) days of the determination that the application
is complete unless the applicant consents to an extension of time. This thirty
(30) day period excludes time required to comply with Chapter 43.21C RCW and
Title 15, Chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024)
12-4-8: RECORDING:
Upon final approval of the short plat, which shall be shown by affixing the
signatures of the community development director, the city engineer and fire
chief, the drawing shall be recorded with the clerk of Pierce County at the
expense of the applicant. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-
2024)
CHAPTER 5
PRELIMINARY PLATS
SECTION:
12-5-1: Requirements For Completed Application
12-5-2: Type Of Approval
12-5-3: Criteria For Approval
12-5-3.5: Special Requirements For Unit Lot Subdivision
12-5-4: Findings And Conclusions
12-5-5: Time Frame For Approval
12-5-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETED APPLICATION:
   A.   Preliminary Plats: Standard drawing sheet size is twenty-four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36"). Digitally submitted plans shall be a portable
document filed (PDF).
   B.   Application Contents: In addition to the requirements for a completed
application as set forth in title 15 of this code, an applicant for a
preliminary plat shall submit the following:
      1.   Map; Scale: A map or sketch using a scale not less than one inch to
fifty feet (1" = 50') or larger, showing:
         a.   Topographical and other data depicting:
            (1)   Boundary lines, including bearing and distance;
            (2)   Easements, including location, width and purpose;
            (3)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract, including name and
right of way width and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing, walks,
curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.;
            (4)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on a datum plane
approved by the city engineer; for land that slopes less than approximately two
percent (2%), show spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage
channels or swales, and all selected points not more than one hundred feet
(100') apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than approximately
two percent (2%), either show contours with an interval of not more than five
feet (5') if ground slope is regular and such information is sufficient for
planning purposes, or show contours with an interval of not more than two feet
(2') if necessary because of irregular land or need for more detailed data for
preparing plans and construction drawings;
            (5)   Other conditions on adjacent land, including approximate
direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining
walls; character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and
other nonresidential land uses or platted land within three hundred feet (300')
of the subject property. Refer to subdivision plat by name, recording date,
volume and page number, and show lot size, and dwelling units;
         b.   Utilities on and adjacent to the parcel, including location and
size of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains;
location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and
streetlights. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the parcel,
indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones;
         c.   Other conditions on the parcel including watercourses, marshes,
rock outcrop and critical areas;
         d.   Zoning district designations, on and adjacent to the parcel;
         e.   Proposed public improvements, including highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the parcel;
         f.   Vicinity map showing location of the parcel;
         g.   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, or other public uses;
         h.   Sites, if any, for multi- family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other proposed uses exclusive of single-family dwellings;
         i.   Minimum building setback lines;
         j.   Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot
size, and acres in parks, etc.;
         k.   Plat name, scale, north arrow and date;
         l.   Typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and
sidewalk;
         m.   Proposed sanitary, storm water and water systems plan with points
of connection and sizes indicated;
      2.   Title And Certificates: Title and certificates, including a legal
description according to official records in the office of the Pierce County
auditor; pertinent survey data compiled as a result of a survey made by or
under the supervision of a land surveyor registered in the state and engaged in
land surveying which contains notation stating acreage, scale, north arrow,
datum, bench marks, certification of registered civil engineer or surveyor,
date of survey;
      3.   Covenants: Draft of proposed covenants, if any.
      4.   SEPA environmental checklist. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
12-5-2: TYPE OF APPROVAL:
A preliminary plat is approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the city
council based on the recommendation of the planning commission. (Ord. 792, 7-
29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-5-3: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
The planning commission shall make an inquiry into the public use and interest
proposed to be served by the establishment of the subdivision and/or
dedication, shall hold an open record public hearing, and shall consider:
   A.   Conformity: Whether the preliminary plat conforms to chapter 8 of this
title and with title 15 of this code;
   B.   Specific Provisions: If appropriate provisions are made for, but not
limited to, the public health, safety and general welfare, for open spaces,
drainageways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops,
potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds,
schools and school grounds, and shall consider all relevant facts, including
sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for
students who walk to and from school; and
   C.   Public Interest: Whether the public interest will be served by the
subdivision and dedication. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-5-3.5:   SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR UNIT LOT SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Purpose: This subsection sets out procedures for unit lot subdivisions.
These procedures allow the division of a parent lot into ten (10) or more
separately owned unit lots. Portions of the parent lot not subdivided for
individual unit lots shall be owned in common by the owners of the individual
unit lots, or by a homeowners' association comprised of the owners of the
individual unit lots. A unit lot subdivision provides for fee-simple ownership
of lots of which dwellings are place which can advance affordable housing
opportunities and increase housing options.
   B.   Applicability: The process for a unit lot subdivision can be used for
existing development including duplexes, cottage developments, multifamily
attached dwellings such as townhouse developments, or a combination thereof.
The provisions of this section apply exclusively to the unit lot short
subdivision of land proposed to be developed with dwellings in which the
proposed building type and use is permitted. In all instances, unit short
subdivisions shall apply to the division or redivision of land into ten (10) or
more lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease,
or transfer of ownership.
   C.   General Requirements:
      1.   Unit lots shall be subject to all applicable requirements of the
Titles 11 and 13 of this code, except as otherwise modified by this section.
      2.   Development on individual unit lots within the unit lot subdivision
need not conform to the minimum lot area, minimum density, or dimensional
requirements, provided, however, that any structure located upon a unit lot
shall comply with the maximum building height requirements; provided further
that unit lot short subdivisions shall comply with the dimensional standards
set forth in OMC 12-4-4D2. The overall development of the parent parcel shall
meet the development and design standards of the underlying Land Use District.
      3.   Setbacks or buffers shall be required from any critical area or
shoreline features per Title 11 of this code.
      4.   Within the parent parcel, required parking for an attached
multifamily dwelling unit may be provided on a different unit lot than the lot
with the dwelling unit if the right to use that parking is formalized by an
easement or covenant recorded with the Pierce County auditor.
      5.   A unit lot subdivision shall make adequate provisions through
easements for ingress, egress, emergency services, and utilities access to and
from each unit lot created by reserving such common areas or other areas over,
under, and across the parent parcel as necessary to comply with all applicable
development standards. Such easements shall be recorded with the Pierce County
auditor.
      6.   Access easements, joint use agreements, covenants, and maintenance
agreements identifying the rights and responsibilities of property owners and
any homeowners association shall be established for the use and maintenance of
common garage, parking, and vehicle access areas, landscaping, underground
utilities, common open space, exterior building facades and roofs, any portions
of the parent parcel not subdivided for individual unit lots, and other similar
features, and shall be recorded with the Pierce County auditor.
   D.   Requirements And Limitations For Unit Lot Subdivision Plats:
      1.   Notes shall be included on the short plat recorded with the Pierce
County auditor as follows:
         a.   The short plat shall be clearly labeled with the phrase “Unit Lot
Short Subdivision.”
         b.   The individual unit lots are not separate buildable sites.
Additional development of the individual unit lots may be limited per the
development standards applicable to the parent parcel.
         c.   Approval of the design and layout of the development was granted
through review of the development of the parent parcel.
         d.   Subsequent platting, additions, or modifications to buildings or
appurtenant structures and uses may not create a nonconformity of the parent
parcel.
      2.   A unit lot short subdivision shall comply with the following:
         a.   The parent parcel of a unit lot short subdivision shall comply
with all applicable standards of the underlying zoning district.
         b.   All duplexes shall comply with OMC 13-5-1H.
         c.   All cottage housing development shall comply with OMC 13-6-5.
         d.   Maximum impervious area of all combined buildings and other hard
surfaces located on the parent parcel shall not exceed the maximum building
coverage and maximum hard surface coverage permitted by the underlying zone.
         e.   Structures abutting the perimeter lot lines of the parent parcel
are subject to the setback requirements of OMC 13-5-1 Table 1 as measured from
the parent parcel lot line.
         f.   Setbacks between structures on the parent parcel shall meet
building code separation requirements.
   E.   Type Of Approval: Unit lot short subdivisions shall be administered
following the same process as short plats or short subdivisions, set forth as a
Type 2 process in Title 15 of this code. (Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-5-4: FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS:
The city council shall conduct a closed record hearing to review the planning
commission recommendation and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the preliminary plat with written findings showing that:
   A.   Conformity: The preliminary plat conforms to chapter 8 of this title
and title 15 of this code;
   B.   Specific Provisions: Appropriate provisions are made for the public
health, safety and general welfare and for such open spaces, drainageways,
streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water
supplies, sanitary sewage disposal, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools
and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other
planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to
and from school;
   C.   Extension Agreement: A developer extension agreement, in accordance
with title 9, chapter 4 of this code, has been executed;
   D.   Public Interest: The public use and interest will be served by the
platting of such subdivision and dedication; and
   E.   Development Agreement: As part of the approval, the city and the
applicant may enter into a development agreement in accordance with title 15,
chapter 15 of this code.
   F.   Option To Remand: The city council may also elect to return the
application to the planning commission for additional review and
recommendations if, during the closed record hearing, the council finds that
the record is incomplete or does not provide sufficient basis for approval or
denial. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-5-5: TIME FRAME FOR APPROVAL:
The city shall make a decision on approval or denial of a preliminary plat
application within ninety (90) days of the determination that the application
is complete, except when the subdivision proposal is combined with a
preliminary planned unit development, or in cases when the applicant consents
to an extension of time. This ninety (90) day period excludes time required to
comply with Chapter 43.21C RCW and Title 15, Chapter 14 of this code. (Ord.
792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 6
FINAL PLATS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Requirements For Completed Application
12-6-2: Type Of Application
12-6-3: Time Frame For Submission Of Final Plat
12-6-4: Recommendations As Prerequisites For Final Plat Approval
12-6-5: Criteria For Approval
12-6-6: Effect Of Final Plat Approval
12-6-7: Time Frame For Approval
12-6-8: Recording
12-6-9: Phased Development
12-6-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETED APPLICATION:
   A.   Construction Drawings: Submittal of as built construction drawings.
Digitally submitted plans shall be digital portable file document (PDF).
   B.   Certification Of City Work: Certification of work done by city in
connection with the checking, computing and correcting of the plat, and for
plan checking, inspecting, and testing of plat improvements, including water
lines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater retention and drainage systems,
streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
   C.   Application Contents: In addition to the requirements for a completed
application set forth in title 15 of this code, the applicant shall submit the
following:
      1.   Final plat on twenty-four inches wide by thirty-six inches (24" x
36") long, scale of one inch to fifty feet (1" = 50') or larger. Digitally
submitted plans shall be a PDF. The plat must contain:
         a.   Primary control points, approved by the city engineer, or
descriptions and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred;
         b.   Parcel boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements
and other rights of way, and property lines of residential lots and other
tracts, with accurate dimensions, bearings, and radii, arcs, central angles of
all curved arcs;
         c.   Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way;
         d.   Location, dimensions and purpose of any easement or tract;
         e.   Parcel or tract number to identify each lot or tract;
         f.   Purpose for which tracts, other than residential lots, are
dedicated or reserved;
         g.   Minimum building setback line on all lots and other tracts;
         h.   Location and description of monuments by symbol. Unless otherwise
approved, monuments shall be placed at street intersections, centers of cul-
de-sacs, and points of curve and tangency in curvilinear streets;
         i.   Reference to plats of adjoining land by their recorded name,
date, volume and page number;
         j.   Certification by licensed land surveyor or licensed professional
civil engineer substantially giving a full and correct description of the lands
divided as they appear on the plat, including a statement that the subdivision
has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the
owner(s). If the plat contains a dedication, the certificate shall also contain
the dedication of all streets and other areas to the public, and individual(s),
religious society or societies or to any corporation, public or private, as
shown on the plat and a waiver of all claims for damages against any
governmental authority which may be occasioned to the adjacent land by the
established construction, drainage, and maintenance of the road. The
certificate shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all
parties having any interest in the lands subdivided.
      2.   Every plat containing a dedication filed for record must be
accompanied by a title report confirming that the title of the lands as
described and shown on the plat is in the name of the owners signing the
certificate.
      3.   An offer of dedication may include a waiver of right of direct
access to any street from any property, and if the dedication is accepted, any
such waiver is effective. Such waiver may be required by the city as a
condition of approval. Roads not dedicated to the public must be clearly marked
on the face of the plat. Any dedication, donation, or grant as shown on the
face of the plat shall be considered to all intents and purposes as a quitclaim
deed to the recipient or recipients, grantee or grantees for his, her, or their
use for the purpose intended by the donors or grantors as aforesaid.
      4.   Plat name, scale, north arrow, date and legend of symbols.
      5.   Plans and profiles of all utilities and street improvements showing
approval of the design by the city engineer.
      6.   Certificate of completion of one of the following alternatives, as
directed by the city, shall accompany the final plat:
         a.   All improvements have been installed in accord with the
requirements of these regulations and accepted by the city upon the
recommendation of the city engineer as certified by the city clerk;
         b.   Approved plans are on file with the city engineer for all
required utilities and street improvements and a cash or surety bond as
required in section
12-8-1  of this title has been posted with the City Clerk and deposited with
the City Clerk.
      7.   Signatures as applicable of the County Treasurer, City Clerk, City
Engineer, Communityy Development Director, Planning Commission Chair, and
Mayor. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-6-2: TYPE OF APPLICATION:
A final plat is a decision made by the City Council as specified by title 15 of
this Code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-6-3: TIME FRAME FOR SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT:
A final plat meeting all requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the
City for approval within five (5) years of the date of preliminary plat
approval if the date of this preliminary plat approval. Portions of the
preliminary plat may be submitted for final approval after the expiration of
said time period provided that the original preliminary plat was proposed as a
phased development with specific divisions identified and, after administrative
review, it has been found that significant progress has taken place on the plat
and that the requirements of section
12-6-9  of this chapter have been met.
Nothing contained in this section shall act to prevent the City from adopting
by ordinance procedures which would allow extensions of time that may or may
not contain additional or altered conditions and requirements. When deemed
reasonable and appropriate, the City Administrator may grant an extension of
one year for such submittal. If at the date of expiration of the time period
provided herein, a final plat has not been filed for approval, the preliminary
plat approval shall expire. (Ord. 2018-1025, 4-25-2018; amd. Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024)
12-6-4: RECOMMENDATIONS AS PREREQUISITES FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
Each preliminary plat submitted for final approval shall be accompanied by the
following recommendations:
   A.   City Administrator's recommendation as to compliance with the terms of
preliminary approval of the proposed plat or subdivision;
   B.   City Engineer. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-6-5: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
A final plat application shall be approved if it:
   A.   Meets Plat Approval Requirements: Meets all general requirements for
plat approval as set forth in chapter 8 of this title;
   B.   Conforms To Preliminary Plat Approval: Conforms to all terms of the
preliminary plat approval; and
   C.   Meets Other Applicable Requirements: Meets the requirements of Revised
Code of Washington chapter 58.17, other applicable State laws, this title,
title 9, chapter 4 of this Code, and any other applicable City ordinances which
were in effect at the time of preliminary plat approval.
   D.   Approval And Inscription: The City Administrator shall make written
findings of fact relating to its decision on the final plat, and if approved,
shall suitably inscribe and execute its written approval on the face of the
plat. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-6-6: EFFECT OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
Any lots in a final plat filed for record shall be a valid land use,
notwithstanding any change in zoning laws for a period of five (5) years from
the date of filing. A subdivision shall be governed by the terms of approval of
the final plat, and the statutes, ordinances and regulations in effect at the
time of approval under Revised Code of Washington 58.17.150(1) and (3) for a
period of five (5) years after final plat approval unless the City Council
finds that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health
or safety in the subdivision. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-6-7: TIME FRAME FOR APPROVAL:
The final plat, or portion thereof, shall be approved, approved with
conditions, denied, or returned to the applicant by the City within thirty (30)
days from the date of the application. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
12-6-8: RECORDING:
The final plat, in the form specified in this chapter, shall be recorded with
the County Clerk by the applicant. If the final plat is not recorded within
twelve (12) months of the date of the city approval, said approval shall be
null and void. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-6-9: PHASED DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Portions of an approved preliminary plat may be processed for approval
and recording in phased divisions, provided that the divisions were identified
in the approved preliminary plat, or an amendment thereto, and that approval
and recording of the divisions is consistent with the conditions of the
preliminary plat approval and will substantially meet all of the requirements
for final approval even if the subsequent divisions are not finished. Prior to
the final approval of a division of a preliminary plat, the City may require
additional conditions such as a bond for the construction of a required
improvement in a subsequent division, if it finds that such improvement is
necessary to ensure that the division being approved meets all the conditions
of the preliminary plat even though subsequent divisions are never finished.
   B.   Any phase of a preliminary plat that has not been completed and
accepted by the City within five (5) years of the date of its preliminary
approval may be subject to the most current development codes. The doctrine of
vested rights shall not apply to said plat phases. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 7
PLAT VACATION AND ALTERATION
SECTION:
12-7-1: Requirements For Complete Plat Vacation Application
12-7-2: Type Of Approval And Criteria For Approval Of Plat Vacation
12-7-3: Requirements For Complete Plat Alteration Application
12-7-4: Type Of And Criteria For Approval Of Plat Alteration
12-7-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETE PLAT VACATION APPLICATION:
   A.   Application Contents: In addition to the requirements for a completed
application as set forth in title 15 of this code, an applicant for a plat
vacation shall submit the following:
      1.   The reasons for the proposed vacation;
      2.   Signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that
portion of the subdivision proposed to be vacated;
      3.   If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were
filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for
vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall
contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing
that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to
accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the subdivision or portion thereof;
      4.   A copy of the approved plat sought to be vacated, together with all
plat amendments recorded since the date of the original approval. (Ord. 792, 7-
29-2004)
12-7-2: TYPE OF APPROVAL AND CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF PLAT VACATION:
   A.   Type Of Approval: A plat vacation is a planning commission decision.
   B.   Criteria For Approval: The plat vacation may be approved or denied
after a written determination is made whether the public use and interest will
be served by the vacation of the subdivision. If any portion of the land
contained in the subdivision was dedicated to the public for public use or
benefit, such land, if not deeded to the city, shall be deeded to the city
unless the city shall set forth findings that the public use would not be
served in retaining title to those lands.
   C.   Vacation Of Streets: When the vacation application is specifically for
a city street vacation, the city's street vacation procedures shall be
utilized. When the application is for the vacation of a plat together with the
streets, the procedure for vacation in this section shall be used, but
vacations of streets may not be made that are prohibited under Revised Code of
Washington chapter 35.70 or the city's street vacation ordinance.
   D.   Easements: Easements established by a dedication are property rights
that cannot be extinguished or altered without the approval of the easement
owner or owners, unless the plat or other document creating the dedicated
easement provides for an alternative method or methods to extinguish or alter
the easement. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-7-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETE PLAT ALTERATION APPLICATION:
   A.   Application Contents: In addition to the requirements for a completed
application as set forth in title 15 of this code, an applicant for a plat
alteration shall submit the following:
      1.   Signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership
interest of lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions in the subject
subdivision or portion to be altered;
      2.   If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were
filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for
alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall
contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing
that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to
accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof.
      3.   A copy of the approved plat sought to be vacated, together with all
plat amendments recorded. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-7-4: TYPE OF AND CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF PLAT ALTERATION:
   A.   Type Of Approval: A plat alteration is a planning commission decision.
   B.   Criteria For Approval: The plat alteration may be approved, approved
with conditions, or denied after a written determination is made whether the
public use will be served by the alteration of the subdivision. If any land
within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding
assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots,
parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the
alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the
general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be
altered and divided equitably between the adjacent properties. A plat
alteration must also be consistent with subsection
12-7-2 D of this chapter.
   C.   Revised Plat: After approval of the alteration, the city council shall
order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of
the final plat or short plat, which after signature of the mayor, shall be
filed with the county auditor to become the lawful plat of the property. (Ord.
792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 8
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
SECTION:
12-8-1: General Requirements For Approval Of Subdivision
12-8-2: Certificate To Accompany Final Plat Or Short Plat
12-8-3: General Requirements For Filing Plat Of Record
12-8-4: Compliance With Public Works Standards
12-8-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION:
In addition to the criteria for approval applicable to an individual
application, all subdivisions must meet the following general requirements in
order to be approved:
   A.   Land Use Controls: No subdivision may be approved unless written
findings of fact are made that the proposed subdivision or short subdivision is
in conformity with any applicable zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan or other
existing land use controls.
      1.   Flag (Pipestem) Lots: Generally, flag lots are discouraged. In cases
where there are no alternatives, flag lots may be allowed under the following
conditions:
         a.   The driveway portion of the lot shall be wide enough to meet city
access and public safety standards;
         b.   The area of the driveway portion of the lot shall not be used to
meet the minimum required lot size per zoning;
         c.   All utilities serving the flag lot shall be underground;
         d.   All property lines of the flag lot abutting adjoining lots shall
be screened with fencing or landscaping;
         e.   Where multiple adjacent flag lots are proposed, shared driveways
shall be required.
      2.   Flag Lots In The RU Zone: In addition to the provisions of
subsection A1 of this section, the creation of new flag lots in the RU zone
shall meet the following criteria:
         a.   The size and configuration of the flag lot shall meet the density
and dimension standards of the zone as provided in section
13-5-1 of this code.
         b.   The siting and design of all buildings on the flag lot shall be
subject to site plan review and approval as provided in title 15, chapter 4 of
this code.
   B.   Dedications; Generally:
      1.   An offer of dedication may include a waiver of right of direct
access to any street from any property, and if the dedication is accepted, any
such waiver is effective. The city may require such waiver as a condition of
approval.
      2.   Roads not dedicated to the public must be clearly marked "private"
on the face of the plat.
      3.   Any dedication, donation or grant as shown on the face of the plat
shall be considered to all intents and purposes, as a quitclaim deed to the
said donee(s) or grantee(s) for his/her/their use for the purpose intended by
the donor(s) or grantor(s).
      4.   If the plat or short plat is subject to a dedication, the
certificate or a separate written instrument shall contain the dedication of
all streets and other areas to the public, and individual(s), religious society
(ies) or to any corporation, public or private, as shown on the plat or short
plat, and a waiver of all claims for damages against any governmental authority
which may be occasioned to the adjacent land by the established construction,
drainage and maintenance of said road. Said certificate or instrument of
dedication shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all
parties having any ownership interest in the lands subdivided and recorded as
part of the final plat.
      5.   Every plat and short plat containing a dedication filed for record
must be accompanied by a title report confirming that the title of the lands as
described and shown on said plat is in the name of the owners signing the
certificate or instrument of dedication.
      6.   Dedication of land to any public body, provision of public
improvements to serve the subdivision, and/or impact fees imposed under Revised
Code of Washington 82.02.050 through 82.02.090 shall be required as a condition
of subdivision approval. No dedication, provision of public improvements or
impact fees imposed under Revised Code of Washington 82.02.050 through
82.02.090 shall be allowed that constitutes an unconstitutional taking of
private property.
   C.   Dedication Of Public Park: The planning commission shall recommend
naming of streets and parks within proposed subdivisions. If preliminary plats
include dedication of land for public parks with areas greater than required
for subdivision approval and the proponents request commemorative names, the
planning commission shall consider such requests. The city council shall adopt
the names as part of final plat approval.
   D.   Release From Damages: The city shall not as a condition to the approval
of any subdivision require a release from damages to be procured from other
property owners.
   E.   Flood, Inundation Or Swamp Conditions: A proposed subdivision may be
disapproved because of flood, inundation, or swamp conditions. Construction of
protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval, and such
improvements shall be noted on the final plat.
   F.   Bonds: In lieu of completing the construction of any required
improvements prior to the approval of a short or final plat, the planning
commission or city council may accept a bond, approved as to form by the city
attorney, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, or
other secure method, provided that actual construction and installation of such
improvements will be completed within a period specified by the city and is
expressed in the bonds. In addition, the city may require the posting of a bond
securing to the city the successful operation of improvements for up to two (2)
years after final approval. All bonded improvements shall be designed and
certified by or under the supervision of a registered civil engineer prior to
the acceptance of such improvements.
   G.   Roadway buffers/cutting preserves shall be separate, designated tracts
and depicted on the face of a plat or binding site plan as required by the City
as a condition of approval. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 812, 10-26-2005;
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-8-2: CERTIFICATE TO ACCOMPANY FINAL PLAT OR SHORT PLAT:
Every final plat or short plat of a subdivision or a short subdivision filed
for record must contain a certificate giving a full and correct description of
the lands divided as they appear on the plat or short plat, including a
statement that the subdivision or short subdivision has been made with the free
consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner(s). (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-8-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING PLAT OF RECORD:
Each and every plat or replat of any property filed for record shall:
   A.   Statement Of Approval: Contain a statement of approval from the city
engineer as to the layout of streets, alleys and other rights of way, design of
bridges, sewage and water systems, and other structures;
   B.   Survey: Be accompanied by a complete survey of the section or sections
in which the plat or replat is located, made to surveying standards adopted by
the division of engineering services of the department of natural resources
pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 58.24.040. The surveyor shall certify on
the plat that it is a true and correct representation of the lands actually
surveyed;
   C.   Acknowledgment: Be acknowledged by the person filing the plat before
the auditor of the county in which the land is located, or any other officer
who is authorized by law to take acknowledgment of deeds, and a certificate of
said acknowledgment shall be enclosed or annexed to such plat and recorded
therewith;
   D.   Certificate Of Paid Taxes: Contain a certification from the proper
officer or officers in charge of tax collections that all taxes and delinquent
assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of
certification have been duly paid, satisfied or discharged;
   E.   Description Of Lands: Contain a certificate giving a full and correct
description of the lands divided as they appear on the plat or short plat,
including a statement that the subdivision or short subdivision has been made
with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner(s);
   F.   Monuments: Show the permanent control monuments established at each and
every controlling corner on the boundaries of the parcel of land being
subdivided. The city shall determine the number and location of permanent
control monuments within the plat, if any;
   G.   Lot Numbers, House Addresses: Show the lot numbers and house addresses
on the short subdivisions and subdivisions at the time of approval;
   H.   Fees And Charges; Responsibility: All plat recording fees and charges
shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-8-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS:
Construction of improvements in all applications shall comply with the city's
adopted public works special provisions and details. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
CHAPTER 9
ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
SECTION:
12-9-1: Issuance Of Permit On Illegally Divided Land
12-9-2: Violations
12-9-3: Appeals
12-9-1: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT ON ILLEGALLY DIVIDED LAND:
No building permit, septic tank permit, or other development permit shall be
issued for any lot, tract or parcel of land divided in violation of Revised
Code of Washington chapter 58.17 or this title, unless the authority authorized
to issue such permit finds that the public interest will not be adversely
affected thereby. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to
an innocent purchaser for value without actual notice. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-9-2: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this title shall be enforced as set forth in title 15 of this
code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-9-3: APPEALS:
Any decision approving or disapproving any plat may be appealed as set forth in
title 15 of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
CHAPTER 10
BINDING SITE PLANS
SECTION:
12-10-1: Purpose
12-10-2: Applicability
12-10-3: Application Submittal
12-10-4: Type Of Approval
12-10-5: Criteria For Approval
12-10-6: Binding Site Plan Components
12-10-7: Recording Requirements
12-10-8: Development Requirements
12-10-9: Amendment, Modification And Vacation
12-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Specify the criteria used by the city of Orting to review and approve
binding site plans.
   B.   Provide an alternative method of land division for the sale or lease of
commercial or industrial zoned properties, condominiums and manufactured home
parks as provided for in Revised Code Of Washington 58.17.035 that is more
flexible than traditional subdivision procedures.
   C.   Provide for the site planning and regulation of nonresidential site
development not requiring land division. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-10-2: APPLICABILITY:
The binding site plan process may be used for:
   A.   The division of land for the purpose of sale or lease of lots for
commercial or industrial purposes.
   B.   The division of land for the purpose of developing residential
condominiums or manufactured home parks. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-10-3: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL:
A complete application for a binding site plan must include:
   A.   Fees. The applicant shall pay the required fees as set forth in the
city's fee schedule or other applicable resolutions or ordinances when
submitting a binding site plan;
   B.   Application form and declaration of ownership;
   C.   Title report (dated within the last 30 days);
   D.   Vicinity map of the area where the site is located;
   E.   SEPA Environmental checklist;
   F.   Landscape plan to reflect landscaping requirements related to site
plans and landscaping associated with permanent best management practices
(BMPs) for stormwater treatment and control;
   G.   A preliminary site plan to a scale of thirty feet to one inch (30' =
1"), stamped and signed by a registered engineer, architect or land surveyor
illustrating the proposed development of the property and including, but not
limited to, the following:
      1.   Name or title of the proposed binding site plan;
      2.   Date, scale and north arrow;
      3.   Boundary lines and dimensions including any platted lot lines within
the property;
      4.   Total acreage;
      5.   Property legal description;
      6.   Existing zoning;
      7.   Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed:
         a.   Buildings, including height in stories and feet and including
total square feet of ground area coverage;
         b.   Parking stalls, access aisles, and total area of lot coverage of
all parking areas;
         c.   Off street loading area(s);
         d.   Driveways and entrances;
         e.   Common open spaces, yards, permanent best management practices
(BMPs) for stormwater treatment and control, and other areas intended for the
use of all owners; and
         f.   Major manmade or natural features, i.e., streams, creeks,
drainage ditches, railroad tracks, utility lines, etc.
      8.   Proposed building setbacks in feet;
      9.   Location of any regulated sensitive areas such as wetlands, steep
slopes, wildlife habitat or floodplain and required buffers;
      10.   Location and height of fences, walls (including retaining walls),
and the type or kind of building materials or planting proposed to be used;
      11.   Location of any proposed monument signs;
      12.   Proposed best management practices (BMPs) for stormwater treatment
and control;
      13.   Location of all easements and uses indicated;
      14.   Location of existing and proposed utility service;
      15.   Existing and proposed grades shown in five foot (5') interval
topographic contour lines;
      16.   Fire hydrant location; and
   H.   Any other information as required by the city shall be furnished,
including, but not limited to, traffic studies, wetland reports, stormwater
site plans, elevations, profiles, and perspectives, to determine that the
application is in compliance with this code.
Digitally submitted plans shall be in a portable document format (PDF).
The city may waive selected requirements for certain site plan features listed
in subsection G of this section upon review and approval of a written request
by the applicant. The determination that such a waiver is justified will be
made if the strict application of the requirements would create a hardship for
the applicant; and if the proposed site design is consistent with the intent of
the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 888, 9-8-2010; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020;
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-10-4: TYPE OF APPROVAL:
A binding site plan is a Type II action. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
12-10-5: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   Standards For Review Of A Binding Site Plan: The city shall review the
proposed binding site plan to determine whether it meets the following
criteria:
      1.   Conformance with the comprehensive plan.
      2.   Conformance with all applicable performance standards and zoning
regulations.
      3.   Design sensitivity to the topography, drainage, vegetation, soils
and any other relevant physical elements of the site.
      4.   Availability of public services and utilities.
      5.   Conformance with SEPA requirements.
   6.   Conformance with roadway buffers/cutting preserves. Roadway buffers/
cutting preserves shall be separate, designated tracts and depicted on the face
of a plat or binding site plan as required by the City as a condition of
approval.
   B.   Condominium Standards: Development of condominiums including
residential units or structures shall meet either the standards set out in
subsection B1 or B2 of this section:
      1.   All lots and developments shall meet the minimum requirements of
this code. Phase or lot lines shall be used as lot lines for setback purposes
under the zoning code.
      2.   Condominiums may be developed in phases where ownership of the
property is unitary but some structures are to be completed at different times
or with different lenders financing separate structures or areas of the
property. The following conditions shall apply to phased condominiums:
         a.   By a joint obligation to maintain any and all accessways. The
city shall have no obligation to maintain such accessways.
         b.   The city shall require easements for access to the property to
allow for emergency services and utility inspections as defined in the
development agreement.
         c.   Reciprocal easements for parking shall be provided to all tenants
and owners.
         d.   The applicant must submit a binding site plan schedule for
completion of all phases.
         e.   Phase lines must be treated as lot lines for setback purposes
under the zoning code unless the property owner will place a covenant on the
BSP that the setback areas for built phases, contained in all unbuilt phases,
shall become common areas and owned by the owners of existing units in the
built portions of the condominium upon the expiration of the completion
schedule.
         f.   All public improvements shall be guaranteed by bond or other
security satisfactory to the city.
         g.   All built phases in a condominium BSP shall have a joint and
separate obligations to maintain landscaping through covenants and/or easements
to assure that the responsibility is shared among the various owners. (Ord.
792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-10-6: BINDING SITE PLAN COMPONENTS:
   A.   A binding site plan means a record of survey and a development
agreement, if required.
   B.   The development agreement shall incorporate the conditions of approval
for the binding site plan. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-10-7: RECORDING REQUIREMENTS:
When the proposed binding site plan receives final approval, the applicant
shall record the binding site plan and development agreement, if required, with
the Pierce County auditor. The applicant shall furnish the city with three (3)
copies and a digital copy of the recorded binding site plan within five (5)
working days of recording, and the Pierce County assessor shall be furnished
one paper copy. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
12-10-8: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
All lots included in the binding site plan shall not be sold or transferred
unless the binding site plan and a record of survey map, which is prepared in
compliance with Revised Code Of Washington 58.09 and which includes a legal
description of each lot being created, is approved by the city and filed for
record in the Pierce County auditor's office. The binding site plan and all
associated requirements shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or other
person acquiring ownership of the lot, parcel, or tract.
All development must be in conformance with the recorded binding site plan. Any
development, use or density which fails to substantially conform to the site
plan as approved constitutes a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
12-10-9: AMENDMENT, MODIFICATION AND VACATION:
Amendment, modification and vacation of a binding site plan shall follow the
same procedures and satisfy the same laws, rules and conditions as required for
a new binding site plan application, as set forth in this chapter. The vacated
portion shall constitute one lot unless the property is subsequently divided by
an approved subdivision or short plat division. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
TITLE 13
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SECTION:
13-1-1: Title
13-1-2: Purpose
13-1-3: Interpretation And Application; General
13-1-4: Severability
13-1-5: Brief User's Guide
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ORTING DEVELOPMENT CODE. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-1-2: PURPOSE:
The general purposes of the development code are:
   A.   Implement Comprehensive Plan: To implement the comprehensive plan in
accordance with Revised Code of Washington 36.70 et seq. (planning enabling
act) and 36.70A et seq. (growth management act);
   B.   Promote Health And Safety: To promote public health, safety, and
general welfare through regulation of physical development of the city;
   C.   Orderly Development: To plan for future development of the city in an
orderly and predictable fashion;
   D.   Adequate Public Facilities: To provide for adequate public facilities
and services to support land development;
   E.   Promote Well Being: To promote social and economic well being through
integration of aesthetic, environmental, and economic values;
   F.   Protect Property Rights: To protect property rights;
   G.   Protect Resources: To encourage protection of environmentally critical
or historically significant resources;
   H.   Ensure Adequate Space: To ensure provision of adequate space for
commercial, industrial, residential, and other activities necessary for public
welfare;
   I.   Administration Of Regulations: To provide for efficient and effective
administration and enforcement of the regulations;
   J.   Provide Light And Access: To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and
convenience of access to property;
   K.   Elimination Of Nonconforming Uses: To provide for the gradual
elimination of those uses of land, buildings and structures which do not
conform to the standards of the district in which they are located and are
adversely affecting the development and taxable value of property in the
district. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION; GENERAL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this title, they shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. It is not intended
by this title to interfere with or revoke or invalidate any easement, covenant,
or other agreement between parties.
   B.   Greater Restrictions: When the provisions of this title impose greater
restrictions than are imposed by other applicable city, Pierce County, state,
and federal regulations, the provisions of this title shall control.
   C.   Ambiguities Or Differences: In case of any ambiguity or difference of
meaning or inconsistencies between the text and any illustrations or other
graphics, the text throughout this title shall control.
   D.   Construction Of Words: Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
words in the present tense can include the future tense, and words in the
singular can include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms
defined in the beginning of each chapter of this title and in chapter 2 of this
title, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary
meanings.
   E.   Shall, Should, May: The words "shall" and "should" are always mandatory
and not discretionary. The word "may" is discretionary. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this title is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of
this title. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-1-5: BRIEF USER'S GUIDE:
   A.   Chapters: The development code, this title, contains nine (9) chapters:
      1.   Introduction: Establishes the purpose, title and basic rules for
using the city development code.
      2.   Definitions: Provides definitions for words used throughout the
title. Words or terms used only in one chapter may be defined in that chapter.
      3.   Zone Classifications: Lists and describes the zoning
classifications, allowed uses for each zone, and categorization of uses. Table
1 "City of Orting Permitted Land Uses by Zoning Designations" is included in
this chapter.
      4.   Temporary Uses/Temporary Housing Units: Allows temporary uses and
structures and provides standards and conditions for regulating such uses and
structures.
      5.   Development Standards: Provides development standards, such as
density, setbacks, height, lot width, landscaping, buffering, parking, access,
and other standards to cover general and specific uses; also covers home
occupations, accessory dwelling units, adult entertainment, transfer of
development rights, and sign standards.
      6.   Special Use Permits: Establishes the permit processes and criteria
for permits provided by this title, e.g., nonconforming use permits,
conditional use permits, planned unit development permits, and variances.
      7.   Sign Regulations: Establishes the permit processes for various sign
types and provides regulations for the installation, alteration, relocation,
maintenance, use, and removal of signs, including permitted and prohibited sign
types; number, size, and height limitations; and architectural details.
      8.   Medical Cannabis: Provides regulations for medical cannabis use
including personal use and collective gardens and sets forth penalties for
noncompliance.
      9.   Wireless Communications Services Facilities: Defines various types
of wireless communication services facilities including general macro
facilities, temporary facilities, and small facilities and provides regulations
for each including standards for locations, monopoles, height, screening, etc.
This chapter also establishes the permit process and timelines.
   B.   Numbering Scheme: The numbering scheme used in this title operates as
shown below:
      13      5      1      A.1.a.(1)(A)
      Title      Chapter   Section    subsections
   C.   Format: Each chapter begins with a listing of the sections and a
purpose statement for the chapter. General definitions are contained in chapter
2 of this title; specialized definitions may be found at the beginning of the
chapter where those definitions are used. Cross references to other chapters
and sections of this title can be found throughout the title. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13-2-1: General Provisions
13-2-2: A
13-2-3: B
13-2-4: C
13-2-5: D
13-2-6: E
13-2-7: F
13-2-8: G
13-2-9: H
13-2-10: I
13-2-11: J
13-2-12: K
13-2-13: L
13-2-14: M
13-2-15: N
13-2-16: O
13-2-17: P
13-2-18: Q
13-2-19: R
13-2-20: S
13-2-21: T
13-2-22: U
13-2-23: V
13-2-24: W
13-2-25: X
13-2-26: Y
13-2-27: Z
13-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
As used in this title, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires
otherwise, the words or phrases defined in this chapter shall have the
indicated meanings. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-2-2: A:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): A separate, subordinate, self contained dwelling
unit attached to or contained within a single-family dwelling; or contained
within a separate structure that is generally subordinate in size to the
primary dwelling unit on the premises.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building or other structure that is subordinate to the
principal building and is incidental to the use of the principal building on
the same lot (such as sheds or barns associated with a single- family
residence). Accessory dwelling units are not included in this definition.
ACCESSORY USE: A use that is clearly incidental and subordinate to the
principal use on the same lot.
ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator, chief supervisory staff person or his/
her designee. Uses of the term "City Administrator" shall mean the same as
"Administrator".
ADULT BUSINESS: Any business which sells, rents, displays, or provides adult
stock in trade depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, or engages in or permits specified sexual
activities on the premises, and which excludes any person by virtue of age from
all or part of the premises. Adult businesses include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Adult bathhouse.
   B.   Adult bookstore in which ten percent (10%) or more of the stock in
trade is adult stock in trade.
   C.   Adult cabaret which presents go-go dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or similar entertainment.
   D.   Adult massage parlor in which massage or touching of the human body is
provided for a fee. This does not include a licensed spa or health club/medical
clinic.
   E.   Adult retail store in which ten percent (10%) or more of the stock in
trade is adult stock in trade.
   F.   Adult sauna parlor.
   G.   Adult theater, including a building, portion of a building, enclosure
or drive-in theater which displays adult stock in trade.
   H.   Adult video store in which ten percent (10%) or more of the stock in
trade is adult stock in trade.
ADULT FAMILY HOME: A residence licensed by the state of Washington where
personal care, room and board are provided for more than one but not more than
six (6) adults who are not related by blood or a marriage to the person or
persons providing the services.
ADULT STOCK IN TRADE: All books, pictures or other printed materials, products
or equipment, prerecorded videotapes, disks, or similar material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where such material
is generally available for rental, purchase, viewing, or use by patrons of the
establishment, excluding material located in any storeroom or other portion of
the premises not regularly open to patrons.
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, TESTING, AND TRAINING: The study of the actions
associated with the cultivation of crops and/or livestock.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare for motor vehicles, providing secondary access to
abutting property.
ALTERATION: A change or rearrangement of the structural parts of existing
facilities or an enlargement by extending the side or increasing the height or
depth or moving from one location to another. In buildings for businesses,
commercial, industrial or similar uses, the installation or rearrangement of
partitions affecting more than one-third (1/3) of a single floor area shall be
considered an alteration.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated by the city of Orting or its authorized
agents, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the
authority of this article or of state law.
ANTENNA: A wire or system of wires, rods, poles, or similar devices; or
satellite dishes used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic
waves, external to or attached to the exterior of any building.
APARTMENT: Any portion of a multi-family or mixed use building that is
designed, built, rented, leased or offered to be occupied as an independent
living unit with self-contained cooking facilities.
APPLICANT: A person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity seeking
development approval from the city by submitting an application for any of the
activities covered by these regulations.
AQUACULTURE: Raising aquatic plants and animals in controlled or selected
aquatic environments for the sale of aquatic plants, animals, or their
products.
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW: Review and approval conducted in accordance with
section
13-6-7  of this title.
ART GALLERY: A space with public access and which is located within a building
for the interior exhibition or display of artworks which may or may not be
offered for sale to the public.
ASSEMBLY/FABRICATION: See “Manufacturing, Light.”
ATTACHED RESIDENCES: Two or more physically attached dwelling units (sharing a
wall), where each unit has separate access to a yard, court, or street. (Ord.
792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 886, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-3: B:
BANKS: See “professional offices.” “Savings associations” and “loan
associations” shall be considered “banks” as the term applies in Title 13.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A single-family residence that provides overnight lodging
and limited meal service for guests and which is limited to five (5)
guestrooms.
BLOCK: A group of continuous lots, tracts or parcels within well defined and
fixed boundaries.
BOARDING HOUSE: A rooming house with no more than five (5) guestrooms operated
for compensation in which meals (with or without lodging) are provided.
BREWERY: See definition of Winery/Brewery.
BUFFER: A linear landscaped area with sufficient planting density to provide
effective sight obscuring between land uses.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof for the shelter of persons.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The total ground coverage of all buildings, structures, roof
overhangs, and eaves measured from the outside edges, external walls,
supporting members or roof edges.
BUILDING AREA, BUILDING SITE: An area within a lot upon which a building to
accommodate the principal use of the lot could be practicably built, bound by
the setbacks.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN: The building which accommodates the principal use
of a site or lot.
BUSINESS OFFICES: See “professional offices.” (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2020-1063, 8-12-2020; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-4: C:
CAMPGROUND: A developed area consisting of more than one campsite used for the
purposes of recreational camping.
CANOPY: A portion of a building which extends beyond the building line and
fully or partially covers a sidewalk, entry, or other access.
CARETAKER RESIDENCE: An attached or detached dwelling unit of permanent type
construction used exclusively for a caretaker to live on the same site as the
use.
CARGO CONTAINER: A standardized, reusable vessel that was:
   A.   Originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the
packing, shipping,    movement, storage or transportation of freight, articles,
goods, commodities, or personal property, and
   B.   Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a railcar, or
   C.   Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for
movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
CHURCH: An establishment, the principal purpose of which is religious worship
and for which the principal building or other structure contains the sanctuary
or principal place of worship. This term, as used in this Title, is
interchangeable with mosque, temple or other religious facilities/places of
worship.
CITY: The city of Orting, Washington.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Orting.
CLOSED RECORD APPEAL: An appeal to the city council based on the existing
record.
CLUBS AND LODGES: Non-commercial groups and organizations, which may be
centered around an activity, a hobby, or philanthropy.
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: A post-secondary institution for higher learning that
grants associate or bachelor degrees and may also have research facilities and/
or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degrees. This may also
include community colleges that grant associate or bachelor degrees or
certificates of completion in business or technical fields (such as trade
schools).
COMMERCIAL: Any activity carried on for financial gain, including cooperative
or nonprofit businesses offering merchandise or services for a fee or price, or
any organization serving a public purpose of community service such as
churches, noncommercial clubs, lodges, theater groups, recreational and
neighborhood associations and cultural associations.
COMMUNICATION SERVICES: Broadcasting, recording, and other communication
services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but
excluding major utilities. This classification includes radio, television, or
recording studios; telephone switching centers; and telegraph offices. This
classification does not include wireless communication facilities.
COMMUNITY CENTER: Public buildings, meeting halls, and/or recreational spaces
where members of a community can gather for events, recreational opportunities,
support services, or public information. These uses may be publicly or
privately operated.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Orting comprehensive plan adopted in 1996, as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use allowed in one or more zones as defined by this zoning
title, but which has peculiar characteristics such as the size, technological
processes or equipment, location with reference to surroundings, streets, and
existing improvements or demands upon public facilities and therefore, requires
a special permit in order to assure proper control to make the use consistent
and compatible with other existing or permissible uses in the same zone and
mitigate adverse impacts of the use. Typical conditional uses are listed in
this title. Others may be established by the city upon application.
CONDOMINIUM: A type of real property ownership in projects composed of two (2)
or more dwelling units, offices, or other establishments that are individually
owned and within which common building areas or land areas of the project are
owned cooperatively in fixed percentages by the owners of the individual
dwelling units or establishments. This type of development requires the
preparation of a plat under the provisions of the state horizontal property
regime act 1  and the formation of a legal homeowners’ association to guide the
financial and maintenance arrangements for the units within the development.
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY/ RETIREMENT CENTER: A residential facility designed
for and occupied by at least one person per unit who is able to live
independently and without twenty-four (24) hour supervision; and providing
centralized services for the residents including meals, recreation,
housekeeping, laundry and transportation.
CONSTRUCTION BUSINESS: A commercial establishment offering the construction,
repair, and/or remodel of structures, performed by a licensed contractor. These
businesses may include office space, and indoor or outdoor storage of
construction vehicles, equipment, and materials.
COPY: The written or graphic content of a sign.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES: Jails, prisons, and other detention facilities, used
to house people who have been charged with or convicted of a crime.
COTTAGE: A small, detached dwelling unit, not larger than one thousand (1,000)
square feet in total floor area that is developed at a density greater than the
underlying zone. More than one cottage may occupy a single lot.
COTTAGE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A single-family housing cluster of dwelling units
around a central open space with the following characteristics:
   A.   Each unit is of a size and function suitable for a single person or
very small family;
   B.   Each unit has the construction characteristics of a single-family
house;
   C.   Units may be located on platted lots or as units in a condominium and
may share use of common facilities such as a party room, toolshed, garden
orchard, workshop or parking areas;
   D.   The site is designed with a coherent concept in mind, including shared
functional open space, off street parking, access within the site and from the
site, and consistent landscaping.
CRITICAL AREAS: Areas of environmental sensitivity, which include the following
areas and ecosystems: a) wetlands; b) areas with a critical recharging effect
on aquifers used for potable water; c) fish and wildlife habitat conservation
areas; d) frequently flooded areas; and e) “geologically hazardous areas”, as
defined in title 11 of this code.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street intersecting with another street at one end and
terminated by a vehicular turnaround at the other end. (Ord. 873, 2-25-2009;
amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2020-1063, 8-12-2020; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 64.32.
13-2-5: D:
DATE OF DECISION: The date on which final action occurs and from which the
appeal period is calculated.
DAYCARE CENTER: An establishment licensed by the state, used to provide adult
or child care services during part of the twenty- four (24) hour day in a
facility. See also definition of Family Daycare in this chapter.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land or rights in land by its owner
for any general and public use, reserving to himself or herself no other rights
than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public
use to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be
evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or short
plat showing the dedication thereon; and the acceptance by the public shall be
evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city.
DENSITY: The number of permitted dwelling units allowed on each acre of land or
fraction thereof.
DESIGN STANDARDS: Dimensional and other quantitative standards, including, but
not limited to, lot sizes and dimensions, setbacks, building placement and
other standards used by the city to control physical development.
DETACHED: A type of building or dwelling unit surrounded on all sides by open
space and not connected to other buildings or structures except for permitted
accessory structures.
DEVELOPER: See definition of Applicant in this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT CODE: Orting municipal code, this title and titles 12 and 15 of
this code.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Shall mean and refer to those standards for development
of real property as set forth in the development code.
DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THRU RESTAURANT: A food and beverage establishment that contains
an outside service window and/or provision for food service to occupants of
automobiles parked on the premises.
DRIVING SURFACE: That portion of a street intended for vehicular travel or
parking.
DUPLEX: A building with two (2) attached dwelling units with a common
separation wall or floor.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping
facilities for a person, one family, or group of individuals. Dwelling unit
does not include recreation vehicles or mobile homes. (See also definitions of
Multi-Family Dwelling and Family in this chapter.) (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd.
Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2021-1086, 10-27-2021; Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-6: E:
EASEMENT, ACCESS: A private right of way no less than twenty feet (20') wide
which provides vehicular access to a street from no more than three (3)
existing or potential lots.
EATING AND DRINKING PLACES: Any establishment that offers food and drink,
including alcoholic beverages, for sale and consumption on the premises.
EMERGENCY HOUSING: Temporary indoor accommodations for individuals or families
who are homeless or at imminent risk of becoming homeless that is intended to
address the basic health, food, clothing, and personal hygiene needs of
individuals or families. Emergency housing may or may not require occupants to
enter into a lease or an occupancy agreement.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: Facilities for agencies or organizations that respond to
emergencies when they occur, such as ambulance, medical, and firefighting
agencies.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: a facility that provides a temporary shelter for individuals
or families who are currently homeless. Emergency shelter may not require
occupants to enter into a lease or an occupancy agreement. Emergency shelter
facilities may include day and warming centers that do not provide overnight
accommodations.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL: A business which offers any specialized equipment for
consumer rental.
ERECT: To build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach, hang,
place, suspend, affix or maintain buildings, signs, lighting, or other
architectural features.
EXTRACTION AND PROCESSING: The removal of natural resource materials from the
earth, and/or the conversion of those raw materials into a commercially or
industrially usable product. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; Ord. 2021-1083, 9-29-2021;
Ord. 2022-1093, 3-30-2022; Ord. 2022-1095, 8-10-2022; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-
2024)
13-2-7: F:
FACADE: The entire building front or street wall face of a building.
FAMILY: Persons, either related or unrelated, occupying a dwelling unit and
living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAYCARE: A facility licensed by the state of Washington located in a
dwelling and operated by the owner of the residence for regularly scheduled
care of twelve (12) or fewer adults or children, for periods less than twenty-
four (24) hours.
FINAL DECISION: The final action by the administrator, planning commission,
hearing examiner or city council.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The ratio of building floor area to the area of the lot upon
which the building is located.
FOOD: Has its usual and ordinary meaning and includes all items designed for
human consumption, including, but not limited to, candy, coffee, gum, popcorn,
hot dogs, sandwiches, peanuts, soft drinks and dairy products.
FOOD PROCESSING: The commercial or industrial processing of raw agricultural
materials or ingredients into food for sale or consumption, not including
standard on-site kitchens for food vendors or eating and drinking places.
FOOD VENDING OR FOOD VENDING SERVICES: Engaging in the business of selling food
of any kind or description.
FOSTER HOME: A home licensed and regulated by the state and classified by the
state as a foster home, providing care and guidance for not more than three (3)
unrelated juveniles.
FREIGHT FACILITIES WAREHOUSING: A facility for the storage and distribution of
products, supplies, and equipment. This use excludes outdoor storage and self-
service storage.
FRONTAGE: The side of a lot or parcel along a street. (Ord. 943, 5-14-2014;
Ord. 2021-1086, 10-27-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-8: G:
GARAGE, PARKING OR COMMERCIAL: A building used for storage, repair or servicing
of motor vehicles as a commercial use.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or space within the principal building
used for storage of vehicles.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: An establishment that sells motor vehicle fuels,
lubricants, and auto accessories, and may include vehicle washing and
servicing, not including painting, bodywork or major engine repair.
GOLF FACILITIES: A commercial or recreational establishment or facility
offering space to play or practice golf.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a
government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental
storage and maintenance of vehicles.
GRADE: The surface of the ground.
GREENBELT: An area of vegetation, either native stock or replanted, in public
or private ownership lying outside and adjacent to the right of way line of
streets or along real property lines. Greenbelts are intended to visually and
physically screen and separate land uses or activities from each other.
GROUND COVER: Small plants that grow close to the ground.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the floor or floors
of all the buildings on a building site, measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls covering all areas having a ceiling height of seven feet
(7') or more; but excluding elevator shafts and stairwells, all parking and
loading spaces inside the building, unroofed areas, roofed areas open on two
(2) or more sides, areas having a ceiling height of less than seven feet (7'),
areas used exclusively to house fixed mechanical or electrical equipment, and
basements used exclusively for storage or housing of fixed mechanical equipment
or central heating or cooling equipment. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024)
13-2-9: H:
HARD SURFACE: See Section
9-5A-4 for hard surface definition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any liquid, solid, gas, or sludge, including any material,
substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits
any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous waste as described in
Revised Code of Washington 70A.300.010(10), or its successor.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: All dangerous and extremely hazardous waste as defined in
Revised Code Of Washington 70A.300.010(11), or its successor, except for
moderate risk waste as set forth in Revised Code Of Washington 70A.300.010(13),
or its successor.
HAZARDOUS WASTE STORAGE: The holding of hazardous waste for a temporary period
as regulated by the state dangerous waste regulations, Washington
administrative code chapter 173-303, or its successor.
HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT: The physical, chemical, or biological processing of
hazardous waste for the purpose of rending these wastes nondangerous or less
dangerous, safer for transport, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume, as
regulated by the state dangerous waste regulations, Washington administrative
code chapter 173-303, or its successor.
HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT AND STORAGE FACILITY ON SITE: Storage and treatment
facilities which treat and store hazardous wastes generated on the same
property.
HEALTH SERVICES: A business or organization providing professional healthcare
to clients. Hospitals are defined separately and not included in this
definition.
HEARING EXAMINER: The official appointed by the mayor to adjudicate land use
decisions as set forth in this code.
HEDGE: A fence or boundary formed by a dense row of shrubs or low trees.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance from the average of the lowest and
highest point exposed by the finished ground level to the highest point of the
building, excluding chimneys.
HOME OCCUPATION: An economic enterprise to make a product or perform a service
that is conducted or operated within a residential dwelling unit, or building
accessory to a residential dwelling unit, by the resident occupant or owner,
and which use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use
of the dwelling unit, including the use of the dwelling unit as a business
address in a directory or as a business mailing address.
HOSPITAL: A public or private institution providing medical treatment, surgical
intervention, and nursing care to sick or injured people.
HOTEL or MOTEL: A facility with six (6) or more guestrooms that offers
transient lodging accommodations on a daily or weekly rate to the general
public, which complies with WAC 246-360, and which may provide additional
services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities.
Accommodations for recreational vehicles are not included. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2020-1063, 8-12-2020; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-10: I:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: See Section
9-5A-4 for impervious surface definition.
IRREGULAR LOT: A lot which is shaped so that application of setback
requirements is difficult. Examples include a lot with a shape which is not
close to rectangular, or a lot with no readily identifiable rear lot line.
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee,
whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in the business of providing
vending services and who conducts such a business either in or about a
stationary vendor unit, or from a mobile vendor unit by traveling from place to
place, or customer to customer. A person, firm or corporation so engaged shall
not be relieved from complying with the provisions of title 3, chapter 2 of
this code merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary business in
connection with, as part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer. (Ord. 943, 5-14-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-1063, 8-12-2020)
13-2-11: J:
JUSTICE FACILITIES: Any site, structure, or facility used in the provision of
law enforcement and criminal justice. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-12: K:
KENNEL: A structure or lot on which four (4) or more domestic animals at least
four (4) months of age are kept.
K-12 SCHOOLS: Public or private institutions providing education to school-age
children from kindergarten through twelfth grade. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-13: L:
LANDFILL: A disposal facility or part of a facility at which solid waste is
placed in or on land and which is not a land treatment facility, or as defined
and regulated in Title 5 Public Health and Safety.
LANDSCAPE: Site or development area characterized by plantings, screens,
buffers, and other features intended to provide aesthetic or functional relief.
LIBRARY: An establishment, or part of an establishment, which offers books,
periodicals, other printed materials, and/or films and music for borrowing.
Libraries may also offer public computer access, information, and events.
LIGHTING: The illumination of structures and/or buildings and signs.
LIQUOR STORE: An establishment specializing in selling alcoholic beverages, not
for consumption on the premises.
LIVESTOCK AND SMALL ANIMALS: Cattle, sheep, goats, or animals of the Bovidae
family; all horses, mules, other hoof animals, or animals of the Equidae
family; all pigs, swine, or animals of the Suidae family; llamas; and
ostriches, rhea, and emu.
LOADING SPACE/LOADING FACILITY: An off-street space on the same lot with a
structure or use, or contiguous to a group of structures or uses, for the
temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading persons, merchandise,
or materials, and which abuts a street, alley or other appropriate means of
access and egress.
LOT: A fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of
sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and
area. The term shall include parcels.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot,
excluding any street right of way or access easement.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and bordered by two (2)
intersecting city streets. Alleys and driveways are not considered public
streets for the purposes of determining corner lots.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured in the general direction of the side lot line(s).
LOT, FLAG OR PIPESTEM: A large lot not meeting minimum street frontage
requirements where access to the street is provided by a narrow, private
driveway.
LOT LINE OR PROPERTY LINE: Any boundary line enclosing the lot area.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line separating any lot or parcel of land from a street
right of way. On a through lot, the line abutting the street providing primary
access to the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the front line shall be
considered to be along both street lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line,
and in the case of a triangular, irregular or other odd shaped lot, the line
bordering the lot, generally parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: An area or parcel of land as shown on an officially recorded
plat or subdivision, or an area or parcel of land to which a deed or contract
is officially recorded as a unit of property, or which is described by metes
and bounds or as a fraction of a section.
LOT SIZE AVERAGING: Lot size averaging is an approach to dividing land that
allows a parcel to be divided such that some of the resulting lots are smaller
than the minimum lot size required in the applicable zone, in order to preserve
critical areas or other topographical adversities and provide greater
flexibility, provided that the average lot size in the development as a whole
meets the minimum lot size.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot fronting on two (2) streets that is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to
the line establishing the lot depth at a point midway between the front lot
line and the rear lot line. Any area used as an access easement shall be
excluded from the computation of the lot width. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-14: M:
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: Manufacturing activities that are typically smaller in
scale and do not require heavy, specialized, industrial equipment. Typical
activities may include, but are not limited to, materials testing, printing,
and small-scale assembly. Light manufacturing excludes machine shops,
incinerators, wrecking yards, feedlots and other uses where significant adverse
noise, air quality, or other impacts caused by manufacturing processes can not
be contained within buildings.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling unit manufactured off site in a factory,
transported to the site and placed on a permanent foundation and bearing an
insignia by a state or federal regulatory agency indicating that the building
complies with all applicable construction standards of the U.S. department of
housing and urban development’s definition of a manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A residential development in which the land is owned,
operated, and maintained as a commercial business and the individual
manufactured homes or recreational vehicles (RVs) are either leased or are
located on leased sites.
MILL: A structure and/or piece of machinery used in materials processing to
break down raw materials into finer or smaller pieces, usually by grinding or
cutting.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle bearing the “mobile home” insignia of the Washington
state department of labor and industries.
MOBILE VENDOR: An itinerant vendor providing vending services from a mobile
vending unit.
MOBILE VENDOR UNIT: A vehicle, cart or other conveyance capable of moving or
being moved and being used, or intended for use, by a person or persons to
provide vending services while located within or upon the public rights of way.
MODULAR HOMES: A detached dwelling that is designed for human habitation, is
either entirely or substantially prefabricated at a place other than a building
site, and is constructed or installed on the site in accordance with the UBC
and bearing the appropriate insignia indicating such compliance. Modular homes
are also commonly referred to as “prefabricated,” “panelized,” or “factory-
built” units.
MONUMENT: A permanent freestanding structure designed to commemorate a person
or event.
MOTEL: See definition of Hotel or Motel in this chapter.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
MUSEUM: Facilities open to the public where works of art, scientific specimens,
or other objects of permanent value are kept and displayed. (Ord. 943, 5-14-
2014; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-15: N:
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lawfully established lot which does not conform to the
provisions of the development code.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A lawfully erected structure which does not conform to
the provisions of the development code.
NONCONFORMING USE: A lawfully established use which does not conform to the
provisions of the development code.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization incorporated under provisions of the
federal tax code 501(c)(3).
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: An establishment which provides full time care
for three (3) or more chronically ill or infirm persons. Such care shall not
include surgical, obstetrical or acute illness services. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-2-16: O:
OFFICE: A building or separately defined space within a building used for
business. The use of an office does not include on premises sales or
manufacture of goods.
OPEN RECORD HEARING: A hearing, conducted by a single hearing body or officer
authorized by the local government to conduct such hearings, that creates the
local government's record through testimony and submission of evidence and
information, under procedures prescribed by the local government by ordinance
or resolution. An open record hearing may be held prior to a local government's
decision on a project permit to be known as an "open record predecision
hearing." An open record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be known as an
"open record appeal hearing," if no open record predecision hearing has been
held on the project permit.
OPEN SPACE: Any part of a lot unobstructed by structures from the ground
upward.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: All or part of a lot or business which is used for the keeping
of materials, vehicles, or products in an open, uncovered yard or in an
unwalled building. Such materials may include tractors, backhoes, heavy
equipment, construction materials, bulk products, and other similar items.
OUTDOOR THEATER: An outdoor stage, amphitheater, or similar gathering space,
where the public may view live musical or dramatic performances, film
screenings, and other forms of entertainment. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-17: P:
PARAPET: A false front or wall extension projecting above a roof.
PARCEL: A fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of
sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and
area. The term shall include lots.
PARKING FACILITIES: A land area or building used for the storage of four (4) or
more vehicles excluding parking areas for single-family residences.
PARKING SPACE: An area accessible to vehicles and used exclusively or
principally for vehicle storage.
PARKS: Recreational areas which primarily are owned or operated by public or
nonprofit entities for the use and enjoyment of the general public. In some
cases, such areas and facilities may be incidental to private development, such
as open space set-asides necessary for environmental mitigation and children’s
play areas within a subdivision; are intended to be principally used by a
finite group; and may constitute private property. This can also include plaza
and courts, typically a pedestrian space that is available for public use and
is clearly visible and accessible from the adjacent right-of-way. Typical
features may include special paving, landscaping, lighting, seating areas,
water features, and art.
PARTY OF RECORD: Any person who has testified at a hearing or has submitted a
written statement related to a development action and who provides the city
with a complete address.
PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: One or more subsidized, leased dwelling units
with no limit on length of stay that prioritizes people who need comprehensive
support services to retain tenancy and utilizes admissions practices designed
to use lower barriers to entry than would be typical for other subsidized or
unsubsidized rental housing, especially related to rental history, criminal
history, and personal behaviors. Permanent supportive housing is paired with
on-site or off-site voluntary services designed to support a person living with
a complex and disabling behavioral health or physical health condition who was
experiencing homelessness or was at imminent risk of homelessness prior to
moving into housing to retain their housing and be a successful tenant in a
housing arrangement, improve the resident’s health status, and connect the
resident of the housing with community-based health care, treatment, or
employment services. Permanent supportive housing is subject to all of the
rights and responsibilities defined in the Residential Landlord Tenant Act,
chapter 59.18 RCW.
PERSON: Any person, firm, business, corporation, partnership or other
association or organization, marital community, municipal corporation, or
governmental agency.
PERSONAL SERVICE: Businesses engaged in providing services to meet individual's
needs, not including healthcare. These services include, but are not limited
to, barber shops, travel agencies, instructional facilities such as dance
studios, coin-operated laundries, and fitness studios.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: Any surface that enables full or partial absorption of
stormwater into the ground and that is not considered impervious surface as
that term is defined in title 9, chapter 5, article A of this code.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS: Crude oil, petroleum products and byproducts, and gaseous
hydrocarbons and byproducts.
PLANNED ACTION: A significant development proposal as defined in Revised Code
Of Washington 43.21C.031, as amended.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A flexible method of land development which
accomplishes the purposes of chapter 6 of this title.
PRIMARY OR PRINCIPAL USE: The predominant use of the land or building to which
all other uses are secondary.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A paved or graveled surface that provides access to a lot
from a public or private right-of-way and is dimensionally consistent with
current adopted Orting Development Standards.
PRIVATE PARKING: Parking facilities for the noncommercial use of the occupant
and guests of the occupant.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: “Professional offices” or “business offices” means
specialized services or skills provided in an office setting, such as lawyers,
architects, engineers, consultants, real estate offices, accountants, banks,
and financial advisors.
PROJECT: A proposal for development.
PROPERTY LINE: See definition of Lot Line.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND UTILITIES: Land or structures owned by or operated for
the benefit of the public use and necessity, including, but not limited to,
public facilities defined in Revised Code Of Washington 36.70A.030, as amended,
and private utilities serving the public.
PUBLIC HEARING: An open or closed record hearing at which evidence is presented
and testimony is taken.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any structure, utility, roadway or sidewalk for use by the
public, required as a condition of development approval.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned land, including, but not limited to,
parks, playgrounds, waterways, and trails.
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES: Any site, structure, or facility used in the
provision of public safety services, especially police and fire.
PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS: Shall mean and refer to those specifications and
standard design details, as adopted and amended from time to time by the City
Department of Public Works, that are intended to regulate the construction of
public works, or improvements that will be dedicated to the public, that are
associated with public and private development within the City. The Public
Works Standards shall mean the same as the Orting Development Standards. (Ord.
792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2021-1083, 9-29-2021; Ord. 2022-
1093, 3-30-2022; Ord. 2022-1095, 8-10-2022; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-18: Q:
Reserved. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-2-19: R:
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES: Facilities for recreational use such as swimming
pools, athletic clubs, tennis courts, ball fields, play fields, and the like.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A recreational vehicle is a factory built vehicular
structure designed only for recreational use and not as a primary residence or
for permanent occupancy, built and certified in accordance with NFPA 1192-15 or
ANSI A119.5-09 consensus standards for recreational vehicles and not certified
as a manufactured home. It is designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable and shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailers, campers,
motor homes, and camping trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK/CAMPGROUND: A recreational vehicle park/campground
refers to any tract of land divided into lots or spaces, under the ownership or
management of one person, firm or corporation for the purpose of locating three
or more recreational vehicles for nightly or short-term use. Said park/
campground shall have an on-site caretaker.
REMODEL, EXTERIOR: Any renovation, upgrading, or otherwise changing the
exterior of a building, including repainting, except when using previously
approved colors.
RESORT: An establishment, often including lodging, where people may go for
recreation, rest, personal care, sport, or another similar purpose.
RETAIL FUEL SALES: Businesses selling fuel for motor vehicles, including
gasoline and diesel.
RETAIL SALES: Any business offering goods for sale. If a specific type of
retail business is otherwise defined in this section, that definition shall
prevail.
REZONE: A change in classification from one zoning district to another.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel, motel or lodge which advertises
as a boarding, lodging, or rooming house, or is a licensed place of business
with rooms available for rent. This does not include short-term rentals offered
in residences. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord.
2024-1133, 10-30-2024; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-20: S:
SCHOOL SUPPORT FACILITIES: A building, complex, or installation that
facilitates an action or process associated with school uses including
facilities such as administrative buildings and bus barns.
SCREEN, SCREENING: A continuous fence, hedge or combination of both which
obscures vision through eighty percent (80%) or more of the screen area, not
including drives or walkways.
SECONDARY USE: A use, subordinate to the primary use, which may exist only when
a primary use is existing on the same lot. The floor area of a secondary use
must be less than that devoted to the primary use.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE: A facility consisting of separate storage units which are
rented to customers having exclusive and independent access to their respective
units for storage of residential or commercial oriented goods.
SETBACK: The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and
the related front, side, or rear property line, rights-of-way, or access
easements.
SETBACK AREA: The lot area between the lot lines and the setback lines.
SETBACK LINE: A line which is parallel to a lot line or access easement located
at the distance required by the setback.
SHARED OFF-STREET PARKING: Off-street areas designed, used, required, or
intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles in which two (2) or more
uses which are within close proximity may share parking facilities to fulfill
their individual parking requirements because their prime operational hours do
not overlap.
SHED: An accessory structure, with or without a permanent foundation, without
plumbing, used for storage, generally less than two hundred (200) square feet
in area.
SIGN: A structure or graphic display designed to inform or attract the
attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ABANDONED: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a person,
business, product or activity conducted or available for more than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days on the premises where the sign is located, or a
damaged or vandalized sign which has not been repaired within sixty (60) days
of the event.
SIGN AREA: The area of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn around all
parts of the sign from the viewpoint exposing the largest surface area,
excluding simple support structures. Sign supporting structures which are part
of the sign display shall be included in the area of the rectangle.
SIGN, ATTACHED: A sign permanently attached to or mounted on a building,
including signs painted on a building wall.
SIGN, BANNER: Any temporary sign intended to be hung, with or without framing,
and possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to
fabric or similar material. Flags, insignias, canopy signs, and posters shall
not be considered banner signs.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession,
product, activity or service that is not conducted, sold, or offered on the
premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign that is part of or attached to a canopy.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A sign used to advertise or provide information about
physical construction activity occurring under a valid building permit.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign intended to provide wayfinding information.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the
use or uses of a building are given. This includes signs for office buildings,
church directories, and multiple signs for malls, arcades and similar
commercial buildings using standard format business signs.
SIGN FACE: Any side of a sign which contains advertising or graphic display
which is visible to the public.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign not attached to a building.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign internally illuminated in any manner by an
artificial light source. Indirectly illuminated signs are not included in this
definition.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED: A sign with an internal light source shining
through the face of the sign. Exposed neon signs are internally illuminated.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A freestanding structure with signage for multiple
establishments collocated on a property.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this
Code, but which conforms to all applicable laws in effect on the date the sign
was originally erected.
SIGN, OFF SITE: A permanent sign not located on the same lot as the business or
use it is intended to serve.
SIGN, PERMANENT: A sign nailed, glued, screwed or similarly fastened to
foundation systems capable of holding it in position under an imposed wind load
of twenty-five (25) pounds per square foot or the design requirements of
chapter 23 of the Building Code.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any mobile, movable sign, sign on a vehicle or structure,
including a sandwich board sign, which is not securely attached to the ground
or any other structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign affixed to a building or wall, the leading edge of
which extends beyond such building or wall.
SIGN, READER BOARD: A sign that is designed to allow message changes either by
manual or electronic means.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected or constructed wholly upon or over the roof of a
building and supported by the roof structure.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign or advertising display intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time or for a fixed event and not permanently affixed to a
structure or the ground, including real estate signs used to offer for sale,
lease, or rent, the property upon which the sign is placed.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign placed upon the interior or exterior surface of a window
or placed inside the window within six feet (6') of the window surface, facing
the outside and intended to be seen from the exterior.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing only one dwelling unit.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY SLEEPING UNIT: A housing type consisting of single
sleeping units, with shared cooking facilities and with shared bathroom
facilities. See also subsection
10-2-1F of this Code.
SITE PLAN: A scale drawing which shows the areas and locations of all
buildings, streets, roads, improvements, easements, utilities, open spaces and
other principal development features for a specific parcel of property.
SITE PLAN, BINDING: A site plan reviewed and approved pursuant to this title,
containing the inscriptions or attachments setting forth the limitations and
conditions of use for a specific parcel of property and meeting the
requirements of the Pierce County auditor for recording.
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES: A facility providing services related to the
management, storage, collection, transportation, treatment, use, processing or
final disposal of solid wastes, including the recovery and recycling of
materials from solid wastes, the recovery of energy resources from wastes or
the conversion of the energy in wastes to more useful forms or combinations
thereof.
SPAS AND HEALTH CLUBS: Businesses or organizations offering health and beauty
treatments, wellness services, exercise equipment, and/or classes.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely or opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast; or human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
STABLE: A building used to board animals owned by the owner and/or others.
STATIONARY FOOD VENDOR: An itinerant vendor who provides food vending services
from a stationary vendor unit.
STATIONARY FOOD VENDOR UNIT: A stationary vendor unit used, or intended to be
used, to provide food vending services.
STATIONARY VENDOR: An itinerant vendor who provides vending services from a
stationary vendor unit.
STATIONARY VENDOR UNIT:
   A.   A vehicle, cart or other conveyance capable of moving or being moved,
or
   B.   A structure that is not permanently affixed to real property, and which
is used, or intended to be used, at a fixed location to provide vending
services.
STOCK IN TRADE: Any item or goods that: a) is produced, purchased, processed,
finished or fabricated as part of a home occupation; or b) is incorporated into
any such item; or c) is used to make, manufacture, produce, process, finish or
fabricate any such item; or d) is intended for resale on site; provided, that
it does not include samples.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way or easement which provides vehicle
access to more than three (3) lots or potential lots.
STREET LOT LINE: The lot line or lines along the edge of a street.
STREET SETBACK: The minimum distance required for buildings to be set back from
the street lot line.
STRUCTURE: Any combination or arrangement of material that is artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together, for use, occupancy, or
ornamentation, that is installed, built, constructed, or erected on, above, or
below the surface of land or water, whether or not affixed permanently or
attached to something having a permanent location.
SUBDIVISION: A division of land into ten (10) or more lots, tracts, parcels,
sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership,
including resubdivision of previously subdivided land, except as provided in
this title.
SUBDIVISION CODE: Title 12 of this Code.
SUBDIVISION, SHORT: A division of land into nine (9) or fewer lots, tracts,
parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of
ownership, except as provided in this title. (Ord. 943, 5-14-2014; amd. Ord.
2018-1024, 4-25-2018; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-21: T:
TEMPORARY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure not having or
requiring permanent attachment to the ground or to other structures which have
no required attachment to the ground.
THEATER: A building or part of a building devoted primarily to the showing of
motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.
TOWNHOUSE: A multiple dwelling unit meeting the following criteria: a) no
dwelling unit overlapping another vertically; b) common side walls joining
units; and c) not more than six (6) dwelling units in one structure.
TRACT: A fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries.
TRANSIT FACILITY: All passenger facilities, structures, stops, shelters, bus
zones, properties, and rights-of-way of all kinds that are owned, leased, held,
or used by a transit authority for the purpose of providing public
transportation services.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: A facility that is owner operated or managed by a
nonprofit organization or governmental entity that provides housing and
supportive services to homeless individuals or families for up to two years and
whose primary purpose is to enable homeless individuals or families to move
into independent living and permanent housing. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; Ord. 2021-
1083, 9-29-2021; Ord. 2022-1093, 3-30-2022; Ord. 2022-1095, 8-10-2022; Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-22: U:
USE: The purpose which lands or structures serve or for which they are
occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended.
UTILITY FACILITY: A small-scale facility serving primarily local distribution
needs within the city, including underground power lines, water distribution
lines, sewer lift stations, and stormwater conveyance pipes, fiber optic cable,
pump stations and hydrants, switching boxes, and other structures normally
found in a street right-of-way to serve adjacent properties. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-23: V:
VARIANCE: A permissible modification of the application of this title to a
particular property, subject to City approval.
VEGETATIVE SCREEN: A planted buffer that is opaque to a height of six feet (6')
minimum, accomplished through any combination of solid row(s) of evergreen
trees or shrubs; the same on an earthen berm; and/or fencing. Ground surfaces
of the planting area are to be seventy-five percent (75%) covered with ground
cover plants within three (3) years of installation.
VEHICLE: A device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or
by which any persons or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
public highway, including mopeds, excepting devices moved by human or animal
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VENDING OR VENDING SERVICES: Exhibiting goods or services for sale for the
purpose of selling, bartering, trading, exchanging, or advertising such goods
or services.
VETERINARY FACILITIES: Any facility, structure, or equipment used in the
operation of an
VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS: Institutions providing technical and professional training,
usually with the goal of employment in a craft or trade. (Ord. 943, 5-14-2014;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-24: W:
WALKWAY: A hard surfaced portion of a street, right-of-way, trail or easement
intended for pedestrian use.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT: Establishments primarily engaged in providing waste
management services including waste treatment and disposal, remediation,
operation of materials recovery facilities, septic tank pumping, and related
services.
WATER SUPPLY FACILITY: A facility that obtains, treats, and distributes water
to customers.
WATERCOURSE: The course or route followed by waters draining from the land,
formed by nature or man and consisting of a bed, banks, sides and associated
wetlands and headwaters. A watercourse shall receive surface and subsurface
drainage waters and shall flow with some regularity, but not necessarily
continuously, naturally and normally, in draining from higher to lower lands.
The watercourse shall terminate at the point of discharge into a larger
receiving body such as a lake. Watercourses shall include sloughs, streams,
creeks and associated wetlands.
WETLAND OR WETLANDS:
   A.   Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas.
   B.   Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created
from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage
ditches, grass lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment
facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities. However, wetlands include
those artificial wetlands intentionally created to mitigate conversion of
wetlands.
WHOLESALE TRADE: Establishments primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers; industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business
users; or other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying for or
selling merchandise to such individuals or companies; and professional and
commercial equipment suppliers.
WILDLIFE SHELTER: A facility which is used to house or contain wildlife and
which is owned, operated or maintained by a public body, an established humane
society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to
animals or other nonprofit organizations or persons devoted to the welfare,
protection and humane treatment of animals. This does not include domestic
animals.
WINERY/BREWERY: An establishment which manufactures beer, wine, and or cider
beverages on site and may sell products manufactured on site for on-premises
and off-premises consumption.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: See OMC section 13-9-16. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-25: X:
Reserved. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-2-26: Y:
YARD: The lot area between lot lines and the building area.
YARD, FRONT: The area between the front lot line and the building line
extending the full width of the lot. The front yard shall be the area between
the front line which primary access is taken and the building setback line. On
a corner lot there shall be two (2) front yards.
YARD, REAR: The area between the rear lot line and the building area extending
the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: The side setback area between the side lot lines and the building
area, extending the full length of the building area. On corner lots the side
yard is that which is opposite from the front yard except when a corner lot is
also a through lot, then the side yard shall be the area along the interior
side lot line. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
13-2-27: Z:
ZONE, ZONE DISTRICT: A defined area of the City within which the use of land is
regulated and certain uses permitted and other uses excluded as set forth in
this title.
ZONING CODE: This title. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
CHAPTER 3
ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS
SECTION:
13-3-1: Purpose
13-3-2: Zone Classifications
13-3-3: Uses
13-3-4: Zoning Map
13-3-5: Interpretation Of Uses
13-3-6: Exempted Uses
13-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to list and describe the zone classifications
and their purposes; provide interpretations of uses allowed in each zone
classification; and classify uses according to a limited number of categories
on the basis of common functional, product, or compatibility characteristics.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-3-2: ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS:
Zone classifications are grouped into residential classifications; mixed use
classifications; industrial classification; and public classifications as
follows:
   A.   RC Residential-Conservation Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The Residential-Conservation Zone is intended to
provide for low density single-family residential and duplex uses along the
Puyallup and Carbon Rivers where there are critical areas such as frequently
flooded areas, wetlands, and fish and wildlife habitat.
   B.   RU Residential-Urban Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The Residential-Urban Zone is intended to
provide for high density urban single-family, townhouse, cottage, and duplex
residential uses which benefit from the full array of services and amenities
available in the Town core.
   C.   RMF Residential-Multi-Family Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The intent of the Multi-Family Residential Zone
is to provide for the highest residential density, including cottage housing,
professional office uses and government service uses in the Town core.
   D.   MUTC Mixed Use-Town Center Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The intent of the MUTC Zone is to provide an
attractive mix of commercial retail, office, residential and service
development in the Town core. Pedestrian amenities, public transportation, and
architectural design review will be considerations in development approvals for
projects in this zone.
   E.   MUTCN Mixed Use-Town Center North Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The intent of the MUTCN Zone is to benefit the
citizens of Orting with the desirable opportunities presented to the City of
the large lots and land area between Orting High School and Rocky Road for the
development of new economic opportunities including a mix of residential, non-
residential, open space and recreational uses that support a sustainable
community by providing jobs and increasing the tax base. Pedestrian amenities,
public transportation, and architectural design review will be considerations
throughout master planning and development approvals for projects in this zone.
      2.   Master Development Plan Required: Development in the MUTCN (Mixed
Use Town Center North) requires approval of a master development plan that
shall include a planned unit development and an approved development agreement
with site specific design guidelines, and a parcel map if future phases are
anticipated. The development agreement shall set forth the conditions for
development, public improvements, and phasing, if applicable. The master
development plan approval process is a Type 4 permit per section
15-4-1 of this Code. All development and uses shall be in accordance with the
adopted master development plan. Provisions for allowed and conditional uses,
site specific locations of public streets, parks and open spaces, and design
standards described in this section shall be interpreted and modified as
appropriate during the master plan review and planned unit development approval
process based on evidence provided by the applicant.
      3.   Master Plan Elements: The master development plan shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
         a.   A master site plan showing the location of:
            (1)   Buildings;
            (2)   Streets, alleys, and major driveways;
            (3)   Off street parking areas;
            (4)   Open spaces (plazas, squares, courtyards, permanent BMPs, and
other spaces intended for public enjoyment) based on the proposed uses and
whether they are intended to serve the public;
            (5)   Critical areas and buffers;
            (6)   Shorelines;
            (7)   Floodplains;
            (8)   Pedestrian walks and paths;
            (9)   Landscaping to reflect landscaping requirements related to
site plans and landscaping associated with permanent BMPs;
            (10)   Proposed Phases; and
            (11)   Other site features;
         b.   A unified parking management plan showing potential shared
parking areas;
         c.   Subdivision or Binding Site Plan proposals per title 12 of this
Code, if applicable; and
         d.   Other materials as required for planned development or binding
site plan approval and architectural design review per this title.
      4.   Principal Uses: Section
13-3-3, Table 1, of this chapter, shows the allowed principal and conditional
uses in the MUTCN Zone. Uses not listed are prohibited. All development within
the MUTCN is subject to Architectural Design Review.
      5.   Bulk And Dimensional Requirements: The following bulk and
dimensional requirements apply to the MUTCN district:
         a.   Non-Residential Space: A minimum of fifteen (15) acres of non-
residential uses (Commercial, Light Industrial and Light Manufacturing, with
associated streets, sidewalks, parking, and Cultural and/or Public Uses per OMC
13-3-3, Table 1) shall be located primarily along Washington Avenue N/SR 162,
and/or adjacent to Rocky Road, the Orting Wastewater Treatment Plant and/or the
Orting School District property per the adopted site master plan. Prior to
certificates of occupancy for up to every one hundred (100) residential
dwellings, a minimum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of
retail and/or office space along SR162 and a minimum of one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet of Light Industrial or Light Manufacturing
commercial uses shall be developed for commercial uses ready for tenant
improvement and occupancy. Retail development fronting on SR162 may be phased.
Initial commercial development shall start at the White Hawk Blvd/SR162
intersection and then move north and south.
         b.   Public Open Space: In addition to the required commercial plazas
and courtyards and the community open space required in this title, the
district shall contain a minimum of five (5) acres of useable open community
park space that is not part of a critical areas buffer or shoreline buffer,
required landscaping or perimeter buffering, part of a required easement, or
part of a stormwater facility. These five (5) acres of open community park
space may not be subdivided into more than two smaller tracts and subject to
the proportional size of the tax parcels. Public access to park space shall be
compliant with the American Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. 12101, et seq.,
including wheelchair accessibility. Park equipment shall have ADA accessible
features including wheelchair accessibility. An ADA accessible pathway shall be
provided for access to the Carbon River levy. Development of this park space
with improvements shall be dedicated to the City for public access and use and
may be provided by the applicant, or may be financed by park impact fees paid
by the applicant. Exceptions to this provision may be granted when
circumstances make compliance infeasible or when a park impact fee is proposed,
pursuant to section
15-6-7 (B) of this code.
         c.   Residential Density: There shall be a maximum of twenty (20)
buildable acres allowed for residential construction including streets,
sidewalks and neighborhood parks and open space. The minimum residential
density is six (6) dwelling units per gross buildable acre. The maximum
residential density for any non-senior residential development parcel is twelve
(12) dwelling units per buildable acre. Buildable acreage does not include
critical areas or flood plain acreage. There shall be a mix of housing
including detached, attached, and multi-family units within the residential
acreage and avoidance of a segregation of housing types into specific areas.
Detached single family residences in the non-senior housing can only be Cottage
Housing per sections
13-2-4,
13-3-3,
13-5-1g of this code. Attached housing in non-senior housing must be three (3)
or more units.
      Senior housing minimum density is six (6) dwelling units per gross
buildable acre and a maximum of twenty (20) units per gross buildable acre.
Senior housing shall include a mix of housing including detached single family
residences, attached housing, and multifamily units. Residential uses over
retail uses in the same structure have no maximum density restrictions and do
not count toward the density total.
         d.   Each of the above totals shall be proportionate in acreage to the
parcel size for each lot of record existing as of the date of adoption of this
code. This provision shall run with the land and be in effect whether the
parcels remain in their existing configuration or are subsequently divided.
         e.   Height is restricted to a maximum of thirty-five feet (35') for
commercial and residential construction fronting SR162 and Rocky Road. Height
is restricted to a maximum of forty-five feet (45') east of commercial
construction fronting SR 162 and south of construction fronting on Rocky Rd. No
commercial or residential building may be more than three (3) stories (3
occupied floors). Development shall not be permitted that raises the height of
the ground above the site plan elevations as approved by the City.
      6.   Project Design: The design, layout and distribution of uses such as
buildings, landscaping, parking areas, signs, open spaces, public areas, and
streetscapes shall comply with the approved master development and guidelines.
Proposed design features shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in
accordance with section
13-6-7 of this title and the MUTCN design guidelines. The following design
features shall be addressed during the review of all project proposals:
         a.   Architectural character illustrated by building elevations and
renderings showing design features, building orientations, and relationships to
parking, pedestrian areas, and open spaces;
         b.   Public plazas and open spaces;
         c.   Relationships to adjacent properties, uses, and buildings;
         d.   Pedestrian walkways and paths;
         e.   Construction materials and colors;
         f.   Coordinated signage and lighting;
         g.   Streetscape design for improvements in public rights-of-way
including sidewalk finishes, street trees, lighting, and street furniture;
         h.   Landscaping of parking areas, open spaces, and project
perimeters; and
         i.   Use of low impact design techniques for stormwater management.
      7.   MUTCN Design Guidelines : The following guidelines are supplementary
to other adopted design standards and guidelines:
         a.   Pedestrian Oriented Street Frontage: Buildings shall provide
pedestrian entries along streets. Sidewalks along SR 162/Washington Avenue
North, one side of Daffodil Avenue NE, and one side of Rocky Road and in the
non-residential shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width with greater
widths at entries. Sidewalks along all other roadways must be a minimum of five
feet (5') in width. All streets shall have street trees spaced no more than
thirty feet (30') apart. All streets shall be public streets built to the City
of Orting Public Works standards. Buildings on public street frontages shall
provide at least two (2) of the following pedestrian amenities:
         (1)   Window displays along at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the
frontage;
         (2)   Pedestrian weather protection;
         (3)   Street furniture such as benches, drinking fountains, trash
receptacles, public art, or site maps;
         (4)   Open spaces including cafe seating, plazas, play structures,
fountains, or gardens;
         (5)   Perimeter landscaping; and/or
         (6)   Sidewalk "bulb-outs" at street intersections may be allowed
depending upon traffic study findings.
         b.   Off Street Parking Access: Off street parking between streets and
buildings shall be minimized. Curb cuts providing driveways to off street
parking lots shall be minimized. The building street frontage facade shall not
be broken by parking lots for more than sixty-five feet (65') at any location.
No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total frontage along SR162 may be
occupied by parking areas. Those parking lots may not be deeper than seventy-
five feet (75') including planter strips and must be screened with landscaping.
         c.   Off Street Parking Management: Absolute compliance with parking
requirements may be waived if a parking demand analysis demonstrates that
shared parking can be accomplished through the following:
            (1)   Parking lots/areas are connected by driveways and pedestrian
walkways.
            (2)   Multiple projects are treated collectively in the master
development plan.
            (3)   Daytime and nighttime parking demand can be balanced.
            (4)   Parking areas in adjacent or nearby projects (within five
hundred feet (500')) are dedicated to serving demand.
            (5)   Employee parking demand is addressed through carpooling and/
or remote parking areas.
         d.   Service Areas: Loading areas, outdoor storage, waste facilities,
and other services shall be located and screened from public views and adjacent
properties with a combination of location, landscaping and solid fencing.
         e.   Building Design: All buildings shall be designed in compliance
with the architectural design review (ADR) standards set forth in section
13-6-7 of this title.
         f.   Signage: The master development plan shall include a signage plan
including a unifying theme, and details for all typical signs such as monument
signs, major building signs, projecting signs, storefront signs, lighting, and
directional signs.
         g.   Plazas And Courtyards: Plazas and courtyards are required in all
non-residential areas, except for light industrial use areas. Plazas are major
open space features intended to provide significant opportunities for public
use and enjoyment including special events. Courtyards are smaller open space
features intended to provide quiet spaces for resting and relaxing. For each
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building area, a combination of plazas
and/or courtyards totaling one thousand (1,000) square feet is required. The
minimum area of a courtyard is two hundred fifty (250) square feet. The minimum
area of plaza is one thousand (1,000) square feet. At least twenty- five
percent (25%) of all plazas and courtyards shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, and ground cover at grade or in planters. At least twenty-five percent
(25%) shall be paved with decorative materials. Seating (1 linear foot of
seating area for each sixty (60) square feet of plaza or courtyard area), trash
receptacles, public art, water features, and other furnishings shall be
provided.
      h.   Residential Open Space: Small scale, usable open space is required
in all residential areas. All residential open space areas must be relatively
level; located on useable space that is not part of a critical areas or
shoreline buffer and    must provide access and inclusive uses for all persons,
including those with mobility issues and other disabilities. Areas required for
perimeter buffering,
   landscaping, screening, utilities or storm water facilities may not be
counted as residential open space. For every fifty (50) dwelling units, a
combination of open space areas including tot lots, pedestrian amenities,
picnic areas, etc. totaling two thousand (2,000) square feet is required. The
minimum area of an individual open space is one thousand (1,000) square feet.
No side dimension of the open space may be less than thirty feet (30'). At
least fifty percent (50%) of all residential open space shall be landscaped
with trees, shrubs, and ground cover at grade or in planters. At least twenty-
five percent (25%) shall be improved with play structures, unless the
development is predominantly senior housing. Seating (one (1) linear foot of
seating area for each sixty (60) square feet of residential open space), trash
receptacles, public art, water features, and other furnishings shall be
provided.
      i.   Low Impact Design: In conjunction with standard stormwater
management practices, site design for stormwater conveyance, detention, and
treatment shall include measures such as biofiltration, irrigation reuse, and
other techniques integrated with the overall landscape design to minimize high
volumes of discharge and pollution, where reasonably practicable.
      j.   Mt. Rainier Site lines: It is preferable that the Master Development
Plan proposal protect views of Mt. Rainier along the SR162 corridor and from
the internal community parks.
      k.   Commercial setbacks fronting SR162: A minimum of fifty percent (50%)
of retail development along SR162 shall have a minimum setback of twenty-five
feet (25') from the street curb with pedestrian entry in the front. See
Sections 5 and 7 of this chapter.
   F.   LM Light Manufacturing Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The intent of the Light Manufacturing Zone is to
provide for development of low impact manufacturing and warehousing employment
centers that can be concentrated where traffic congestion, visual and other
impacts on the surrounding areas can be minimized. Light manufacturing
includes, but is not limited to: canning or bottling of food or beverages using
an assembly line; production, assembly, finishing, or packaging of articles
from parts made at another location; and production of finished household and
office goods from materials that are already refined or from raw materials that
do not need refining.
   G.   OS Open Space And Recreation Zone:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: The intent of the Open Space and Recreation Zone
is to provide for parks, trails, open spaces, and recreational areas for the
use of the public.
   H.   PF Public Facilities Zone:
         1.   Purpose And Intent: The intent of the Public Facilities Zone is
to be applied to major parcels of land serving the cultural, educational,
recreational and public service needs of the community, such as, but not
limited to schools, water and wastewater facilities, City buildings, City
parking lots, and other City owned uses. This zone shall only apply to lands
owned by governmental agencies. (Ord. 2018-1026, 4-25-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-
1033, 7-25-2018; Ord. 2019-1051, 10-30-2019; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord.
2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-3-3: USES:
   A.   General: The uses of property are defined by the activity for which the
building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. Each
lot or parcel in single-family or related zones shall contain one principal use
as set forth in table 1 of this section. Multi-family, commercial and
industrial zones may contain up to three (3) principal uses. Other uses on a
lot or parcel may be permitted accessory or conditional uses.
   B.   Use Tables: Table 1 of this section sets forth allowed principal (P)
and conditional (C) uses for each zone. The table lists the zones in the
vertical columns and the land use activities in the horizontal rows. If no
symbol appears in the box at the intersection of a row and column, the use is
not allowed and is prohibited unless otherwise noted. In general, prohibited
uses shall be as follows:
      1.   Any use or structure that is not of a character similar to the
stated principal, conditional or accessory uses for the zone; or
      2.   Any use which causes or may be expected to cause an excessive
disturbance not in keeping with the character and stated intent of the zone.
"Excessive" is defined for these purposes as a degree exceeding that generated
by the uses permitted in the zone in their customary manner of operation or to
a degree injurious to the public safety, health, welfare or convenience.
If the letter "P" appears in the box, the use is permitted outright subject to
the provisions of this title. If the letter "C" appears in the box, the use is
conditional, subject to review and approval including site plan approval. If
the box contains a number, the corresponding footnote further specifies the
conditions applicable to the use in the zone.
TABLE 1
CITY OF ORTING PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DESIGNATION
 
RC: Residential-         MUTC: Mixed Use-Town     OS: Open Space and
Conservation Zone         Center Zone               Recreation Zone
RU: Residential-Urban    MUTCN: Mixed Use-Town    PF: Public Facilities Zone
Zone                      Center North Zone
RMF: Residential-Multi-  LM: Light Manufacturing   
Family Zone               Zone
  Zones
   RC RU RMF MUTC MUTCN2 LM OS PF
                                         Zones
                                          RC  RU   RMF  MUTC MUTCN2 LM  OS PF
Residential uses1 :
 Accessory dwelling units (ADU), subject P   P    P
  to OMC 13-5-6
 Cottage                                 P   P    P         P
 Cottage development                         P3,4 P3,4      P
 Duplex                                      P10  P    P    P
 Group residences:                           C    C3   C3                 C12
  Adult family homes                    P   P    P    P    P
  Emergency housing16, 17, 18, 19, 20,                C    C
    21
  Emergency shelter16, 17, 18, 19, 20,                C    C
    21
  Permanent supportive housing15, 19,   C   C    C    C    C
    20, 21, 22
  Single room occupancy sleeping units                                   C
  Transitional housing15, 16, 17, 18,   C   C    C    C    C
    19, 20, 21, 22
  Other5                                    C    P    C
 Manufactured home park                  C   C    C
 Mobile/manufactured home6               P   P    P
 Multi-family                                     P    P3   P
 Single-family detached                  P   P    P         P
 Temporary lodging:
  Bed and breakfast                     C   C    C    P3
  Hotel/motel                                         P3   P
  Rooming house                                  C    C3
 Townhouse                                   P7   P    P3   P13
Commercial uses:
 Adult businesses                                      C3
 Banks, Savings and Loan Associations,                 P    P
  Business or Professional Offices
 Clubs and lodges                                 C3   P3
 Communication facilities:
    Communication services                          P3   C
 Daycare facilities:
  Daycare center                            C    C    C    P
  Family daycare                        P   P    P    C3   P
 Eating and drinking places                       C3   P3   P          C3
 Health services                                  P3   P3   P
 Home occupations8                       P   P    P    P    P
 Liquor stores                                         P3   P
 Offices                                          C3   P3   P      C3
 Personal services                                     P3   P
 Retail fuel sales                                     C3   P      P3
 Retail sales                                     C3,9 P3   P      C3  C3
 Theaters                                              P3   P
 Veterinary facilities                                 P3   P      P3
Industrial uses:
 Manufacturing:
  Assembly/fabrication                                     C14    P
  Food processing                                          C14    P
  Light manufacturing                                      C14    P
  Petroleum products                                              P
  Wineries and breweries                              P    P      P
  Wood products                                                   P
 Storage and shipping:
  Construction business                                    C14    P
  Equipment rental                                    P24  C14    P
  Freight facilities warehousing                                  P
  Outdoor storage                                          C14    C
  Self-service storage                                     C14    P
  Wholesale trade                                          C14    P
Cultural and recreational uses:
 Cultural:
  Art galleries                                       P3   P
  Churches                              C3  C3   C3   P3   P
  Community centers                                   P3   C
  Libraries                                           P3   P
  Museums                                             P3   P
  Outdoor theaters                                    P3   C
 Recreation:
  Athletic fields                       C10 C10  C10       C          P  P
  Campgrounds                           C10 C10  C10                  P  P
  Golf facilities                       C10 C10  C10                  P  P
  Parks                                 C10 C10  C10  C10  P      C10 P  P
  RV parks                              C10 C10  C10                  C  C
  Resorts (including lodging)                    C    C    C
  Shooting ranges                       C                         C   C  C
  Spas and health clubs                               P3   P
  Stables/riding clubs                  C10                           C  P
  Trails                                C10 C10  C10  C10  P      C10 P  P
Public uses:
 Animal shelters                                            C14    P      P
 Colleges and universities                        C    C    C      C      P
 Correctional facilities                                           C      C
 Emergency services                          C    C    C    C      P      P
 Government offices                               P    P    P      P      P
 Hazardous materials                                        C          C
 Hospitals                               C3  C3   C3   C    C      C      P
 Justice facilities                                                       P
 K - 12 schools                          C   C    C    P    C             P
 Landfills                                                         C      C
 Public safety facilities                    C    C    C    C      P      P
 School support facilities                                  C      P      P
 Shared off street parking                             C    P
 Solid waste facilities                                            C      P
 Transit facilities                      C   C    C    C    C      C   C  P
 Utility facilities                      C   C    C    C    C      P   C  P
 Vocational schools                               C    C    C      C      P
 Wastewater treatment                                                     P
 Water supply facilities                 C   C    C    C    C      C   C  P
Resource uses:
 Agricultural:
  Agricultural research, testing and    C                  C      P      C
    training
  Growing crops                         P                  C
  Livestock and small animals           P11                C
 Fish and wildlife management:
  Aquaculture                           C                             C  C
  Wildlife shelters                     C                             C  C
 Forestry:                                                             C
  Growing trees                         P
  Mills                                                           P
  Research and testing                  C                         P      C
 Mineral:
  Batch plants                                                    P
  Extraction and processing             C   C    C                P      C
 
Notes:
    1.    Residential planned unit developments (PUD) may allow increases in
underlying density except in the MUTCN.
    2.    All development subject to Master Development Plan and MUTCN Bulk and
Dimensional Requirements. See sections
13-3-2 E2 and E5 of this code.
    3.    Subject to architectural design review.
    4.    As a binding site plan.
    5.    Occupancy limit may only be regulated in accordance with RCW
35.21.682 or its successor.
   6.   On a legal lot with permanent foundation and no older than three years
old on the date the home is placed on the lot.
   7.   Townhouses are not allowed on flag lots (pipestem) in the RU zone.
   8.   Subject to section
13-5-4 of this title.
   9.   Food stores only.
    10.    Private facilities.
    11.    Subject to all other City regulations regarding livestock.
    12.    Redevelopment of the Orting Soldiers' Home subject to site plan and
architectural design review approval.
   13.   Three or more units per building.
   14.   May not have frontage along SR 162/Washington Avenue N. Must be
screened from all adjacent residences with sight obscuring landscaping, 6-foot
tall solid fencing.
   15.   The number of permanent supportive housing units and transitional
housing units allowed on any given property shall be no more than the number of
standard dwelling units that would be allowed under the applicable zoning of
the property.
   16.   The total combined capacity of all emergency shelter beds, emergency
housing beds, and transitional housing units in the City shall not exceed 0.4%
of the City's population, as estimated annually by the Washington Office of
Financial Management.
   17.   Emergency housing and emergency shelters are required to be indoors.
An operations and security plan shall be required that addresses site
management and neighborhood impacts. Each facility shall be limited to a total
of 10 individuals.
   18.   Emergency housing, emergency shelter, and transitional housing uses
shall not be located on any parcel that abuts or is directly across a public
right-of-way from a parcel with an existing school or park use, or on any
parcel within the main street area of Orting, defined as the area bounded by
Whitsell Street, Bridge Street, Corrin Avenue Northwest, and Rainier Lane
Northeast. This does not include indoor emergency shelter facilities that are
needed to respond temporarily to a natural disaster or other similarly acute
emergency (ex: heating and cooling centers).
   19.   No person convicted of a felony assault, arson, illegal drug
manufacturing, burglary, or kidnapping charge within the past three (3) years,
or otherwise under court supervision or sex offender registration requirements
can receive services from a provider, unless providing such services is
consistent with the laws, regulations, and/or supervisory requirements related
to such persons. To ensure compliance, providers of transitional housing and
permanent supportive housing shall order and review background checks prior to
resident entry. Providers of emergency housing and emergency shelter shall
order and review background checks within three days of intake.
   20.   All providers of emergency shelter, emergency housing, transitional
housing, and permanent supportive housing shall, after the initial two years of
operation of any such facility, provide the City with a report that
demonstrates ongoing compliance with the terms of the Conditional Use Permit as
defined at the time of approval. Such providers are also required to maintain a
valid City of Orting business license and liability insurance. These service
providers should prioritize individuals living in the Orting valley. Upon
intake, providers shall record each individual's most recent city or other
place of residence and shall provide a report on such data to the City every
year. Providers shall also record the number of individuals seeking services
who are turned away due to lack of capacity and their most recent place of
residence.
   21.   In reviewing Conditional Use Permit applications for emergency
shelter, emergency housing, transitional housing, and permanent supportive
housing, the Hearing Examiner shall not treat adversely or discriminate against
people experiencing homelessness.
   22.   No more than two persons per bedroom shall inhabit a permanent
supportive housing or transitional housing facility.
   23.   Two or more physically attached dwelling units sharing a wall, where
each unit has separate access to a yard, court, or street.
   24.   No outdoor storage.
TABLE 2
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES BY ZONING DESIGNATION
  Zones
                                                          Zones
Conditional accessory uses:
  Cargo container                                         RU (CUP)
Permitted accessory uses:
 Accessory structures such as garages, carports, and     All zones
  sheds
 Barns and agricultural structures                       RC, PF
 Caretaker residences                                    LM, OS
 Cargo container                                         LM, PF
 Collective gardens2                                     All residential zones
 Maintenance and storage facilities and yards            OS
 Off street parking for 1 commercial truck or van used   All residential zones
  for commuting
 Parking lots                                            OS
 Private outdoor storage of small noncommercial trucks,  All residential zones
  boats and recreational vehicles in required setbacks
 Recreation facilities in conjunction with planned       All residential zones
  residential developments
 Required automobile parking for permitted principal and All zones
  conditional uses
 Required truck loading facilities                       All zones
 Restrooms and bathing facilities                        OS
  Retail sales associated with the principal
 manufacturing or processing use and not occupying more  LM
  than 10 percent of the site area
 Stationary food vending                                 MUTC
 Uses customarily incidental to the principal uses 3     MUTC
 Utility installations except solid waste disposal       All zones
  facilities
 
Notes:
   1.    Repealed.
   2.    Collective gardens must conform to chapter 8 of this title.
   3.    Such as seasonal displays, sidewalk sales, etc.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 943, 5-14-2014; Ord. 1026, 4-25-2018; Ord.
2019-1051, 10-3-2019; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2021-1083, 9-29-2021;
Ord. 2021-1086, 10-27-2021; Ord. 2022-1093, 3-30-2022; Ord. 2022-1095, 8-10-
2022; Ord. 2022-1097, 8-31-2022; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-3-4: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Map Established: The official zoning map used as the basis for this
zoning regulation is the same as the adopted Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use
Map and shall be maintained by the City. Each property in the City is
classified under this title and is subject to the requirements of this title.
Zoning classifications on the official zoning map shall use the symbols shown
in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-1026, 4-25-2018)
   B.   Urban Growth Area Boundary: The official zoning map shall include the
designation of the comprehensive plan urban growth area boundary for the City.
Any reference to the urban growth area boundary in this title shall mean that
mapped designation.
   C.   Interpretation Of Boundaries: When uncertainty regarding zone
classification boundaries arises, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Where zoning or urban growth area boundaries are indicated as
following the centerline of streets, alleys or highways; the right-of-way
centerline shall be the boundary.
      2.   Where zoning or urban growth area boundaries are indicated as
following lot or tract lines, the lot or tract lines shall be the boundaries.
      3.   Unmapped shore lands shall be considered to be within the same
zoning classification or urban growth area designation as the adjacent upland.
      4.   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned,
the zone classification applicable to the property abutting the vacated portion
shall apply to the vacated or abandoned street or alley.
      5.   Where zoning or urban growth area boundaries divide a parcel created
prior to January 11, 1996, the entire parcel shall be considered to be within
the classification of the majority of the parcel, i.e., the portion which is
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the area. The property owner(s) may
petition the City for relief from this provision based on hardship created by
unique or special circumstances, such as natural features. If the City finds
that such hardship exists, the boundary line may be moved within the lot area
to a location which provides relief from said hardship so long as the action
does not create hardships upon adjacent properties or conflict with other
provisions of this Code.
      6.   Where these rules (subsections C1 through C5 of this section) do not
clarify a boundary issue, the Administrator shall make the determination based
on an analysis of the specific parcel(s) with written findings and conclusions.
The Administrator's determination in these matters may be appealed according to
title 15, chapter 10 of this Code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024)
13-3-5: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
   A.   Typical Uses Within Use Types: The descriptions of use types in this
chapter may contain examples of usual and customary uses. These uses are
intended to be typical and are not intended to represent all permissible uses.
   B.   Interpretation By Administrator: Where there is a question regarding
the inclusion or exclusion of a particular proposed use within a particular use
category or use type, the Administrator shall have the authority to make the
final determination based on an analysis of the specific question with written
findings and conclusions. The Administrator's determination in these instances
may be appealed according to title 15, chapter 10 of this Code. (Ord. 792, 7-
29-2004)
13-3-6: EXEMPTED USES:
   A.   Applicability To Other Chapters: Unless otherwise stated, the uses
exempted in this section are also exempted from chapters 5 and 6 of this title
and title 15, "Development Code Administration", of this Code.
   B.   Uses Exempted: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following uses:
      1.   On site and community septic systems;
      2.   Stormwater conveyance systems which includes features such as
gutters, pipelines, culverts, manholes, weirs, manmade and natural channels,
water quality filtration systems and dry wells;
      3.   Electrical distribution lines and poles (55 kilovolts and under);
      4.   Sewerage and water conveyance systems which include underground or
flush with the ground features, including, but not limited to, pipes and
manholes;
      5.   Water, oil, and petroleum gas distribution pipelines;
      6.   Natural gas distribution lines (not transmission lines), and
necessary appurtenant facilities and hookups;
      7.   Cable, fiber optic, or telephone transmission and distribution
lines, poles and appurtenances (not including antennas or cellular transmission
towers);
      8.   Public streets and linear trails when located in existing rights-of-
way;
      9.   Cargo containers when authorized pursuant to subsection
13-4-2 A of this title as a temporary construction building or pursuant to
subsection
13-4-2 E of this title when being used as a portable storage unit.
      10.   The establishment of vaccination centers, medical testing
operations, cooling/heating centers, severe weather shelters and other
community gathering places where emergency services and aid is provided during
the daytime hours when an Emergency proclamation or declaration of Disaster is
be made by any of the following: Pierce County Executive, Pierce County
Council, Orting City Council, Washington State Governor, or the President of
the United States.
   C.   Repair And Maintenance: The provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to regulate the maintenance and repair of any use or facility
exempted or permitted in this chapter. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 873, 2-
25-2009; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 4
TEMPORARY USES/TEMPORARY HOUSING UNITS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Purpose
13-4-2: Standards
13-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish allowed temporary uses and
structures and provide standards and conditions for regulating such uses and
structures. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-2024)
13-4-2: STANDARDS:
   A.   Temporary Construction Buildings: Temporary structure for the storage
of tools and equipment or containing supervisory offices in connection with
major construction projects, may be established and maintained during the
progress of such construction on such projects, and shall be abated within
thirty (30) days after completion of the project or thirty (30) days after
cessation of work or for a period not to exceed the duration of the building
permit, whichever is greater.
   B.   Temporary Christmas Tree Lots: A temporary Christmas tree lot for the
purpose of selling Christmas trees may be located on a property in any XXX zone
for a maximum of forty five (45) days within any twelve (12) month period.
   C.   Temporary School Uses: A temporary use associated with a school for the
purpose of educational needs, including but not limited to agricultural
programming, may be located in any zone on the school property for a maximum of
XX days within a calendar school year.
   D.   Temporary Real Estate Office: One temporary real estate sales office
may be located on any new subdivision in any zone, provided the activities of
such office shall pertain only to the selling of lots within the subdivision
upon which the office is located; and provided further, that the temporary real
estate office shall be removed at the end of a twelve (12) month period,
measured from the date of the recording of the map of the subdivision upon
which such office is located or at the time specified by the city council.
   E.   Temporary Classrooms: Portable, modular, or mobile structures that
provide classrooms or other school related space are allowed as part of K-12
school facilities and are subject to the provisions of the underlying permit.
   F.   Temporary Housing Unit: A factory-built structure may be placed in any
zone to provide on-site security and surveillance for public facilities, or a
recreational vehicle may be placed in any residential zone for occupancy during
the construction or renovation of a permanent dwelling on the same lot or
tract, or to provide for residential occupancy when permanent homes have been
destroyed or damaged by a disaster, provided:
      1.   The unit meets all applicable codes and regulations including OMC
10-14-3. A recreational vehicle may remain on site unoccupied as long as it
meets all applicable development standards in Title 13 OMC;
      2.   The mobility gear is not removed from the unit and the unit is not
permanently affixed to the site on which it is located;
      3.   The recreational vehicle is located on private property in a manner
consistent with OMC 13-5-3;
      4.   A temporary permit is issued by the building department prior to
occupancy of the unit on the site;
      5.   Prior to the issuance of a temporary permit for a unit allowed per
this section, the site shall be reviewed by the Pierce County health department
to determine additional requirements for water supply and/or septic waste
disposal or adequacy of existing utilities. The recreational vehicle may be
inspected by the City if connected to sewer or to a Tacoma-Pierce County health
department approved septic system;
      6.   In the event the site contains trees or other natural vegetation of
a type and quantity to make it possible to partially or totally provide
screening on one or more sides of the unit, the city may require the unit be
located so as to take advantage of the natural growing material available to
screen said unit from adjacent properties.;
      7.   Prior to the issuance of a temporary housing permit, the city shall
review the application and may require installation of such fire protection/
detection equipment as may be deemed necessary as a condition to the issuance
of the temporary housing permit; and
      8.   The unit shall comply with all applicable requirements in Title 11 -
Critical Areas and Shoreline Management.
      9.   Recreational vehicles located within an approved recreational
vehicle park are not subject to the standards set forth in this Section.
   G.   A recreational vehicle may be occupied for up to 14 (fourteen) days in
a six (6) month period, with one potential extension of 14 (fourteen)
additional days, per year, with a temporary use permit when located on a parcel
in the RC, RU, or RMF zoning districts, provided:
      1.   The recreational vehicle shall not be parked on or overhanging a
public right of way (street or sidewalk), and
      2.   The recreational vehicle shall not be connected to sewer or water
systems.
   H.   Cargo Containers; When Allowed: Except pursuant to subsections A,
“Temporary Construction LM and PF zones pursuant to a type 1 permit as an
accessory use and in the RU zone pursuant to a type 3 permit as a conditional
accessory use, subject to the following limitations as determined by the city
administrator:
      1.   Only two (2) cargo containers will be allowed per lot with a maximum
length of forty feet (40') per cargo container.
      2.   The cargo container must be located to minimize the visual impact to
adjacent properties, parks, trails and rights of way. Property located across a
public right of way is not regarded as adjacent property.
      3.   The cargo container must be sufficiently screened from adjacent
properties, parks, trails and rights of way, as determined by the city
administrator. Screening may be a combination of solid fencing, landscaping, or
the placement of the cargo containers behind, between or within buildings. If a
cargo container is located on a lot adjacent to a residential zone, the cargo
container shall be no greater in size than ten by twenty feet (10 x 20'), and
shall have a stick built structure, with a peaked roof, constructed to
completely enclose the container. No stick built structure shall be required if
the cargo container is totally screened from adjacent residential properties as
determined by the city administrator.
      4.   If located adjacent to a building, the outdoor cargo container must
be painted to match the building’s color.
      5.   Cargo containers may not occupy any required off street parking
spaces.
      6.   Cargo containers may not be used as an accessory dwelling unit.
      7.   Cargo containers shall meet all setback requirements for the zone.
      8.   Outdoor cargo containers may not be refrigerated.
      9.   Outdoor cargo containers may not be stacked.
      10.   Outdoor cargo containers must comply with all applicable
requirements of title 11, “Critical Areas And Shoreline Management”, of this
code, as now or hereafter amended.
      11.   Cargo containers shall be prohibited from having windows, heating
and cooling, plumbing, or multiple entrances. Cargo containers are allowed to
have electric, ventilation, and drainage systems installed that would be
necessary to meet the minimum codes and standards for lighting, circulation,
and drainage.
      12.   No signage shall be allowed on any cargo container unless approved
in accordance with section
13-7-1  of this title, as now or hereafter amended.
      13.   Cargo containers shall not be visible from any site designated or
identified as a local or national historic landmark or natural area. This
includes significant vegetative features, stream and creek corridors,
buildings, sites, structures and/or identified viewsheds of historic and/or
cultural significance.
      14.   Cargo containers shall be safe, structurally sound, stable, and in
good repair.
      15.   The location of the cargo container shall not block or impede fire
or emergency access and shall not be located within or upon the public right of
way except as may be permitted by the governing body managing or controlling
the public right of way.
      16.   Conditional use permit for placement in the RU zone requires that
the property be at least five (5) acres or more in size.
   I.   Temporary Portable Storage:
      1.   When Allowed: Cargo containers used for temporary portable storage
may be located on property in all residential zones subject to the following:
         a.   Such cargo containers may be located on property within the city
for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) consecutive days in duration from and
including the date of delivery to the date of removal, without registering the
property upon which such cargo container is located as provided at subsection
G.2. of this section;
         b.   No more than one such cargo container may be located on a
specific property within the city at one time and each such cargo container
shall be individually limited in duration to the time period established
herein;
         c.   Such cargo container may not be removed and relocated on a
specific property more than two (2) times in any given thirty (30) calendar day
period;
         d.   Such cargo container shall be located, if feasible, no closer
than five feet (5') to the property line;
         e.   Such cargo container shall be placed on an existing impervious
surface; provided that, in the vent that it is unfeasible to place the cargo
container on an existing impervious surface, the cargo container may be placed
anywhere on the property that is otherwise in compliance with this subsection
G.1.;
         f.   It shall be the obligation of the owner or user of such cargo
container to secure it in a manner that does not endanger the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity of the cargo container. In the event of high winds
or other weather conditions in which such structure may become a physical
danger to persons or property, the appropriate law enforcement officers may
require the immediate removal of such temporary structure;
         g.   No such cargo container shall be located in a manner that blocks
access to a fire hydrant or obstructs the view of street intersections;
         h.   No such cargo container shall contain toxic or hazardous
materials;
         i.   No such cargo container shall be located in the public right of
way; and
         j.   No such cargo container shall be used to store solid waste,
construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business
inventory, or commercial goods (i.e., used for retail sales), or personal
property not from the residential property where the cargo container is
located.
         k.   “Temporary portable storage” shall mean an unoccupied cargo
container that is used on a temporary basis for the transient storage of
personal property of any kind and which is located for such purposes outside an
enclosed building.
      2.   Registration Required: The owner or occupant of the residential
property upon which a cargo container is located pursuant to this subsection G,
shall not cause or allow such cargo container to remain on such property beyond
the duration specified in subsection G.1.a. of this section, unless the
property upon which such cargo container has been located is registered with
the city administrator and the ten dollar ($10.00) nonrefundable registration
fee has been paid. The registration application shall contain the name of the
applicant, whether the person owns, rents, occupies, or controls the property,
the street address at which the cargo container has been placed (and assessor’s
tax parcel number if available), the delivery date, removal date, and a
description of the cargo container and its location on the registered property.
The effective date of the registration shall be the date of approval of the
registration application and the registration shall be conspicuously posted on
the cargo container. A cargo container may be located upon the registered
property for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of approval.
No property may be registered more than one time in any one hundred eighty
(180) day period.
      3.   Revocation: A violation of any of the provisions of this subsection
shall, in addition to any other penalties provided herein, subject the
registration approval to revocation by the city administrator.
      4.   Removal: The owner or occupant of the residential property is
responsible for removing the cargo container from the property at the
expiration of the registration approval or sooner if the registration is
revoked by the city administrator.
      5.   Penalties: A violation of any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be and constitute a class IV civil infraction for each day that such
violation continues, and any person found to have committed such a violation
shall be subject to a maximum fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
such violation. Imposition of such penalties shall not preclude the city from
exercising any other rights or remedies it may have to require or seek removal
of a cargo container located in violation of this subsection.
   J.   Model Homes:
      1.   When Allowed: Any applicant who has received preliminary plat
approval may apply for building permits for model homes, up to the number
authorized under subsection 3 of this section.
      2.   Criteria: Prior to the issuance of model home permit(s), the
applicant must demonstrate that the following criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant has submitted and received all required permits and
approvals required of the preliminary plat approval; and
         b.   All required retention and detention facilities necessary for the
areas of the subdivision serving the model homes are in place and functional,
and in accordance with the civil permit approved by the city of Orting; and
         c.   All critical areas upon or immediately adjacent to the areas of
the subdivision serving the model home(s) have been protected or mitigated, in
accordance with adopted critical areas regulations and preliminary plat
approval; and
         d.   The model home(s) shall meet the access and fire protection
requirements of OMC Title 10; and
         e.   All areas of the subdivision serving the model home(s) have
installed frontage improvements including, but not limited to, curb, gutter and
sidewalk, street illumination, and landscaping as required by the preliminary
plat approval or this code; and
         f.   All proposed streets serving the model homes shall be adequately
marked with street signs conforming to the current Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Device (MUTCD) standards; and
         g.   Water and sewer conveyance systems are installed and functional
to each lot proposed for model homes, in accordance with the approved civil
permit; and
         h.   Lot property corners of all lots proposed to be used for the
model home complex have been set by a licensed, professional land surveyor in
accordance with the preliminary plat lot configuration; and
         i.   All impact fees for model homes shall be paid prior to issuance
of a building permit for the model homes; and
         j.   Fire protection features including access, hydrants, and fire
flow must be provided in accordance with OMC Title 10 and the approved civil
plans prior to any combustible construction on any lot within the development.
Such fire protection may be installed in a phased manner; provided, that they
are in place and approved as prescribed by code for each individual parcel
within the plat prior to issuance of a building permit for said parcel; and
         k.   Any model home utilized as an office space shall meet all
applicable requirements for such use as provided for in OMC Title 10.
      3.   Application Process: In addition to the application requirements for
a building permit, the following additional information for a model home shall
be included:
         a.   The applicant shall have written authorization from the property
owner permitting the model home(s) if the applicant is other than the owner of
the approved preliminary plat; and
         b.   Title report current within the last thirty (30) days; and
         c.   Name of approved preliminary plat as well as the proposed name of
the final plat (if different); and
         d.   Date of preliminary plat approval; and
         e.   Date of preliminary plat expiration; and
         f.   Copy of City Council decision approving the preliminary plat; and
         g.   Overall site plan showing the preliminary plat, including phases
(if applicable) and the location of all proposed model homes; and
         h.   Individual site plan showing the location of the model home(s) in
relation to the property lines and setbacks consistent with the preliminary
plat approval; and
         i.   A statement from the applicant in which the applicant
acknowledges that construction of any model home is at applicant’s own risk and
agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed
officials, employees, agents, and representatives from any and all claims
related to the model homes, including but not limited to any costs of removal
of such buildings and portions not in compliance with the final plat approval.
      4.   Number Of Model Homes Per Plat: The number of allowed model homes
varies per plat. Approved preliminary plats are allowed to have model homes as
follows:
         a.   Plats with five through nineteen (19) lots may have one model
home;
         b.   Plats with twenty (20) or more lots may have up to ten percent
(10%) of the lots be model homes. If the number of model homes yielded from
this calculation is a fractional number, the result shall be rounded down to
the nearest whole number.
      5.   Occupancy: Certificate of occupancy shall not be granted for any of
the model homes until the final plat has been recorded. However, the applicant
shall request final inspection and temporary occupancy for model homes prior to
final plat recording, provided:
         a.   The owner and homebuilder have complied with applicable state law
with regard to any agreements to transfer, sell or lease property within the
preliminary plat prior to final plat recording; and
         b.   All building and fire safety requirements have been met to the
satisfaction of the city’s building official and fire marshal; and
         c.   Driveway approaches for each model home requesting occupancy have
been installed; and
         d.   Repairs to the roadway improvements have been completed as
necessary due to damage as a result of model home construction, if any; and
         e.   Miscellaneous utility work as necessary to minimize potential for
damage to vehicles or tripping hazards has been completed; and
         f.   Miscellaneous work to provide access for maintenance or operation
of underground utilities has been completed; and
         g.   No model home shall be occupied for residential use prior to
recording of the final plat. No model home shall be sold, leased, rented or
otherwise transferred in ownership until the final plat is recorded, unless the
property interest is transferred in conjunction with a transfer in interest of
the plat as a whole; and
         h.   The hours of operation for the model home(s) can only be between
the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.; and
         i.   The city’s building/fire safety department and public works
department have verified all water and sewer connections are connected and
installed in accordance with the approved civil permit. (Ord. 889, 9-8-2010;
amd. Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-2024; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
13-5-1: Density And Dimension
13-5-2: Landscaping And Screening
13-5-3: Loading Area And Off Street Parking Requirements
13-5-4: Home Occupations
13-5-5: Daycare Facilities
13-5-6: Accessory Dwelling Units
13-5-7: Adult Businesses
13-5-8: Manufactured Home Parks (Rep. by Ord. 889, 9-8-2010)
13-5-9: Nonconforming Uses And Structures
13-5-1: DENSITY AND DIMENSION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish dimensional
standards for development. These standards are established to provide
flexibility in project design and promote high quality development within the
City.
   B.   Density Standards: All residential density provisions are herein
expressed in terms of minimum lot size based on the density standards adopted
in the comprehensive plan.
      1.   Density bonuses and shifting in accordance with planned unit
developments and clustering shall be authorized in approvals as described in
section
13-6-4 of this title.
   C.   Lot Size, Setback, Height, And Coverage Standards: Table 1 of this
section sets forth the required development standards for the zones.
   TABLE 1
   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
       Minimum Lot       Setbacks
       Requirements                              Maximum  Maximum
 Zones                                  Maximum Building Hard     Maximum
       Width Depth Area3 Front Rear Side Height1 Coverage Surface  Density 2
                                                          Coverage
       Minimum Lot Requirements      Setbacks                            Maximum
                                                        Maximum Maximum  Hard     Maximum
 ZonesWidth Depth Area3             Front  Rear   Side Height1 Building Surface  Density
                                                                Coverage Coverage 2

RC     None  None  2 acres           25'    25'    8'   35'     20%      50%      1 DU/2A
RU     None  None  7,260 sq. ft.     25'    25'    8'   35'     40%      65%      6 DU/A
                   5,450 sq. ft.5
                   7,000 sq. ft.6
RMF    40'   100'  4,000 plus 2,000  25'    25'    8'   35'     50%      75%      8 DU/
                   sq. ft.7                                                       A11
                   None
                   (nonresidential)8
MUTC   None  None  None              None   None   None 45'16   100%     100%     None
MUTCN  None  None  None10            None11 None11 None 35'12   100%14   100%     n/a
                                                   11   50'13
LM     None  None  None              None   None   None 35'     100%     100%     n/a
OS     None  None  None              None   None   None 25'     None     None     n/a
PF     None  None  None              9      9      9    9       None     None     n/a
 
Notes:
   1.    Heights specified are for principal structures; maximum height for
accessory structures in all zones is 20 feet. Maximum height for accessory
dwelling units is specified in section
13-5-6.
   2.    The regulation is expressed by the number of principal dwelling units
(DU) per acre (A) and does not include ADUs. Duplex density may be increased in
accordance with the minimum lot area found in subsection
13-5-1H of this title.
   3.    Lot size averaging is permitted pursuant to subsection
13-5-1I of this title.
   4.    Reserved.
   5.    Minimum lot area for single-family detached dwellings.
   6.    Minimum lot area for townhouses.
   7.    Minimum lot area for multi-family dwellings: 4,000 square feet for the
first unit and 2,000 for each additional unit.
   8.    No minimum lot area for nonresidential uses.
   9.    Minimum setbacks and building heights consistent with the most
intensive adjacent zone.
   10.    Minimum area for master plans is 5 acres.
   11.   Setbacks to be determined during site plan review.
   12.   In sectors 1 and 3.
   13.   In sector 2.
   14.   Minimum open space requirement is 1,000 square feet for every 10,000
square feet of building area.
   15.   Or 3 stories subject to architectural design review. Height limit
applies to those portions of the MUTC Zone shown in figure A of this section.
   16.   Under RCW 36.70B (as amended by ESHB 1042 in 2023: Chapter 285, Laws
of 2023) a density bonus of 50% may be granted for new residential units added
within an existing multifamily or commercial building.
FIGURE A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2284.png]
      1.   Setback Measurement: A setback is measured from the edge of a street
right of way, access easement or private road. Where there is no street right
of way, access easement or private road, a setback is measured from the
property line.
      2.   Designation Of Required Setbacks: All lots except pipestem lots must
contain at least one front yard setback. A front yard setback shall be required
abutting each right of way on corner lots and through lots. All lots must
contain one rear yard setback except for corner, through, and pipestem lots.
All other setbacks will be considered side yard setbacks.
      3.   Through Lots: In the case of a through lot, a front yard setback is
required abutting each street right of way.
      4.   Front Yard Setback Averaging: Averaging may be used to reduce a
front yard setback requirement when a principal building has been established
on an adjacent lot within the required yard. This provision shall not apply if
the adjacent lot has received a reduced setback based upon a discretionary land
use approval. This exception shall be calculated as follows:
         a.   Averaging shall be calculated by adding the existing front yard
setbacks of the adjacent lots together and dividing that figure by two (2).
         b.   When an adjacent lot is vacant, averaging shall be calculated by
adding the front yard setback of the adjacent developed lot with the minimum
front yard setback of the zone in which the construction is proposed and
dividing that figure by two (2).
      5.   Slopes: If the topography of a lot is such that the minimum front
yard setback line is eight feet (8') or more above the street grade, and there
is no reasonable way to construct a driveway up to the dwelling unit level, a
garage/carport may be built into the bank and set at least five feet (5') back
from the right of way.
      6.   Accessory Structures, Interior Yard and Rear Yard Exceptions:
Detached one-story accessory structures shall maintain a minimum five-foot (5')
setback, except in the MUTC zone. This does not apply to accessory dwelling
units.
      7.   Reserved.
      8.   Bus Shelters: Bus shelters for school district or transit authority
purposes may be located within a front yard setback when located on private
property if they do not exceed fifty (50) square feet of floor area and one
story in height, provided all applicable site distance requirements are met.
      9.   Projection Exception:
         a.   Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair
landings, ornamental features, or similar structures may project into any
setback, provided such projections are:
            (1)   Limited to two (2) per required yard.
            (2)   Not wider than ten feet (10').
            (3)   Not more than eighteen inches (18") into a side yard setback
or two feet (2') into a rear yard setback.
            (4)   Not more than three feet (3') into a front yard setback.
         b.   Uncovered porches and decks which do not exceed thirty inches
(30") from finished lot grade may project into any setback, provided such
projections do not extend more than six feet (6') into a front yard setback or
no closer than five feet (5') to the side lot line.
         c.   Wheelchair ramps may project into any required setback.
      10.   Rear Yards, Exception: In the case of triangular or otherwise
irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet (10') in length entirely within the
lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line may be
considered the "rear lot line" at the owner's discretion. If the owner does not
select such a line, the city may do so.
   D.   Height Standards: (See figure 13.35-1 set forth in subsection D3 of
this section for measuring building heights.)
      1.   Measurement: The height of a fence located on a rockery, retaining
wall, or berm shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the
high side of the rockery, retaining wall, or berm.
         a.   Walls, fences, and berms up to three feet (3') in height may be
located on any part of a lot. Open fences may be up to four feet (4') in
height.
         b.   Walls, fences and berms up to six feet (6') in height may be
located to the rear of the front wall line of the principal residence unless
otherwise determined to provide a site distance hazard by the building
inspector.
         c.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to fences required
by state law to surround public utility installations, or to fences enclosing
school grounds and public playgrounds. A building permit shall be required for
construction of any wall or fence located within the city.
      2.   Exceptions: Height standards shall not apply to the following:
         a.   Church spires, belfries, domes, chimneys, antennas, satellite
dishes, ventilation stacks, or similar structures, provided the structure is
set back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the
structure.
         b.   Rooftop mechanical equipment. All rooftop mechanical equipment
may extend ten feet (10') above the height limit of the zone, provided all
equipment is set back ten feet (10') from the edge of the roof.
         c.   Utility towers and poles subject to review of site location.
      3.   Figure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2286.png]
   E.   General Development Standards:
      1.   Existing Lot; Single-Family Dwelling Permitted: In any zone that
permits a single-family dwelling unit, a single-family dwelling unit and
permitted accessory structures may be constructed or enlarged on one lot which
cannot satisfy the density requirements of the zone where the lot was legally
created prior to the effective date of this regulation. This section shall not
waive the requirements for setbacks and height of the zone in which the lot is
located.
      2.   Combining Lots; Interior Yard Setback Exception: Where two (2) or
more lots are used as a building site and where principal buildings cross lot
lines, interior yard setbacks shall not be required from those lot lines
crossed by the principal building.
      3.   Legally Created Lots; Development Permitted Proof:
         a.   Development shall be permitted only on legally created lots.
         b.   To establish that a lot has been legally created, the applicant
must provide one of the following:
            (1)   A copy of formal plat, short plat, or large lot subdivision
approved by Pierce County separately describing the lot.
            (2)   A copy of the boundary line adjustment or lot combination
separately describing the lot.
            (3)   Documentation that the creation of the lot was exempt from
the provisions of the subdivision title.
            (4)   A deed, contract of sale, mortgage, recorded survey, or tax
segregation that separately describes the lot.
      4.   Pipestem (Flag) Lots: Pipestem (flag) lots in all residential zones
are discouraged. In the RC and RMF Zones, pipestem (flag) lots may be approved
subject to the criteria provided in subsection
12-8-1A of this Code, general approval requirements. Development on pipestem
(flag) lots in the RU Zone shall be subject to the design standards provided in
subsection F of this section. The Planning Commission shall conduct a site plan
review of the proposal as a type 3a permitting action to determine if the
proposal complies with the standards in subsection F of this section.
      5.   Bulkheads And Retaining Walls: Any structure constructed and erected
between lands of different elevations used to resist the lateral displacement
of any material, control erosion, or protect structures may be placed within
required setbacks to a maximum height of six feet (6'), provided all applicable
site distance requirements are met.
   F.   RU Zone Pipestem (Flag) Lot Development Standards: (See figures 13-5-1A
and 13-5-1B of this section.) Road and access standards (including private
roads, public roads, and driveways) are per the City’s adopted development
standards for public works.
      1.   Configuration Of New Pipestem (Flag) Lots: The area of new pipestem
(flag) lots in the RU Zone, exclusive of the area of the driveway portion,
shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet minimum. The shape of any new
pipestem (flag) lot in the RU Zone shall be such that a minimum forty-foot
(40') diameter building circle can be sited within the required setbacks of the
zone. The driveway portion of any new pipestem (flag) lot in the RU Zone shall
be no longer than one hundred feet (100') and at least twenty feet (20') wide.
In all other zones the minimum street frontage for a flag lot shall be fifteen
feet (15') unless a building will be sited one hundred fifty feet (150') or
further from the curb line in which there must be fire access provided with a
minimum width of twenty feet (20').
FIGURE 13-5-1A
BASIC PIPESTEM (FLAG) LOT CHARACTERISTICS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2288.png]
FIGURE 13-5-1B
RU ZONE FLAG LOT CONFIGURATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2290.png]
      2.   Development Standards For All Pipestem (Flag) Lots In The RU Zone:
All pipestem (flag) lots in the RU Zone, irrespective of when platted, shall
meet the following standards, subject to site plan review:
         a.   All development of principal residences, accessory dwellings,
garages, sheds, and other structures shall be built within the required
setbacks.
         b.   The “building area” within the setbacks shall be large enough to
accommodate a forty-foot (40') diameter building circle to ensure that the
shape of the lot is adequate to support development that results in attractive,
usable open spaces.
         c.   Hard surface coverage of the lot shall not be greater than forty-
five percent (45%), not including the driveway portion in the stem section of
the lot.
         d.   The maximum height of any structure shall not be greater than
twenty-feet (20').
         e.   The perimeter treatment of the lot including the driveway portion
may include fencing or landscaping to screen the development from adjacent
properties.
   G.   Cottage Housing Development Standards, Except As Modified During
Binding Site Plan Review or Unit Lot Subdivision approval:
      1.   Minimum site area: Two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square
feet of gross site area per dwelling unit.
      2.   Project size: Four (4) units minimum and twelve (12) units maximum.
      3.   Minimum common open space: Four hundred (400) square feet per unit.
      4.   Perimeter setbacks per underlying zoning.
      5.   Minimum building separation: Ten feet (10').
      6.   Maximum building height: Eighteen feet (18'), twenty five feet (25')
to roof peak.
      7.   Maximum building coverage: Forty percent (40%).
      8.   Maximum total site impervious coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
      9.   Maximum floor area: One thousand (1,000) square feet total, six
hundred fifty (650) square feet ground floor.
      10.   Accessory dwellings: Four hundred (400) square feet maximum,
attached or detached.
      11.   Minimum street frontage: Twenty feet (20').
   H.   Duplex Development Standards:
      1.   Duplexes shall be designed to blend in with the single-family
character of the neighborhood.
      2.   If located on a corner lot, each unit of the duplex shall face onto
an adjacent street, and no two (2) units' front doors and garages are permitted
to face the same street frontage.
      3.   Lot size requirements for duplexes in residential zones are as
follows:
         a.   Residential Conservation (RC):
            (1)   Duplex minimum lot size: Two (2) acres.
         b.   Residential Urban (RU):
            (1)   Duplex minimum lot size: 9,075 square feet.
         c.   Residential Multi- Family (RMF):
            (1)   Duplex minimum lot size: 7,000 square feet.
   I.   Lot Size Averaging:
      1.   Purpose: To allow flexibility in the creation of new subdivisions to
accommodate development barriers including, but not limited to, shorelines,
wetlands, and critical areas, provided that the average lot size in the
development as a whole meets the district's minimum lot size and the density as
a whole does not exceed the districts maximum density standards.
      2.   Applicability: Lot size averaging provisions of this chapter apply
to and may be used by developers of land who are dividing land in conformance
with the provisions of this title, and in which the land is located in the
following zones:
         a.   RC Residential-Conservation Zone (subsection
13-3-2A).
         b.   RU Residential-Urban Zone (subsection
13-3-2B).
         c.   RMF Residential-Multi-Family Zone (subsection
13-3-2C).
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Lot size averaging cannot result in a parcel being divided into a
greater number of lots than would result from development at the normal minimum
lot size required in the applicable zone.
         b.   In approved short plats and subdivisions, the individual lots
shall be considered in compliance with minimum area requirements if the average
of the areas of all the lots in the short plat or subdivision meets the minimum
requirement for the zone in which the short plat or subdivision is located.
         c.   Lot size averaging only applies to creation of lots for detached
single-family residences.
         d.   Lot size averaging shall not be used to create lots for duplexes
or multi-family dwellings as defined by section
13-2-14.
         e.   No individual single-family lot shall be reduced more than twenty
five percent (25%) from the district minimum required area.
         f.   No single-family lot shall be reduced in width to less than forty
feet (40') (regardless of lot depth).
         g.   No single-family lot shall be reduced in depth to less than
seventy feet (70') (regardless of lot width).
         h.   All of the following are to be subtracted from the net square
footage of a lot for the purpose of determining the area of a lot proposed for
lot averaging:
            (1)   Public right-of-way;
            (2)   Private roads, private primary access easement; and
            (3)   Minor portion (pipestem) of pipestem lots.
         i.   The area of easements other than that of the primary access
(public right-of-way or private easement) shall not be subtracted from the net
square footage of a lot.
         j.   Surface detention/retention facilities may count toward
calculations for lot size averaging only if the detention/retention facility:
            (1)   Is designed so as to appear as a natural wetland system; or
            (2)   Provides active or passive recreational benefits in a natural
landscaped setting.
         k.   Developments utilizing lot size averaging shall not receive
preliminary or final approval as phased developments unless each phase meets
the lot size averaging standards for the total land area included in that
phase. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 812, 10-26-2005; Ord. 830, 6-28-2006;
Ord. 886, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2018-1027, 4-25-2018; Ord. 2020-1063, 8-12-2020; Ord.
2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2021-1082, 9-29-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-5-2: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish standards for
landscaping and screening, to maintain or replace existing vegetation, provide
physical and visual buffers between differing land uses, lessen environmental
and improve aesthetic impacts of development and to enhance the overall
appearance of the city. Street trees shall be selected from the approved list
of trees, on file with the City of Orting.
   B.   Applicability: The standards set forth in this section shall apply to
all uses of land which are subject to site plan or architectural design review,
to the construction or location of any multi-family structure of three (3) or
more attached dwelling units, to any new subdivision, and to projects
implementing native vegetation retention, native vegetation revegetation, and
dispersion low impact development (LID) best management practices (BMPs) for
permanent on-site stormwater management.
   C.   Landscape Plan: A plan of the proposed landscaping and screening of
projects subject to this section shall be provided as part of the application
and shall contain the following:
      1.   Identification of existing trees and tree canopies;
      2.   Significant trees and vegetation to remain;
      3.   New landscaping: location, species, diameter or size of materials
using both botanical and common names. Drawings shall reflect the ultimate size
of plant materials;
      4.   Identification of tree protection techniques;
      5.   Alternative landscaping plans: The Administrator or designee may
approve, as a Type 2 administrative decision modification of the landscape
requirements when alternative plans comply with the intent of this chapter and:
         a.   The proposed landscaping represents a superior result than that
which would be achieved by strictly following requirements of this section; or
         b.   The alternative plan incorporates the increased retention of
significant trees and naturally occurring undergrowth; or
         c.   The alternative plan incorporates unique, historic or
architectural features such as plazas, courts, fountains, trellises, or
sculptures.
      6.   Areas of native vegetation retention, native vegetation restoration,
and dispersion LID BMPs used for permanent on-site stormwater management.
The landscape plan shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect
licensed by the state of Washington. The administrator may allow the landscape
plan to be prepared by another party if the applicant can demonstrate that the
size and/or complexity of the project is such that the landscape design
solution may be very simple, involving a limited palette of plant materials and
applications.
   D.   Preservation Of Significant Trees And Vegetation:
      1.   All significant trees in required perimeter buffers shall be
retained.
      Retention of significant trees on the remaining portions of the site is
encouraged. Retention of significant trees on the remaining portions of the
site is required where such tree retention is proposed to meet the requirements
of LID BMPs for permanent on-site stormwater management.
      2.   Significant trees are those which possess one or more of the
following characteristics:
         a.   Trees identified in table
13-5-2 D2 of this code;
         b.   Contribute to the character of the area and do not constitute a
safety hazard;
         c.   Form a continuous canopy or dense vegetated screen; or
         d.   Trees identified as being significant due to their age, scarcity,
habitat value, community identifying characteristics, historical, cultural, or
biological significance.
   Table 13-5-2 D 2, Significant Trees
 
   Tree Species                Size
Garry (Oregon White) Oak       8” diameter at breast height (“d.b.h.”) or
                               greater
Pacific Yew                    5” d.b.h. or greater
Pacific Madrone                10” d.b.h. or greater
Ponderosa Pine, Grand Fir, Big
Leaf Maple, Western Hemlock,   15” d.b.h. or greater
Western Red Cedar
Douglas Fir, Sitka Spruce      24” d.b.h. or greater
Tree of any species            40” d.b.h. or greater
 
      3.   If the grade level adjoining a tree to be retained is altered such
that the tree might be endangered, then a dry rock wall or rock well shall be
constructed around the tree. The diameter of this wall or well must be capable
of protecting the tree.
      4.   Impervious or compactible surfaces within the area defined by the
drip line of any tree to be retained may be permitted if a qualified arborist
certifies that such activities will not endanger the tree or trees.
      5.   Retention of other existing vegetation that is equal to or better
than available nursery stock is strongly encouraged.
      6.   Areas of native vegetation designated as landscape or buffer areas
shall be protected by a ten foot (10') wide no construction zone during
construction. Cleaning, grading or contour alteration is not permitted within
this no construction zone unless a qualified arborist certifies that proposed
construction activity within the zone will not harm existing vegetation.
      7.   Tree retention to meet the requirements of LID BMPs for permanent
on-site stormwater management shall be in accordance with the adopted
Stormwater Management Manual and LID Manual.
   E.   Requirements For Residential Uses:
      1.   Perimeter Areas: Notwithstanding other regulations found in this
chapter, perimeter areas not covered with buildings, driveways and parking and
loading areas shall be landscaped. The required width of perimeter areas to be
landscaped shall be at least the depth of the required yard or setback area.
Areas to be landscaped shall be covered with live plant materials which will
ultimately cover seventy-five percent (75%) of the ground area within three (3)
years. One deciduous tree a minimum of two-inch (2") caliper or one 6-foot
evergreen or three (3) shrubs which should attain a height of three and one-
half feet (31/2') within three (3) years shall be provided for every five
hundred (500) square feet of the area to be landscaped.
      2.   Buffer Areas: All residential subdivisions or planned developments
shall have a buffer consisting of a vegetated screen, that is opaque to a
height of six feet (6') minimum, along the perimeter of the plat. The screening
may be achieved through any one or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Evergreen trees or shrubs; or
         b.   Trees and shrubs planted on an earthen berm as approved by the
Public Works Director; or
         c.   A combination of trees or shrubs and fencing. If fencing is
utilized, vegetation screening is required along fifty percent (50%) of the
fencing on each lot line. If fencing and vegetation is selected, for a lot line
abutting a right-of- way, vegetation must be planted on the exterior of the
fence; or
         d.   Use of existing native vegetation that already provides a
vegetative screen.
      3.   New subdivisions or planned developments that abut arterial streets
or nonresidential uses shall be screened with a minimum twenty-five foot (25')
buffer. Subdivisions or planned developments that abut areas with the same
underlying zoning shall be screened with nominal landscaping that provides
variety and enhances the visual character of the area.
      4.   The vegetation requirements of this section may be waived through a
variance process for new subdivisions or planned developments where native
vegetation retention, native vegetation revegetation or dispersion LID BMPs are
proposed in accordance with the Stormwater Management Manual and LID Manual.
Buffer area widths shall not be reduced. The type of vegetation within buffer
areas shall be determined through the variance process identified in this code.
      5.   Root barriers are required for all trees to be planted adjacent to
right-of- way, and as required by the Public Works Director.
   F.   Requirements For Commercial Uses:
      1.   Perimeter Areas: See subsection E1 of this section.
      2.   Buffer Areas: Where a development subject to these standards is
contiguous to a residential zoning district or areas of residential
development, then the required perimeter area shall be landscaped the full
width of the setback areas as follows:
         a.   A solid screen of evergreen trees or shrubs; or
         b.   A solid screen of evergreen trees and shrubs planted on an
earthen berm an average of three feet (3') high as approved by the Public Works
Director; or
         c.   A combination of trees or shrubs and fencing. If fencing is
utilized, vegetation screening is required along fifty percent (50%) of the
fencing on each lot line. If fencing and vegetation is selected, for a lot line
abutting a right-of- way, vegetation must be planted on the exterior of the
fence.
      3.   Areas Without Setbacks:
         a.   In areas where there is no required setback or where buildings
are built to the property line, development subject to this chapter shall
provide a street tree at an interval of one every twenty feet (20') or planter
boxes at the same interval or some combination of trees and boxes, or an
alternative.
         b.   Street trees shall be a minimum caliper of two inches (2") and be
a species approved by the city and installed to city standards. Planter boxes
shall be maintained by the property owners and shall be of a type approved by
the city.
      4.   The vegetation requirements of this section may be waived through a
variance process for new subdivisions or planned developments where native
vegetation retention, native vegetation revegetation or dispersion LID BMPs are
proposed in accordance with the Stormwater Management Manual and LID Manual.
Buffer area widths shall not be reduced. The type of vegetation within buffer
areas shall be determined through the variance process identified in this code.
      5.   Root barriers are required for all trees to be planted adjacent to
hardscape and/or as required by the Public Works Director.
   G.   Parking Lot Landscaping And Screening: The standards of this section
shall apply to public and private commercial parking lots and residential
parking areas providing spaces for more than ten (10) cars.
      1.   Perimeter Landscaping: In order to soften the visual effects or
separate one parking area from another or from other uses, the following
standards apply:
         a.   Adjacent to a street or road, the minimum width shall be equal to
the required yard for the underlying land use or a strip ten feet (10') wide,
whichever is greater. On all other perimeters the depth shall be a minimum of
five feet (5'). Where parking areas are bordered by more than one street, the
landscape strip shall only apply to the longest side. All other sides shall be
screened with a wall, fence, vegetative buffer or combination of these elements
at a minimum height of three and one-half feet (31/2').
         b.   Visual screening through one or any combination of the following
methods is required:
            (1)   Planting of living ground cover as well as shrubs or small
trees which will form a solid vegetative screen at least three feet (3') in
height; or
            (2)   A fence or wall at least three feet (3') high combined with
low planting or wall clinging plant materials. Materials should be
complementary to building design; or
            (3)   Earth mounding or berms having a minimum height of three feet
(3') and planted with shrubs and trees.
         c.   In order to protect vision clearances, areas around driveways and
other access points are not required to comply with the full screening height
standards. The specific horizontal distance exempt from this standard shall be
as established in the public works standards.
         d.   Trees are required at a ratio of at least one per sixty-four (64)
square feet of landscaped area or fraction thereof. They shall have a clear
trunk to a height of at least five feet (5') above the ground at maturity.
Trees shall be planted no closer than four feet (4') from pavement edges where
vehicles overhang planted areas.
   2.   Interior Small Parking Lot Landscaping: All parking lots that contain
fewer than twenty (20) parking spaces or are smaller than six thousand (6,000)
square feet shall contain trees a minimum of two-inch (2") caliper at intervals
no greater than thirty feet (30') in planting beds a minimum of sixty-four (64)
square feet in area.
   3.   Interior Large Parking Lot Landscaping: All parking lots that contain
twenty (20) or more parking spaces or are larger than six thousand (6,000)
square feet in area shall have interior lot landscaping as follows:
      a.   Landscaped Area: A minimum of five (5) square feet of landscaped
area per one hundred (100) square feet of vehicle use area, or fraction
thereof. Parking lots larger than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet shall
have a minimum of seven (7) square feet of landscaped area per one hundred
(100) square feet of vehicle use area or fraction thereof. Vehicle use area
shall include driveways.
      b.   Minimum Area: The minimum size of individual planting areas shall be
sixty-four (64) square feet in order to provide a proper plant environment.
      c.   Trees Required: Trees are required at a ratio of at least one per
sixty-four (64) square feet of landscaped area or fraction thereof. Trees shall
have a clear trunk to a height of at least five feet (5') above the ground.
Trees shall be planted no closer than four feet (4') from pavement edges where
vehicles overhang planted areas.
      d.   Shrubs And Ground Cover: Required landscaped areas remaining after
tree planting shall be planted in shrubs and/or ground cover. The distribution
of plants shall be adequate to ultimately achieve seventy-five percent (75%)
ground coverage within three (3) years after planting.
      e.   Vehicle Overhang: Parked vehicles may overhang landscaped areas up
to two feet (2') by wheel stops or curbing.
   4.   The vegetation requirements of this section may be waived through a
variance process for new subdivisions or planned developments where native
vegetation retention, native vegetation revegetation or dispersion LID BMPs are
proposed in accordance with the Stormwater Management Manual and LID Manual.
Buffer area widths shall not be reduced. The type of vegetation within buffer
areas shall be determined through the variance process identified in this code.
   H.   Performance Assurance:
      1.   Landscaping required pursuant to an approved site plan shall be
installed prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy or final
inspection, unless the applicant submits a performance assurance equal to not
less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the construction cost and commits
to complete the landscaping within one year.
      2.   Performance assurance devices shall take the form of one of the
following:
         a.   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the state in a form approved by the city attorney;
         b.   Cash;
         c.   A letter of credit approved by the city attorney from a financial
institution stating that the money is held for the purpose of development of
the landscaping;
         d.   Assigned savings pursuant to an agreement approved by the city
attorney.
      3.   If a performance assurance device is employed, the applicant shall
provide the city with a nonrevocable notarized agreement granting the city and
its agents the right to enter the property and perform any required work
remaining undone at the expiration of the assurance device.
      4.   If the applicant fails to carry out provisions of the agreement and
the city has incurred costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city
shall call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursement. If the amount of the
bond or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the city,
the applicant shall be liable to the city for the difference. If the amount of
the bond or cash deposit exceeds the cost and expense incurred by the city, the
remainder shall be released.
      5.   Native vegetation retention areas, areas to be revegetated with
native vegetation, or dispersion areas proposed for LID BMPs to meet the
requirements of the adopted Stormwater Management Manual and LID Manual shall
be preserved through permanent protections. A permanent protective mechanism
shall be legally established to ensure that the required native vegetation area
is preserved and protected in perpetuity in a form that is acceptable to both
the applicant and the City and filed with the County Auditor's office.
Restrictions on the future use of the native vegetation area shall also be
recorded on the face of the plat for subdivision applications. A permanent
native vegetation area shall be established using one of the following
mechanisms.
         a.   Placement in a separate non-building tract owned in common by all
lots within the subdivision;
         b.   Covered by a protective easement or public or private land trust
dedication;
         c.   Preserved through an appropriate permanent protective mechanism
that provides the same level of permanent protection of this section as
determined by the approval authority.
         d.   To ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, all
development activity subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall include
the submittal of a vegetation management plan as specified below;
         e.   Applications for subdivision, short subdivision, large lot
division, planned development district, or binding site plan approval;
         f.   Site development permit applications;
         g.   Use permit and commercial building permit applications.
      6.   To ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, all
development activity subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall include
the submittal of a vegetation management plan as specified below:
         a.   Applications for subdivision, short subdivision, large lot
division, planned development district, or binding site plan approval;
         b.   Site development permit applications;
         c.   Use permit and commercial building permit applications
         d.   Development agreements.
      7.   The vegetation management plan shall comply with the minimum
requirements specified below:
         a.   The vegetation management plan shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect or qualified professional forester.
         b.   Provisions for tree conservation and protection on the site shall
be in conformance with the requirements of this section.
         c.   A vegetation management plan shall be submitted either as part of
the preliminary plat or other appropriate plan, or as a separate drawing, and
shall include the following information:
            (1)   Vegetation Protection Plan: Drawn to scale; designating
vegetation to be preserved. It shall include the following information:
               (A)     Locations of perimeters of individual and strands of
trees to be preserved. The tree protection area for trees to be preserved shall
be shown on the plan.
               (B)   Size, species, and health of trees to be preserved.
               (C)    General locations of trees proposed for removal.
               (D)   Limits of construction and existing and proposed grade
changes on site.
               (E)    Narrative description and graphic detail of tree
protection and tree maintenance measures required for the trees to be
preserved.
               (F)    Timeline for clearing, grading, and installation of tree
protection measures.
            (2)   Planting Plan: Drawn to scale on the site plan. It shall
include the following information:
               (A)    Location, size, species, and number of trees to be
planted.
               (B)    Narrative description and detail showing any site
preparation, installation, and maintenance measures necessary for the long-term
survival and health of the vegetation.
               (C)    Timeline for site preparation, installation, and
maintenance of vegetation.
               (D)   Cost estimate for the purchase, installation and five (5)
years' maintenance of vegetation.
            (3)   Tree Density Calculation: The following information shall be
included on the site plan:
               (A)    Acreage of on-site critical areas, excluding critical
area buffer.
               (B)    Acreage of on-site public and private roads.
               (C)    Calculation of trees per acre for existing trees proposed
for preservation.
               (D)    Calculation of trees per acre for new trees to be
planted.
            (4)   A watering plan is required for the establishment phase of
new plantings. The plan must provide for adequate watering of the newly
installed trees for a minimum of three (3) years.
      8.   Vegetation management plans will be reviewed by the city
administrator. Upon completion of its review, the City will take one of the
following actions:
         a.   Approve the vegetation management plan, with or without
conditions; or
         b.   Disapprove the vegetation management plan, indicating
deficiencies to the applicant. If the vegetation management plan is determined
to be deficient, the applicant will be notified in writing of the deficiency
and will be provided the opportunity to modify the plan as necessary to comply
with the provisions of this Chapter.
         c.   Vegetation management plans will be reviewed by the city
administrator prior to the approval of the associated underlying permit or
application. The underlying permit may not be approved until such time as the
city administrator has approved the plan.
         d.   Vegetation management plans shall be incorporated by reference in
any approval issued for the underlying permit or application. Compliance with
the plans shall be a condition of such approval.
      9.   The city administrator may allow or approve minor modifications to
an approved vegetation management plan during the site development construction
process to account for unforeseen site conditions and circumstances. The
submittal of an amended vegetation management plan meeting the requirements of
this Chapter shall be required.
   I.   Maintenance:
      1.   Whenever landscaping is required under the provisions of this
chapter, shrubs and trees in the landscaping and planting areas shall be
maintained in a healthy growing condition during the first three (3) years
after installation. Planting beds shall not be located over impervious
surfaces. All landscaped areas shall be provided with sprinkler systems or hose
bibs within seventy-five feet (75') of plantings. Dead or dying trees or shrubs
shall be replaced immediately, and the planting area shall be maintained free
of noxious weeds and trash on a regular basis.
      2.   Native vegetation retention areas, areas to be revegetated with
native vegetation, or dispersion areas proposed for LID BMPs to meet the
requirements of the adopted Stormwater Management Manual and LID Manual shall
be maintained in accordance with the adopted Stormwater Management Manual and
LID Manual. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-
2020; Ord. 2021-1087, 11-17-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-5-3: LOADING AREA AND OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate parking and loading
in order to lessen traffic congestion and contribute to public safety by
providing sufficient on-site and off-site areas for the maneuvering and parking
of motor vehicles. This section also intends to recognize the barriers that
expansive off-street parking requirements pose to business growth and new
business establishment in Orting. Orting’s multimodal connectivity throughout
the downtown, its availability of on street and public parking, and its goal to
incite economic prosperity and revitalization in the MUTC are intended to be
key components in the assessment of needed off-street parking in Orting’s
downtown.
   B.   Required Automobile Parking Spaces: Off street parking spaces shall be
provided as an accessory use in accordance with the requirements of this
section at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, or
expanded.
   C.   Size And Access: Each off street parking space shall have an area of
not less than one hundred sixty (160) square feet, exclusive of access drives
or aisles and a width of not less than eight feet (8'). There shall be adequate
provision for ingress and egress from each parking space.
   D.   Location: Off street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter
specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facilities to the
nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve. Parking
is required to be on the subject parcel unless the City approves a proposal
utilizing the off-site parking provisions of OMC
13-5-3L and/or the shared parking provisions of OMC
13-5-3M.
      1.   For a single-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling, the parking
facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the building
they are required to serve.
      2.   For churches, hospitals, large group homes, institutions, rooming
and lodging houses, nursing and convalescent homes, community clubs, and
clubrooms, parking facilities shall be located not farther than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from the facility.
      3.   For uses other than those specified, including governmental
facilities, parking facilities shall be located not farther than three hundred
feet (300') from the facility.
      4.   ADA accessible parking shall be located on the shortest possible
route to the entrance of the building or facility.
   E.   Unit Of Measurement: In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, government
buildings containing public assembly space and other places of assembly in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating
facilities, each eighteen inches (18") of width or eighty (80) square feet of
open area of such seating facilities should be counted as one seat for the
purpose of determining requirements of off street parking facilities under this
title.
   F.   Expansions Or Enlargements: Where any structure is enlarged or
expanded, off street parking spaces shall be provided for said expansion or
enlargement in accordance with the requirements of subsection I of this
section. Nothing in this title shall be construed to require off street parking
spaces for the portion of said building or structure existing at the effective
date of this title. A change in use in an existing structure shall require
additional off street parking spaces as set forth in subsection I of this
section.
   G.   Mixed Occupancies: In the case of two (2) or more uses in the same
building, including governmental office space and public assembly space, the
total requirements for off street parking facilities shall be the sum of the
requirements for the several uses computed separately. Off street parking
facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking
facilities for any other use, except as hereafter specified in subsection I of
this section for joint use.
   H.   Uses Not Specified: In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in
subsection I of this section, the requirements for off street parking
facilities shall be determined by the Administrator. Such determination shall
be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in
subsection I of this section and/or through a parking study as required by the
Administrator or their designee.
   I.   Parking Spaces Required For Particular Uses:
      1.   In the MUTC zone, the uses listed in this subsection are required to
provide only fifty percent (50%) of the number of off-street parking spaces
required by the table in OMC 13-5-3(I)(3): Banks, savings and loan
associations, business or professional offices; bowling alleys; establishments
for the sale and consumption on the premises of food and beverages; medical and
dental clinics; retail stores; theaters; museums; and, libraries.
      2.   Parking reductions authorized by this subsection do not apply to
required ADA accessible parking; all uses in all zones shall provide ADA
accessible parking stalls in a manner compliant with the Americans Disabilities
Act and its implementing regulations.
      3.   Other than as excepted or otherwise stipulated in OMC
13-5-3(I)(1), the minimum number of off street parking spaces required for
nonresidential uses shall be as set forth in the following:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use                                       Parking Spaces Required
1.  All dwellings (RC, RU, RMF, MUTC)     2 off street spaces per unit1
                                          1 for each employee, plus 1
2.  Family daycare                        additional, not including required
                                          residential spaces
   Daycare center                        1 for each employee, plus 1 for every
                                          10 children or adults
3.  Auto repair or mechanic shops         3 for each service bay
4.  Banks, savings and loan associations, 1 for each 400 square feet of gross
    business or professional offices      floor area
5.  Bowling alleys                        4 for each alley
                                          1 for each 5 seats in the principal
6.  Churches                              place of assembly for worship,
                                          including balconies and choir loft
    Dance halls, skating rinks, youth     1 for each 25 square feet of skating
7.  cabarets                              or dancing area, plus 1 per 40 square
                                          feet of all other building area
    Establishments for the sale and
8.  consumption on the premises of food   1 for each 200 square feet of gross
    and beverages, including fraternal    floor area
    and social clubs2
9.  Fraternity, sorority or group student 1 for each 3 sleeping rooms or 1 for
    house                                 each 6 beds, whichever is greater
                                          The maximum of the following:
                                          1 for each 400 square feet of gross
10. Government Facilities                 floor area, or
                                          1 for each 4 seats in each public
                                          assembly space pursuant to OMC
                                          13-5-3: E above
11. Hospitals                             2 for each bed
12. Large group home, institution         1 for each 2 beds
13. Libraries and museums                 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
                                          area open to the public
14. Lodging and rooming house             1 for each sleeping room
    Manufacturing uses, research and
    testing laboratories, creameries,     1 for each employee on a maximum
15. bottling establishments, bakeries,    shift
    canneries, printing and engraving
    shops
16. Medical or dental clinics             5 for each physician or dentist
17. Motels, hotels                        1 for each unit
18. Motor vehicle or machinery sales,     1 for each 400 square feet of gross
    wholesale stores, furniture stores    floor area
19. Retail stores                         1 for each 300 square feet
                                          1 for each 8 students, plus 1 for
20. Schools; high schools                 each faculty member (exclusive of
                                          loading and unloading area)
21. School; Elementary and junior high    1 for each faculty member
    Stadiums, auditoriums, community
22. clubs, community centers, and other   1 for each 4 seats
    places of assembly
23. Theaters                              1 for each 3 seats
                                          1 for each 2,000 square feet of gross
24. Warehouses and storage buildings      floor area, except that office space
                                          shall provide parking as required for
                                          offices
                                         
 
      Notes:
         1.   See section
13-5-6 for accessory dwelling unit off street parking requirements.
         2.   Stationary vendor units used to provide food vending services are
exempt from off street parking requirements; provided that, the principal use
meets the established parking requirements for such principal use.
   J.   Required Loading Areas:
      1.   In any commercial and manufacturing zones, and for any institutional
use in whatever zone it may be located, every building or portion of building
hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide additional floor space
shall be provided with a minimum of one off street or off alley loading space
for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of usable floor space within the
building, which usable floor space is intended to be used for or is used for
merchandising, manufacturing, warehousing, or processing purposes. If the
building contains less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of usable floor
space, the requirement for an off street or off alley loading space may be
waived by the building inspector.
      2.   If the building contains more than twenty four thousand (24,000)
square feet of floor space so used, then there shall be one additional loading
space provided for each additional twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet of
floor space.
      3.   Each loading space shall measure not less than thirty feet by twelve
feet (30' x 12'), and shall have an unobstructed height of fourteen feet (14'),
and shall be made permanently available for such purpose, and shall be
surfaced, improved, and maintained. Such facilities shall be so located that
trucks using the same shall not encroach upon or interfere with areas reserved
for off street parking nor project into any public right-of-way and shall be
adjacent to the building to be served thereby. If the site upon which such
loading space or spaces is to be located abuts upon an alley, such loading
space or spaces shall be off alley. If the loading space is incorporated within
a building then, as to location, the requirements of this section shall not
apply.
      4.   Any floor area provided by additions to or structural alterations to
a building shall be provided with loading space or spaces as set forth herein
whether or not loading spaces have been provided for the original floor space.
   K.   Commercial Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles, And Boats: The following
special requirements and performance standards shall apply to private
properties located in the Residential-Urban, Residential-Multi-Family, and
Residential-Conservation Zones, except as otherwise authorized by the City
through a conditional use permit:
      1.   Outdoor Storage of Vehicles: The outdoor storage of commercial
vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, and vehicle accessories is permitted in
the residential zones, provided the following standards are met. For purposes
of this section, “storage” means the keeping of such vehicles and accessories
on any portion of any parcel of property for a period of seventy-two (72)
continuous hours or longer.
         a.   Recreational Vehicles and Boats: A recreational vehicle or boat
shall not be stored in the front yard of a lot. In no instance shall a
recreational vehicle or boat be stored such that any portion of the vehicle
encroaches upon a site distance area that would create a traffic hazard; nor
shall a recreational vehicle or boat be stored on or overhang a public right-
of-way. A maximum of one recreational vehicle and/or one boat may be located at
a parcel in the residential zones. It is prohibited to store two recreational
vehicles or two boats in the City’s residential zoning districts. If located
within a required side yard that fronts a street, the storage area for a
recreational vehicle or boat shall be improved with a durable and dustless
surface and screened from views from adjacent properties. In this context, a
boat or recreational vehicle shall be considered to be “screened from views”
provided an opaque fence of at least 6-feet in height separates the boat or
recreational vehicle from public view, or similar vegetative or structural
screening as approved by staff separates the boat or recreational vehicle from
public view. See OMC
13-5-1(D) for provisions related to the dimensional and permitting requirements
for fences.
         b.   Inoperable Vehicles And Motor Vehicle Accessories: No more than
two (2) inoperable vehicles may be stored on a lot. The outdoor storage of
inoperable vehicles, or parts thereof, and vehicle accessories such as camper
shells and equipment trailers shall be screened from neighboring properties and
public rights-of-way and prohibited from required front and street side yards.
         c.   Storage Of Commercial Use Vehicles: No vehicle having more than
two (2) axles or exceeding eighty four inches (84") in width, and intended for
commercial use including, but not limited to, truck tractors, truck trailers or
other large trucks shall be stored on property in an RU, RMF, or RC Zone unless
such vehicle is stored within a building or is otherwise screened so as not to
be visible from another property or from any public right-of-way.
   L.   Exceptions:
      1.   Guest parking associated with single family and attached dwellings
in the RMF zone is permitted to be provided it meets the following criteria:
         a.   Parking is located on the neighborhood streets or in a parking
court accessed by a public roadway, but not located more, than one hundred
sixty feet (160') from the home it is intended to serve.
         b.   Parking is not located in a limited residential access lane
right-of-way, except for perpendicular parking associated with private
driveways or alleyways.
         c.   Parking may be accommodated in a tandem driveway space, provided
it is not accessed by a private alleyway.
      2.   If sufficient parking is not available on the premises of a use
within the MUTC zone, a private parking area may be provided off-site, except
for single and two (2) family dwellings in the RU and RC zones if it meets the
following criteria:
         a.   Agreement Required: A parking agreement ensuring that off-site
parking is available for the duration of the use shall be approved by the City
Administrator, following review by the City Attorney.
         b.   Letter of Justification: The following shall be reviewed as part
of the permit process:
            (1)   A letter of justification addressing the need for off-site
parking and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood.
            (2)   A site plan showing all dimensions of parking spaces, aisles,
landscaping areas, abutting street improvements, curb cuts, and on-site and
abutting uses and buildings.
         c.   Fees: No charge for use of such parking area shall be made in any
residential zone or open space and recreation zone except on a weekly or
monthly basis.
         d.   Maximum Distance To Off-Site Parking Area:
            (1)   Within the MUTC Zone: No distance requirements apply when
both the use and off-site parking are located within the MUTC Zone. However,
OMC 13-5-3D4 applies.
            (2)   Maximum distances to off-site parking do not apply if there
is a shuttle in place between the off-site parking and the sponsoring use.
            (3)   All Other Zones: All provisions of OMC
13-5-3D apply.
      3.   The City Administrator may approve a proposal to modify the distance
to off-site parking or allow the required parking to be provided on-street if a
Transportation Management Plan or other acceptable transportation system will
adequately provide for the parking needs of the use and the conditions below
are met.
         a.   Decision Criteria: Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this Title, the Department
Administrator may grant modifications for individual cases provided he/she
shall first find that a specific reason makes the strict letter of this Code
impractical, that the intent and purpose of the governing land use designation
of the Comprehensive Plan is met and that the modification is in conformity
with the intent and purpose of this Code, and that such modification:
            (1)   Substantially implements the policy direction of the policies
and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Element and the Architectural
Design Guidelines and the proposed modification is the minimum adjustment
necessary to implement these policies and objectives;
            (2)   Will meet the objectives and safety, function, appearance,
environmental protection and maintainability intended by the Code requirements,
based upon sound engineering judgment;
            (3)   Will not be injurious to other property(ies) in the vicinity;
            (4)   Conforms to the intent and purpose of the Code;
            (5)   Can be shown to be justified and required for the use and
situation intended; and
            (6)   Will not create adverse impacts to other property(ies) in the
vicinity.
   M.   Joint Use Parking Facilities:
      1.   When Permitted: Joint use of parking facilities may be authorized
for those uses that have dissimilar peak-hour demands or when it can be
demonstrated that the parking facilities to be shared are underutilized.
      2.   Agreement Required: A parking agreement ensuring that joint use
parking is available for the duration of the uses shall be approved by the
Community and Economic Development Administrator, following review by the City
Attorney. Notice of termination of the agreement shall be provided to the
Administrator and additional parking must be provided if the agreement is
terminated, consistent with subsection I of this Section.
      3.   Maximum Distance To Joint Use Parking:
         a.   Within the MUTC, MUTCN and Public Facilities Zones: No distance
requirements apply when both the use and joint use parking are located within
the MUTC, MUTCN or Public Facilities zones. However, OMC
13-5-3D4 applies.
         b.   All Other Zones: All provisions of OMC
13-5-3-D apply.
      4.   Special Provisions For Subdivision Of Shopping Center: Parking areas
in shopping centers may operate as common parking for all uses. If a shopping
center is subdivided, easements and/or restrictive covenants must grant use and
provide for maintenance of common parking and access areas.
   N.   Administrative Parking Waiver: The Administrator may issue a waiver
from the number of off-street parking stalls required by this chapter for uses
in the downtown core in response to a requested waiver by the property owner.
The requested waiver shall only be considered by the Administrator upon showing
of a good faith effort by the applicant that attempts have been made to enter
into joint use parking agreements as governed by OMC 13-5-3M. The waiver
request shall include a statement of justification for the request and shall
document the number of off-street parking stalls for which the applicant is
requesting relief. The Administrator may require a parking study be prepared
and provided by the applicant that considers the use of the site subject to the
request, the availability of parking proximal to the site, and the totality of
approved parking waivers and its impact on the entire community’s access to
parking and public enjoyment of the downtown core. In no instance may a parking
waiver grant relief from the dimensional standards of parking stalls, nor
overwhelm dimensional standards governed by the Orting Development Standards
regulating the space needed for safe maneuverability of a parking lot, nor
approve relief from the number of off-street parking stalls that has otherwise
been denied by the City’s Hearing Examiner after considering a variance
application from the standards set forth in this chapter, not waive required
accessible parking stalls as governed by the International Building Code or
Title 10 of the OMC. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 943,
5-14-2014; Ord. 2018-1026, 4-25-2018; Ord. 2018-1027, 4-25-2018; Ord. 2019-
1043, 3-27-2019, eff. 5-3-2019; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2021-1086, 10-
27-2021; Ord. 2022-1095, 8-10-2022; Ord. 2024-1133, 10-30-2024; Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024; Ord. 2024-1137, 2-12-2025; Ord. 2025-1146, 7-30-2025)
13-5-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide standards which
allow a resident of a single-family dwelling or duplex to operate a limited
activity from their principal residence or permitted accessory structure while
achieving the goals of retaining residential character, maintaining property
values and preserving environmental quality.
   B.   Applicability: Home occupations are only permitted in compliance with
the below performance standards and in conjunction with a detached single-
family dwelling or duplex in the MUTC, RC, RU, and RMF Zones.
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   Home based daycare provisions are stated in section
13-5-5 of this chapter.
      2.   Temporary lodging facilities (lodging house), including bed and
breakfast inns and boarding/rooming homes, are exempt from the regulations of
this section.
      3.   Collective gardens conforming to the requirements of chapter 8 of
this title are a permitted home occupation in the RC, RU, and RMF Zones.
   D.   Performance Standards:
      1.   Intent: It is the intent of this subsection to provide performance
standards for home occupation activities, not to create a specific list of
every type of possible home based business activity. The following performance
standards prescribe the conditions under which home occupation activities may
be conducted when incidental to a residential use. Activities which exceed
these performance standards should refer to chapter 3 of this title to
determine the appropriate commercial, industrial, civic, or office use category
which applies to the activity.
      2.   General Provisions: The following general provisions shall apply to
all home occupation activities:
         a.   The activity is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the property for residential purposes and shall not change the residential
character of the dwelling or neighborhood;
         b.   External alteration inconsistent with the residential character
of the structure is prohibited;
         c.   Use of hazardous materials or equipment must comply with the
requirements of the Building Code and the Fire Code;
         d.   The activity does not create noticeable glare, noise, odor,
vibration, smoke, dust or heat at or beyond the property lines;
         e.   Use of electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible
or audible interference in radio or television receivers or fluctuations in
line voltage at or beyond the property line is prohibited;
         f.   Manufacturing shall be limited to the small scale assembly of
already manufactured parts but does not preclude production of small,
individually handcrafted items, furniture or other wood items as long as the
activity meets the other standards of this chapter;
         g.   Customers/clients are prohibited on the premises prior to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.;
         h.   Sales in connection with the activity are limited to merchandise
handcrafted on site or items accessory to a service (i.e., haircare products
for beauty salon), and shall include online retail businesses;
         i.   In addition to the single-family or duplex parking requirements,
for home occupations that involve customers visiting the premises, off street
parking associated with the activity shall include one additional space for
customers in accordance with standards set forth in section
13-5-3  of this chapter;
         j.   Only the resident can perform the activity; nonresident employees
are prohibited;
         k.   The activity shall be limited to an area less than five hundred
(500) square feet or a size equivalent to fifty percent (50%) of total floor
area of the living space within the residence, whichever is less;
         l.   One vehicle, up to ten thousand (10,000) gross vehicle weight, is
permitted in connection with the activity;
         m.   The activity shall be performed completely inside the residence,
an accessory structure or a combination of the two;
         n.   There shall be no outside display or storage of materials,
merchandise, or equipment. (Ord. 941, 7-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2018-1027, 4-25-
2018; Ord. 2021-1074, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-5-5: DAYCARE FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide operating criteria
to meet the need for quality, affordable, and safe daycare facilities for
adults and children. There are two (2) types of daycare facilities: home based
daycare facilities and daycare centers.
   B.   Family Daycare Facilities: Family daycare facilities operate from a
residence by the resident(s). There are two (2) types of family daycare
facilities; those providing services to adults and those providing services to
children. To be permitted outright per state law, these facilities are
restricted to a maximum of twelve (12) children or adults including residents
of the abode.
      1.   Criteria For Family Daycare Facilities:
         a.   Minimum Fencing/Screening Required: Outdoor recreation areas must
be enclosed by a six foot (6') high fence.
         b.   Outdoor Play Equipment: Play equipment shall not be located in
any required front or side yard setback area.
   C.   Daycare Centers: Daycare centers are facilities with no limit on the
number of clients. There are two (2) types of daycare centers: adult daycare
center and child daycare center.
      1.   Criteria For Daycare Centers:
         a.   Minimum Fencing/Screening Required: Outdoor recreation areas must
be enclosed by a six foot (6') high fence.
         b.   Loading: There shall be an off street area for loading and
unloading children or adults (clearly marked). Adequate vehicle turnaround
shall be provided on site for parking and loading so as to preclude the
necessity of backing out onto the street.
         c.   Signs: One sign will be permitted at a size to be determined by
the zone classification where the facility is located as provided in chapter 7
of this title. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-1027, 4-25-2018; Ord. 2021-
1086, 10-27-2021)
13-5-6: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Purpose: Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are intended to increase the
supply of affordable and independent housing for a variety of households,
provide supplemental earnings for people with limited incomes, and increase
residential densities with minimal cost and disruption to existing
neighborhoods. This should occur by utilizing the existing infrastructure and
community resources while providing a housing type that blends in well with
existing neighborhoods including low density residential neighborhoods. The
provisions of this chapter do not apply to lots designated with critical areas
or their buffers as designated by Title 11 OMC or by Orting's Shoreline Master
Program.
   B.   Procedures: Any owner/occupant seeking to establish an ADU shall apply
for approval in accordance with the following:
      1.   Application: The owner/occupant shall apply for a building permit
for an ADU. A complete application form must demonstrate that all size
thresholds and design standards are met.
      2.   Occupancy And Use: Occupancy of ADUs shall be reserved for
residential uses only. Occupancy of ADUs shall be used for long-term
residential purposes and may not be used for transient occupancy or short-term/
vacation rental purposes. Persons residing in ADUs shall live in such
residences for longer than one hundred eighty (180) days each calendar year.
      3.   Impact Fees: Impact fees are set forth in the fee schedule in a
manner consistent with RCW 36.70A.681(1)(a): The city may not assess impact
fees on the construction of accessory dwelling units that are greater than
fifty percent (50%) of the impact fees that would be imposed on the principal
unit.
   C.   General Requirements: The creation of an ADU shall be subject to the
following general requirements:
      1.   Number: A maximum of two (2) ADUs (either attached, detached, or a
combination of the two (2)) shall be allowed per lot of record in conjunction
with any detached single-family dwelling, subject to building and impervious
surface coverage maximums on the lot of record as per Table 1 in OMC
13-5-1 . ADUs are exempt from the residential density standards of this code.
      2.   Lot Standards: Both attached and detached ADUs shall be permitted on
all parcels containing single-family homes, provided the lot meets the minimum
size for the principal unit.
      3.   Type Of Unit:
         a.   An ADU shall be permitted as a subordinate dwelling unit attached
to or detached from the principal dwelling.
         b.   A detached ADU may be any dwelling permitted in the applicable
land use classification.
         c.   A recreational vehicle, tiny house with wheels as defined in RCW
35.21.686, manufacture home, or mobile home shall be not used as an ADU.
However, modular homes with a manufactured off site may be allowed.
      4.   Size: An ADU shall be no greater than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet. Spaces in the ADU that are not habitable, such as for
enclosed parking, will not be included in the square footage for the purposes
of this section.
      5.   Parking: One (1) off-street parking space is required for each ADU
up to seven hundred (700) square feet in size. For ADUs greater than seven
hundred (700) square feet in size two (2) off-street parking spaces are
required unless the lot is less than 6,000 square feet in size and then one (1)
off- street parking space is required per ADU. Off- street parking spaces for
ADUs shall be in addition to that which is required for the primary dwelling
unit.
      6.   Design: An ADU shall be designed to maintain the appearance of the
principal dwelling as a single-family residence.
         a.   The primary entrance to an attached ADU shall be located in such
a manner as to be clearly secondary to the main entrance to the principal unit.
         b.   Detached ADUs shall be no closer to the front lot line than the
front face of the principal dwelling. This provision shall not apply to
waterfront lots regulated pursuant to the city shoreline management program.
         c.   New construction of a detached ADU or conversion of an existing
detached structure to an ADU shall not be permitted within the required front,
side or rear yard setback as provided in section
13-5-1 , Table 1. An exception to the required rear yard setback may be allowed
if the rear yard abuts an alley in which case a detached ADU may be adjacent to
the lot line abutting the public alley.
         d.   If an ADU is created by constructing a new detached structure,
the building height of the ADU shall not be greater than the principal
dwelling’s building height or twenty-four feet (24') measured from the ground
to the top plate, whichever is less. The roof pitch may not exceed that of the
principal dwelling.
         e.   An ADU may be created by adding on to or converting an existing
detached structure, even if the existing structure is non-conforming to
required setbacks or lot coverage as long as other applicable codes and
requirements are met, such as for fire and safety, and as long as any existing
non-conforming components of the existing structure are not expanded upon. The
height of the ADU shall not exceed the principal dwelling's building height or
twenty- four feet (24'), whichever is greater.
         f.   An ADU shall have similar facade, roof pitch and siding to the
principal dwelling unit.
         g.   Right-of-way improvements shall not be required as a condition of
approval of a permit for an ADU. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-
25-2019; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-5-7: ADULT BUSINESSES:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of this section is to establish regulations for
activities or uses which, because of their adult orientation, are recognized as
having objectionable characteristics and need to be distanced from other uses
such as residential, schools, parks and community centers. Special regulations
for these uses are necessary to:
      1.   Prevent inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the public;
      2.   Ensure that adverse effects of these uses will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of surrounding neighborhoods; and
      3.   Protect property values and quality of life from potential adverse
impacts.
   B.   Location Standards: Adult businesses shall be subject to the provisions
of this section.
      1.   Separation Requirements I: Adult businesses are prohibited from
locating within six hundred feet (600') of any other adult business or any of
the following: (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
         a.   Areas zoned RC, RS, and RU; (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 830,
6-28-2006)
         b.   Community and cultural facilities, including, but not limited to,
post offices, government offices and courthouses;
         c.   Residential day treatment or workshop facilities primarily
oriented to the physically or mentally disabled; or
         d.   Senior citizens' service centers or residential facilities with
the primary emphasis oriented to senior citizens.
      2.   Separation Requirements II: Adult businesses are prohibited from
locating within two thousand feet (2,000') of the following uses:
         a.   Public or private schools from kindergarten to twelfth grade and
their grounds;
         b.   Daycare centers, preschools, nurseries or other childcare
facilities;
         c.   Youth cabarets, public parks, playgrounds, libraries or any other
area where large numbers of minors regularly travel or congregate; or
         d.   Churches, convents, monasteries, synagogues, temples, chapels or
other places of religious worship.
      3.   Legal Use Status: Adult businesses shall not become nonconforming if
a new use as listed under subsection B1 of this section is located closer than
six hundred feet (600') from the adult business or if a new use as listed under
subsection B2 of this section is located closer than two thousand feet (2,000')
of the adult business.
      4.   Distance Measurement: The distance requirements for this section
shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the lot upon
which the proposed adult business use is to be located to the nearest point of
any lot owned or leased for any of the uses listed in this subsection B.
   C.   Signage For Adult Businesses: No descriptive art or displays depicting,
describing or relating to any "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" shall be allowed on any exterior portion of the building or
as window displays visible to the public; otherwise, signage for adult
businesses shall comply with the provisions of applicable city ordinances.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004)
13-5-8: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS:
(Rep. by Ord. 889, 9-8-2010)
13-5-9: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide standards and
conditions to regulate lots, structures and uses which were legally established
prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this title and which remain
legal, but have become nonconforming as a result of this title's application,
or by acquisition of land in public interest. This section provides reasonable
alternatives to property owners for the limited expansion and continuance of
nonconformities. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any
discretionary land use action specifically authorized prior to or after the
adoption of this title. Discretionary land uses shall comply with conditions
and restrictions set forth in the approval through which it was authorized.
   B.   Basic Standards: The basic standards apply to all nonconforming uses,
structures, developments and lots. These standards provide for actions that are
allowed outright. Limited exceptions to the standards in this section are
allowed through a nonconforming use permit in section
13-6-6 of this title.
      1.   Expansion Of Nonconforming Uses And Structures: Nonconforming uses
and structures shall not be enlarged, expanded, extended, replaced or altered
except as expressly permitted in this section.
      2.   Expansion Beyond Original Parcel: Nothing in this section shall be
construed to permit expanding or extending a nonconforming use or structure
beyond the confines of the lot or parcel of land upon which it was located on
the date the use or structure became nonconforming.
      3.   Continuation Of Use: A nonconforming use may be continued by
successive owners or tenants where the use continues unabandoned (see
subsection I of this section).
      4.   Normal Upkeep, Repairs And Maintenance: Normal upkeep, repairs,
maintenance, strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any
nonconforming building or structure or part thereof shall be permitted subject
to the provisions of this section.
      5.   Compliance With Development Regulations: Any additions or expansions
of nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures shall comply with the
development standards in this chapter for the zone classification in which the
nonconformity is located; provided, that portions of nonconformities that
legally existed prior to adoption of this section shall not be subject to this
provision.
      6.   Nonconforming Use Within Structure: A nonconforming use, within an
existing structure, which is nonconforming by reason of zone classification may
be extended throughout such structure.
      7.   Structures And Uses Accessory To Residential: Structures and uses
accessory to an existing nonconforming residential use shall be allowed as
provided in chapter 3 of this title.
   C.   Expansion Standards For Nonconforming Uses: Expansion of nonconforming
uses or replacement of structures occupied by nonconforming uses shall be
subject to the following provisions, provided the basic standards of this
section are satisfied:
      1.   Where a nonconforming use of a structure exists, that structure can
be replaced, provided the original footprint is not relocated or altered,
except as provided in the expansion standards below.
      2.   An expansion of existing nonconforming uses shall be allowed under
one of the following provisions:
         a.   The proposed expansion of the nonconforming use or the
nonconforming use of a structure does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the floor
area of the total existing use or structures, nor create more than ten percent
(10%) additional pad sites for manufactured home parks and RV parks; or
         b.   The proposed expansion of the nonconforming use or the
nonconforming use of a structure does not create impervious cover exceeding
twenty five percent (25%) of the existing impervious area of the lot or parcel,
nor exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the developed area for manufactured
home parks and RV parks. Expansion of impervious cover shall meet the
stormwater mitigation requirements of Title 9 Chapter 5 of this code. Expansion
of impervious cover beyond the limits allowed in this paragraph may be allowed
provided that such impervious cover meets the criteria for on-site stormwater
management LID BMPs or infiltration facilities so that the effective impervious
area expansion does not exceed the limits allowed in this paragraph.
   D.   Change Of Use Standards: A nonconforming use may change outright to a
conforming use allowed within the zone classification in which the use is
located. A nonconforming use may change to another use within another
nonconforming use only after review and approval using the criteria in section
13-6-6 of this title; or
   E.   Nonconforming Structure Standards: A nonconforming structure may be
enlarged, altered or replaced, provided the basic standards of this section are
satisfied, and provided:
      1.   When a nonconforming structure is occupied by a nonconforming use it
shall comply with the expansion standards of this section;
      2.   A structure which is nonconforming due to height or yard
requirements may be structurally altered, enlarged or replaced, provided the
degree of nonconformity is not extended or increased; and
      3.   The nonconforming portion of the structure shall not be expanded or
the footprint of that portion altered, except as specifically authorized
through a variance (see section
13-6-3 of this title).
   F.   Nonconforming Lot Standards: Any permitted uses or structures,
including any accessory uses or structures permitted in conjunction with a
principal use, shall be allowed to be built or expanded on a nonconforming lot.
Applicable development standards in this chapter shall be complied with.
   G.   Nonconforming Development Standards: Existing uses or structures may be
expanded or new uses and structures added, provided the nonconforming
development is brought into conformance with the development standards of this
chapter for the lot or parcel on which it is located.
   H.   Restoration Standards For Damaged Or Destroyed Nonconforming Structures
And Uses: Any nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion,
wind, flood, earthquake or other calamity may be completely restored or
reconstructed. Damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures must be restored
under the following provisions:
      1.   Restoration or reconstruction shall not serve to extend or increase
the nonconformance of the original structure or use, except as provided by
nonconforming structures standards.
      2.   To the extent reasonably possible, restoration should retain the
same general architectural style as the destroyed structure.
      3.   Permits shall be applied for within one year of damage. Restoration
or reconstruction must be substantially completed within eighteen (18) months
of permit issuance. When deemed reasonable and necessary, the city may grant a
time extension.
   I.   Discontinuance Standards: Should a nonconforming use of a property or
structure be discontinued for more than one year, the use of the property and
structure shall be deemed abandoned and shall conform to a use permitted in the
zone classification in which it is located. If the intended discontinued use of
a property or structure is temporary in nature as opposed to abandonment, then
the applicant may apply for a nonconforming use permit to reestablish the
nonconforming use.
   J.   Cargo Containers; Loss Of Nonconforming Status: Cargo containers that
have been legally located on property in any zone of the city prior to the
adoption of subsection
13-4-2D of this title shall be a legal nonconforming use of the property.
Notwithstanding any provision of subsections A through I of this section to the
contrary, cargo containers shall lose legal nonconforming status under the
circumstances set forth as follows:
      1.   If the legal nonconforming cargo container is moved to a different
location on the property.
      2.   If a legal nonconforming cargo container is removed from a property,
any subsequent cargo containers placed on the property shall comply with the
requirements of subsection
13-4-2D of this title.
      3.   If a legal nonconforming cargo container is moved off of a
residential zoned property, no new cargo container may be moved onto the
property.
      4.   All nonconforming cargo containers shall be made to conform to the
requirements of subsection
13-4-2D of this title or removed from the property by ninety (90) days after
approval of this section.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 873, 2-25-2009; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
13-6-1: General
13-6-2: Conditional Use Permit
13-6-3: Variances
13-6-4: Planned Unit Developments
13-6-5: Cottage Developments
13-6-6: Nonconforming Use Permit
13-6-1: GENERAL:
All special use permits shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of
title 15, "Development Code Administration", of this code. (Ord. 792, 7-29-
2004)
13-6-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   The purpose of this section is to establish decision criteria and
procedures for special uses, called conditional uses, which possess unique
characteristics. Conditional uses are deemed unique due to factors such as
size, technological processes, equipment, or location with respect to
surroundings, streets, existing improvements, or demands upon public
facilities. These uses require a special degree of control to assure
compatibility with the comprehensive plan, adjacent uses, and the character of
the vicinity.
      2.   Conditional uses will be subject to review by the city and the
issuance of a conditional use permit. This process allows the city to:
         a.   Determine that the location of these uses will not be
incompatible with uses permitted in the surrounding areas; and
         b.   Make further stipulations and conditions that may reasonably
assure that the basic intent of this title will be served.
   B.   Decision Criteria: The city shall review conditional use permits in
accordance with the provisions of this section and may approve, approve with
conditions, modify, modify with conditions, or deny the conditional use permit.
The city may modify bulk requirements, off street parking requirements, and use
design standards to lessen impacts, as a condition of the granting of the
conditional use permit.
      1.   Required Findings: The city may use design standards and other
elements in this title to modify the proposal. A conditional use permit may be
approved only if all of the following findings can be made regarding the
proposal and are supported by the record:
         a.   The granting of the proposed conditional use permit will not:
            (1)   Be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general
welfare;
            (2)   Adversely affect the established character of the surrounding
vicinity; nor
            (3)   Be injurious to the uses, property, or improvements adjacent
to, and in the vicinity of, the site upon which the proposed use is to be
located.
         b.   The granting of the proposed conditional use permit is consistent
and compatible with the intent of the goals, objectives and policies of the
comprehensive plan and any implementing regulation.
         c.   All conditions necessary to lessen any impacts of the proposed
use are conditions that can be monitored and enforced.
         d.   The proposed use will not introduce hazardous conditions at the
site that cannot be mitigated to protect adjacent properties, the vicinity, and
the public health, safety and welfare of the community from such hazard.
         e.   The conditional use will be supported by, and not adversely
affect, adequate public facilities and services; or that conditions can be
imposed to lessen any adverse impacts on such facilities and services.
         f.   The level of service standards for public facilities and services
are met in accordance with the concurrency management requirements. See title
15, chapter 8 of this code.
         g.   Will not preclude the use of LID BMPs if LID BMPs are feasible
for existing site conditions or existing site characteristics.
      2.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant has the burden of proving that the
proposed conditional use meets all of the criteria in subsection B1 of this
section.
   C.   Application: Submittal of an application for a conditional use permit
shall include:
      1.   A completed application form.
      2.   A base map showing property boundary lines, existing lots, tracts,
utility or access easements and streets, topography, existing development
features, water bodies, wetlands and buffers, and flood prone areas.
      3.   A legal description and vicinity map of the property.
      4.   A site plan showing the location and ground elevation of any
proposed structures, parking areas, common use areas, landscaping, utilities,
grading and drainage, mitigation for critical area impacts, fences and other
proposed features. (If easements or covenants are proposed, their location and
design must be shown.)
      5.   Mailing labels of all property owners as provided in title 15,
chapter 7 of this code.
      6.   A written statement addressing the decision criteria (see subsection
B of this section) and any other information required by the city at the
preapplication meeting.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
13-6-3: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a means of altering
the requirements of this title in specific instances where the strict
application of those requirements would deprive a property of privileges
enjoyed by other properties within the identical regulatory zone because of
special features or constraints unique to the property involved.
   B.   Granting Of Variances: The city shall have the authority to grant a
variance from the provisions of this title, when, in the judgment of the
hearing examiner, the conditions as set forth in subsection C of this section
have been found to exist. In such cases a variance may be granted which is in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title so that the spirit of
this title shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
   C.   Decision Criteria: Before any variance may be granted, it shall be
shown:
      1.   That there are special circumstances applicable to the subject
property or to the intended use such as shape, topography, location, or
surroundings that do not apply generally to the other property or class of use
in the same vicinity and zone;
      2.   That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right or use possessed by other property in the same
vicinity and zone but which because of special circumstances is denied to the
property in question;
      3.   That the granting of such variance will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvement
in such vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located;
      4.   That the granting of such variance will not adversely affect the
comprehensive plan.
      5.   That the granting of such variance will not preclude the use of LID
BMPs if LID BMPs are feasible for existing site conditions or existing site
characteristics.
   D.   Conditions On Variances: When granting a variance, the hearing examiner
shall determine that the circumstances do exist as required by subsection C of
this section, and attach specific conditions to the variance which will serve
to accomplish the standards, criteria, and policies established by this title.
   E.   Application: Submittal of an application for a variance shall include:
      1.   A completed application form.
      2.   A site plan showing all information relevant to the request
including, but not limited to: location of existing and proposed structures,
roads, property lines, parking areas, landscaping and buffers.
      3.   Mailing labels of all property owners as provided in title 15,
chapter 7 of this code.
      4.   A written statement addressing the decision criteria (see subsection
C of this section) and any other information required by the city at the
preapplication meeting.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
13-6-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: A PUD is a flexible zoning concept that results in as good or
better use of land than that produced through the standards of the regular zone
classifications. The uses within the PUD depend on the uses in the underlying
zone. The residential densities and bulk and scale of the development within
the PUD may vary to provide more flexibility and creativity in addressing the
site and project aesthetics, natural areas, and open space planning. An
approved PUD is an overlay zone, enacted as part of the final approval action
which may also include subdivision, binding site plan, or master plan approval.
   B.   Classifications Of Planned Unit Development Districts: Planned
developments may be either residential or nonresidential in character. A
"residential PUD" means that the principal purpose of the PUD is to provide one
or more types of housing at densities of dwellings the same as densities
permitted by the underlying zone and where all other uses shall be considered
accessory, supportive, or adjunct to housing. A "nonresidential PUD" means a
development where the majority of uses are intended for purposes other than
housing such as: retail, service, industrial and manufacturing, and where
residential uses as are allowed by the underlying zone secondary in purpose to
intended use of the project.
   C.   Minimum Area Required:
      1.   Residential PUD: One acre.
      2.   Nonresidential PUD: None.
   D.   Staging: The applicant may elect, or the city may require that the
development of a PUD be accomplished or constructed in stages; provided, that
when a residential PUD is developed in stages, the cumulative density of all
phases shall not exceed the approved overall density of the entire PUD.
   E.   Redevelopment; Street Vacations: When the city determines that the
location, configuration and/or condition of existing structures on site may
threaten the public health, safety or welfare, it may require the removal of
all or portions of existing structures. It is the further purpose of this
section to encourage development of a PUD upon contiguous land and property.
When deemed appropriate and necessary, the city may require the vacation of all
or portions of existing streets within the PUD project area. The city may, as
an alternative to vacation of streets, permit the inclusion of existing rights
of way within a PUD, when it can be shown that the existing rights of way serve
a functional purpose for the PUD and do not act to separate or divide a PUD
into noncontiguous units. Rights of way within the context of this section
shall not include freeways, limited access highways or major arterials.
   F.   Uses Permitted In PUD:
      1.   Residential: Housing concepts of all types limited only by the
density commensurate with the underlying zone upon land either subdivided into
two (2) or more ownerships or held in common, unified, or single ownership.
Examples include the following:
         a.   Condominiums, apartments and townhouses.
         b.   Customary accessory uses and structures common to individual or
group dwellings.
         c.   Group residence.
         d.   Manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
         e.   Nonresidential uses such as schools, churches, libraries or other
conditional uses allowed in residential zones.
      2.   Nonresidential: Uses permitted by the underlying zone.
      3.   Unclassified And Conditional Uses: Unclassified uses and conditional
uses, if permitted in the underlying zone and as specifically authorized by the
final development plan.
   G.   Procedure For Approval: The approval of a PUD shall be considered an
amendment to the official maps and, except as provided in this section, shall
be processed as is any other amendment with respect to notice, hearings, and
appeals pursuant to this title. A two (2) step procedure shall be followed in
the approval of a PUD as follows:
      1.   The approval of a preliminary development plan after public notice
and hearing.
      2.   The final PUD approval shall not become final and effective until
the date the final development plan is approved and overlay zone is adopted.
The final development plan may be approved and adopted by stages. The final
development plan shall be approved when the City determines that the
development conforms with the approved conditions established in the
preliminary development approval.
   H.   Decision Criteria: The action by the City to approve a preliminary
development plan for a proposed PUD with or without modifications shall be in
writing based upon the following findings:
      1.   The proposed development is in substantial conformance with the
comprehensive plan, the intent of the underlying zoning, and applicable City
design standards.
      2.   Exceptions from the standards of the underlying district are
warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the development plan and
program.
      3.   The proposal does not adversely impact the surrounding area or its
potential future use.
      4.   The system of ownership and means of developing, preserving, and
maintaining common open space is consistent with the size, design and scale of
the project.
      5.   The approval will result in a beneficial effect upon the area which
could not be achieved under other zoning districts.
      6.   The proposed development or units thereof will be pursued and
completed in a conscientious and diligent manner.
      7.   The proposed development will not preclude the use of LID BMPs if
LID BMPs are feasible for existing site conditions or existing site
characteristics.
   I.   Project Limitation: The City, in order to protect the public health,
safety, welfare, and general interest may limit or restrict development in a
PUD or any portion thereof in relationship to the size of the area being
developed or redeveloped with the nature of uses intended, lot coverage,
parking and loading requirements, provisions for open space, adequacy of roads
and utility systems to accommodate the use as well as to minimize the impact
the development will have on the existing or intended development of adjacent
lands and the general neighborhood.
   J.   Permissive Variation From Standard Requirements: In considering a
proposed development plan, the approval may involve modifications in the
regulations, requirements, and standards of the underlying zone in which the
project is located so as to appropriately accomplish the purpose of this
section. In making such modifications as are deemed appropriate, the following
guidelines shall apply:
      1.   Off Street Parking And Loading: The total required off street
parking facilities should not be less than the sum of the required parking
facilities for the various uses computed separately.
      2.   Common Walls: In projects receiving final approval where units
intended for individual ownership will have common walls, the City may issue
building permits for construction of those units prior to approval of a final
PUD, although occupancy of said units will not be allowed until the final
approval.
      3.   Height Of Buildings: The height of buildings and structures within a
PUD should be limited to the height permitted by the underlying zone, or as
required as a special limitation. The height of buildings and structures may be
increased in relationship to provisions for greater open space and separation
between buildings on the same or adjoining property and when adequate provision
is made for light, air, and safety.
      4.   Lot Area Coverage: The maximum lot coverage within a PUD or any
portion thereof shall be determined at the time of consideration of a
preliminary development plan.
      5.   Yards: The requirement for yards in a PUD should be same as required
by the underlying zone for those yards abutting the exterior boundary of the
PUD. Yard requirements for any yard not abutting or adjoining the exterior
boundary of the PUD shall be as authorized in the preliminary development plan.
   K.   Subdivisions: When it is the intention of an applicant to subdivide or
resubdivide all or portions of property within a proposed PUD, a preliminary
subdivision approval shall be considered concurrently with an application for
approval of a preliminary development plan. The minimum lot provisions
specified in the underlying zone district may be qualified if the design of the
subdivision is in accordance with the intent and purpose of this section and
the resulting overall density of the project is consistent with the underlying
zoning.
   L.   Final Development Plan; Time Limitation: A final development plan
meeting all requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the City for
approval within seven (7) years of the date of preliminary plat approval if the
date of preliminary plat approval is on or before December 31, 2014, and within
five (5) years of the date of preliminary plat approval if the date of
preliminary plat approval is on or after January 1, 2015. A final development
plan meeting all requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the City
for approval within ten (10) years of the date of preliminary plat approval if
the project is not subject to requirements adopted under chapter 90.58 Revised
Code of Washington and the date of preliminary plat approval is on or before
December 31, 2007. Nothing contained in this section shall act to prevent the
City from adopting by ordinance procedures which would allow extensions of time
that may or may not contain additional or altered conditions and requirements.
When deemed reasonable and appropriate, the Administrator may grant an
extension of one year for such submittal. If at the date of expiration of the
time period provided herein, a final development plan has not been filed for
approval, the preliminary PUD approval shall expire and the applicant shall be
required to resubmit an application for preliminary approval to reinstate the
project. In instances when a planned unit development is requested concurrent
with an application for subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan,
the final plat, final short plat, or final binding site plan shall satisfy the
final development plan required by this chapter.
   M.   Application: Submittal of an application for preliminary PUD approval
shall include:
      1.   A completed application form;
      2.   A preliminary PUD development plan including:
         a.   Topographical and other site data depicting:
            (1)   Boundary lines including bearing and distance;
            (2)   Easements, including location, width and purpose;
            (3)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract, including name, right-
of-way width, location, and type, width, and elevation of surfacing, walks,
curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.;
            (4)   Number of residential lots and typical lot size;
            (5)   Lot layout with lot line dimensions, the area in square feet
contained in each lot and minimum building setback lines;
            (6)   The location and use of all existing buildings within the
proposed project indicating which buildings are to remain and which are to be
removed;
            (7)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on a datum plane
approved by the City Engineer;
            (8)   Other conditions on adjacent land, including:
               (A)   Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope,
including any embankments or retaining walls;
               (B)   Character and location of buildings, railroads, power
lines, towers, and other nonresidential land uses or platted lands within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property (subdivision plats should be
referred to by name, recording date, volume and page number, with lot size and
dwelling units shown);
         b.   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract, including:
            (1)   Location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm and
combined sewers;
            (2)   Location and size of water mains;
            (3)   Location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone
poles, and streetlights;
            (4)   If water mains and sewers are not adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to, and size of, the nearest ones, showing
invert elevation of sewers;
         c.   Proposed sanitary, stormwater and water systems plan with points
of connection, grades and sizes indicated;
         d.   Proposed public improvements, including highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract;
         e.   Typical cross sections of proposed grading, roadways and
sidewalks within the proposal;
         f.   Profiles of all proposed streets within the proposal showing the
grade to which the streets will be built and the existing ground line of the
proposed streets including probable future extensions of any stub (dead end)
streets for a maximum distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond the
boundaries of the project (or, as an alternative, the site plan may show
topography, certified by a registered engineer or surveyor, in 2 foot contours
within 50 feet of each side of the centerline of all probable extensions of any
stub [dead end] streets for a distance of 150 feet beyond the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision);
         g.   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, or other common or public uses;
         h.   Site plans for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings;
         i.   Zoning district designations, on and adjacent to the tract;
         j.   Other conditions on the tract including:
            (1)   Rock outcroppings;
            (2)   Location and disposition of any wells, creeks, drainage
courses, drainageways, 100-year floodplain boundary and easement in or within
two hundred feet (200') of the proposal;
            (3)   The location of all trees more than six inches (6") in
diameter at a height of four feet (4') above grade within the proposal, and for
one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond the terminus of all dead end streets
allowing that:
               (A)   Individual trees in a stand of five (5) trees or more need
not be shown, but the area covered by the stand (the drip line) shall be shown;
               (B)   For trees outside of the subdivision boundaries, the
location of said trees may be based on aerial photographs or other methods
acceptable to the City Administrator;
            (4)   The location of identified hazards or development limitation
areas identified by the city of Orting sensitive area map;
            (5)   The location of any state shorelines and associated wetlands
as defined by state law and the city of Orting shoreline master program;
      3.   A vicinity map extending at least eight hundred feet (800') in each
direction from the proposed project, or further if necessary to assist in
locating the site. The vicinity map shall be drawn to scale of one inch equals
eight hundred feet (1" = 800'). The vicinity map shall show the following:
         a.   Street layout;
         b.   Existing and tentatively approved street layout within eight
hundred feet (800');
         c.   Zoning designations within and adjacent to the site;
         d.   All property lines within eight hundred feet (800') of the site;
         e.   Streams or watercourses and public facilities, such as schools
and parks;
         f.   All 100-year floodplain and designated shoreline boundaries in
and within eight hundred feet (800') of the proposed subdivision;
         g.   Any other pertinent information that will assist in locating the
proposed project;
      4.   Drawings and text illustrating and describing the scale, bulk and
architectural character of proposed structures;
      5.   A written statement addressing the decision criteria (subsection H
of this section) and any other information required by the city at the
preapplication meeting;
      6.   Draft conditions, covenants, and restrictions pertaining to the
operation and maintenance of the development, including all common areas,
private streets (if any) and recreational facilities; and
      7.   Mailing labels of all property owners as provided in title 15,
chapter 7 of this code.
   N.   Manufactured Home Parks: Manufactured home parks operated as commercial
enterprises leasing sites and/or homes without platting shall be subject to the
following:
      1.   Density shall not exceed the densities established in section
13-5-1 of this title.
      2.   Only one manufactured home or recreational vehicle shall occupy any
space in the park, subject to the following.
         a.   A recreational vehicle may stand or be parked for an indefinite
period in a manufactured home park, provided the recreational vehicle is
connected to sewer or a Tacoma-Pierce County health department approved septic
system, water, and electricity, and the recreational vehicle contains at least
one internal toilet and at least one internal shower; provided, that if this
requirement is not met, a manufactured home park must provide toilets and
showers in lieu of having the facilities within the recreational vehicle.
      3.   Setbacks shall conform to the underlying zoning and building code.
      4.   Storage areas comprising not more than ten percent (10%) of the
total manufactured home park site for recreational vehicles, boats, and
trailers shall be provided. Such areas shall be paved or surfaced with crushed
rock and enclosed by a sight obscuring fence, wall or landscape visual buffer.
(Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 889, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2018-1028, 4-25-2018; Ord.
2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-6-5: COTTAGE DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   The purpose of this section is to establish decision criteria and
procedures for cottage developments which possess unique characteristics due to
factors such as size, residential density, ownership, and location with respect
to their surroundings. These uses require a special degree of control to assure
compatibility with the comprehensive plan, adjacent uses, and the character of
the vicinity.
      2.   Cottage developments are subject to review by the city and the
issuance of a binding site plan (or approval of a unit lot subdivision) and
architectural design review approval. This process allows the city to:
         a.   Determine that the location of these uses will not be
incompatible with uses permitted in the surrounding areas; and
         b.   Make further stipulations and conditions that may reasonably
assure that the basic intent of this title will be served.
   B.   Decision Criteria: The city shall review cottage development permit
applications in accordance with the provisions of this section and may approve,
approve with conditions, modify, modify with conditions, or deny the binding
site plan approval. The city may modify bulk requirements, off street parking
requirements, and use design standards to lessen impacts, as a condition of the
granting of the binding site plan approval.
      1.   Required Findings: The city shall use design standards and other
elements in this title to modify the proposal. A cottage development binding
site plan shall be approved only if all of the following findings regarding the
proposal can be made and are supported by the record:
         a.   The granting of the proposed binding site plan will not:
            (1)   Be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general
welfare;
            (2)   Adversely affect the established character of the surrounding
vicinity; nor
            (3)   Be injurious to the uses, property, or improvements adjacent
to, and in the vicinity of, the site upon which the proposed use is to be
located.
         b.   The granting of the proposal is consistent and compatible with
the intent of the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and
any implementing regulation.
         c.   All conditions necessary to lessen any impacts of the proposal
are conditions that can be monitored and enforced.
         d.   The proposal will not introduce hazardous conditions at the site
that cannot be mitigated to protect adjacent properties, the vicinity, and the
public health, safety and welfare of the community from such hazard.
         e.   The cottage development will be supported by, and not adversely
affect, adequate public facilities and services; or that conditions can be
imposed to lessen any adverse impacts on such facilities and services.
         f.   The level of service standards for public facilities and services
are met in accordance with the concurrency management requirements (see title
15, chapter 8 of this code).
      2.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant has the burden of proving that the
proposed cottage development meets all of the criteria in subsection B1 of this
section.
   C.   Application: Cottage development proposals shall be subjected to a two
(2) step process. No more than two (2) cottage developments shall be approved
in a calendar year. Preliminary applications shall be accepted at any time, but
the first two (2) submitted after January 1 shall be allowed to proceed through
the full application review and approval process if they meet the criteria
stated in subsection C1 of this section. If one or both of the first two (2)
applications in any year drop out, the next in line will be notified that the
city will accept a full application for review.
      1.   Step one preliminary application:
         a.   Each applicant should schedule a meeting with the city
administrator to discuss the location, size, and features of the proposal. No
written application is required at this point. The administrator will advise
the applicant of any known issues with respect to the location, parcel(s) to be
developed, or city facilities necessary to serve a cottage development.
         b.   The administrator will schedule a briefing for the planning
commission. The administrator will introduce the applicant and summarize the
discussion at the initial meeting. The applicant shall have the opportunity to
describe the proposal, using conceptual plans or drawings. The planning
commission may offer informal comments.
         c.   The applicant will schedule a community meeting and notify all
residents and property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the site by
mail. The applicant shall provide the mailing address list and proof of the
mailing to the city. The meeting shall be held in Orting on a weeknight. The
applicant shall be responsible for conducting the meeting and providing an
attendance list and printed transcript, and copy of a tape recording of the
meeting to the city administrator.
         d.   Upon receipt of the community meeting tape and transcript, the
administrator shall advise the applicant of any additional application
requirements beyond those specified below.
      2.   Step two full application: Submittal of an application for a cottage
development binding site plan and ADR approval shall be in accordance with
section
12-10-3 of this code and subsection
13-6-7E of this chapter. Review of the application shall be conducted as a type
4 permit as described in section
15-4-1 of this code. The community meeting transcript shall become part of the
application record for use by the city in reviewing the application. (Ord. 830,
6-28-2006; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
13-6-6: NONCONFORMING USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish decision criteria
and procedures to allow reasonable limited expansion and continuance of
"nonconformities" as defined in section
13-5-9 of this title. Nonconformities require a special degree of control to
ensure compliance with applicable regulations and compatibility with the
comprehensive plan, adjacent uses and the character of the surrounding areas.
Limited exceptions, expansions or changes of use are allowed after approval of
a nonconforming use permit by the city or after approval of an administrative
nonconforming use permit. (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 830, 6-28-2006)
   B.   Nonconforming Use Permit: Exceptions to the nonconforming standards,
section
13-5-9 of this title, are allowed after city approval of a nonconforming use
permit. Any application for a building permit or land use permit affecting an
existing nonconformity shall require a nonconforming use permit. The city may
impose such conditions as deemed necessary to ensure proposals conform to the
intent of the comprehensive plan and this title.
      1.   Required Findings For Nonconforming Use Permit: The city shall grant
a nonconforming use permit if documentary evidence is provided by the applicant
to support the administrator's findings that:
         a.   Granting a nonconforming use permit is necessary to adapt the
nonconforming use and associated structures to changes in technology,
merchandising, or other generally recognized trends which affect the utility of
structures or the applicant's ability to compete;
         b.   Granting a nonconforming use permit will not introduce any
(additional) hazards or interfere with the potential development of nearby
properties in accordance with present zoning regulations;
         c.   The nonconforming use and associated structures will comply with
the requirements of subsection
13-5-9B5 of this title;
         d.   The applicant's proposal will result in improvements in
functionality or safety, or in exterior appearance, screening, access and other
features which will make the use or structure more compatible with allowed
uses; and
         e.   Granting a nonconforming use permit will not detract from the
intent of the comprehensive plan and any implementing regulation.
      2.   Abandonment: An exception to the discontinuance standards in
subsection
13-5-9I of this title may be granted by the city. Documentary evidence shall be
provided by the applicant to show that the discontinuance was beyond the
control of the applicant. If the city is satisfied by evidence that the
discontinuance was beyond the control of the applicant, nonconforming rights
shall be continued for the property or structure. The city may consider
circumstances such as, but not limited to, the following:
         a.   The property or structure has been involved in litigation.
         b.   Attempt to lease the site is ongoing due to:
            (1)   Length of time involved for marketing of premises;
            (2)   The structure is a specialized type of building requiring a
specialized type of use due to equipment, processes or configuration; or
            (3)   There is a uniqueness to the property giving the use special
operating characteristics such as its location in relationship to
transportation facilities, open spaces needed for operations or its proximity
to other critical activities such as mineral extraction. (Ord. 889, 9-8-2010)
   C.   Approval: A nonconforming use permit may be approved, approved with
additional requirements above those specified in this title, or approved with
modification of the proposal to ensure that surrounding land uses or the
character of the area are not adversely impacted.
   D.   Denial: A nonconforming use permit may be denied if the use is
incapable of complying with specific standards set forth in this title and if
any of the above required findings are not supported by evidence in record.
   E.   Application: Submittal requirements for a nonconforming use permit
shall be the same as those for a variance. (See section
13-6-3 of this chapter.) (Ord. 792, 7-29-2004; amd. Ord. 830, 6-28-2006)
CHAPTER 7
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13-7-1: Findings And Purpose
13-7-2: Definitions
13-7-3: Exemptions
13-7-4: General Regulations
13-7-5: Permit Required; Administration
13-7-6: Prohibited Signs; All Zones
13-7-7: Sandwich Board Signs
13-7-8: Temporary Signs
13-7-9: Limitations On Permanent Signs
13-7-10: Sign Variances
13-7-11: Nonconforming Signs
13-7-12: Abatement Of Illegal Signs
13-7-13: Liability Of City
13-7-14: Severability
13-7-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE: 
   A.   Findings. The City Council finds as follows:
      1.   Signs are a means of personal free expression;
      2.   The use and display of signs is a legitimate use of public and
private property, and is an integral part of the business and marketing
functions of the local economy and serves to promote and protect private
investments in commerce and industry, and is a necessary component of a
commercial environment;
      3.   Signs can promote the efficient transfer of information by providing
messages and information needed and sought by the public, allowing businesses
and services to identify themselves; and, ensuring that customers and other
persons may locate a business or service;
      4.   Easily read and properly designed and placed signage can be valuable
to the public by assisting with way-finding, orientation, and decision making
and therefore contribute in a positive way to the health, safety, and welfare
of the public;
      5.   In the absence of regulation, the number of signs tends to
proliferate, with property owners' desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes
of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted property and
thoroughfares, and escalation in the size of signs erected by competing
businesses;
      6.   The competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their
signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians, and
undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of
its idea or identification of its premises;
      7.   Persons exposed to signs can be overwhelmed by the number of
messages presented, and may not be able to exercise freedom of choice to
observe or ignore said messages, according to the observer's purpose;
      8.   Regulations restricting the size, material, construction, location
and number of signs can create a pleasing environment for the entire community
and enhance public safety;
      9.   Signs erected by the City are, in part, erected for the purpose of
maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or
through provision of such type of signage as street signs which enable the
traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are
going. With the exception of signs identifying government buildings and signs
providing information on government-sponsored community events, virtually all
government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their
use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the
motoring public;
      10.   Public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those
signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary
information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street
excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying
markings on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of
benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there
may be temporary losses of power and identifying potential hazards;
      11.   Some signage has a single targeted function and identification of
such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function.
For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating
addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is
essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Subdivision
signs at the entrances to subdivisions favor a similar purpose in enabling both
the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate subdivision
entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency
calls. While such signage is often referenced based upon the function it serves
within the context of this ordinance, whenever possible, it is the intent of
this ordinance to refer to signs unrelated to the content of the message
provided;
      12.   Driver distraction is a significant cause of motor vehicle
accidents leading to property damage and personal injury;
      13.   Signs visible from motor vehicles being driven upon streets in the
City have a visual impact upon the drivers of those vehicles;
      14.   Signs can overwhelm the public, unduly distract and confuse
motorists by diverting attention away from the roadway, and result in safety
threats to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      15.   Signs can create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting
motorists and pedestrians, or by impairing the driver's ability to see
pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read traffic signs;
      16.   Brightly lit signs, flashing electronic signs, and overly animated
signs waste valuable energy, contribute to light pollution, produce hazardous
glare, and create the potential for distracting or confusing motorists, thereby
negatively impacting the health, safety, and welfare of the public;
      17.   Signs which are unregulated as to size, location and appearance can
increase the level of distraction of motorists, interfere with early
identification of traffic control devices, and hinder the smooth and safe
movement of traffic;
      18.   Portable signs contribute to visual clutter and present
distractions to drivers and pedestrian users of the public sidewalks,
crosswalks and other pedestrian pathways;
      19.   Lightweight design and easy mobility of portable signs create a
potential for extraordinary safety hazards. Portable signs are often placed in
close proximity to public rights-of-way in order to optimally attract the
attention of motorists. Such placement creates visual obstruction of oncoming
pedestrian and vehicular traffic for motorist's ingressing or egressing from a
place of business;
      20.   Portable signs also have a tendency to be blown about in strong
winds causing and creating visual clutter, obstruction of pedestrian and
vehicular passage, safety hazards, and damage to landscaping;
      21.   Portable signs with electrical connections and components, if
improperly maintained, pose a serious public safety hazard;
      22.   Improperly constructed and poorly maintained signs may be safety
hazards that constitute a public health risk;
      23.   Moving signs are intended to distract the attention of drivers and
pedestrians to call attend to the message on the sign and create a greater
distraction to drivers and pedestrians than stationary signs of similar size
and appearance;
      24.   Signs can constitute aesthetic harm by cluttering the rural
landscape and highway corridors and adversely affecting the naturally scenic
views and native environment;
      25.   Signs may conceal or obstruct windows, doors, or significant
architectural features or details of buildings;
      26.   Signs can create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay
or abandonment;
      27.   Signs can obstruct firefighting or police surveillance;
      28.   Signs can arbitrarily deny the use of the lines of vision from the
public right-of way;
      29.   Regulation of signs can protect the public welfare and enhance the
appearance and economic value of the City and protect or increase property
values;
      30.   The regulatory standards set forth in this Code are consistent with
customary use in this City and will properly carry out the purposes of this
Code.
   B.   Purpose: This Chapter establishes regulations governing the
installation, alteration, relocation, maintenance, use, and removal of signs in
the City in a manner that recognizes the importance of signage for the economic
well-being of businesses within the City while promoting a quality visual
environment and protecting our views and vistas. These regulations are further
intended to balance the need to protect the public safety and welfare, the need
for a well-maintained and attractive community, the need for adequate
identification, communication and advertising; and, to protect free expression.
      Specifically, this Chapter seeks to accomplish the following:
      1.    Encourage commercial communication which is responsive to the needs
of the public in locating a business establishment by identification address,
product, and/or service information; and
      2.   Promote the enhancement of business and residential properties and
neighborhoods by fostering the erection of signs complementary to the buildings
and uses to which they relate and which are harmonious with their surroundings;
and
      3.    To protect and enhance the visual character and identity of the
community by the thoughtful placement and design of signs; and
      4.   To reflect and support the desired character and development
patterns of the various zones of the City by requiring that signs, adhere to
section
13-6-7 of this title pertaining to the architectural design style for the City.
Section
13-6-7 of this title states that these regulations are intended to implement
and further the comprehensive plan of the City by ensuring that all development
in the mixed use-town center and mixed use-town center north, and all
commercial and public development within the City limits, is designed to be
consistent with the adopted architectural theme of "turn of the century:
western or Victorian"; and
      5.    Ensure that signs, including indoor signs visible from streets or
ways open to the public, do not create obstructions to motorists by interfering
with sight lines or directional traffic signs or in any other way endanger the
safety, health, or welfare of citizens and visitors to the City; and
      6.    To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and
maintained according to minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property
and public welfare; and
      7.   To ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech
is protected by regulating signs in a content-neutral manner; and
      8.    To improve pedestrian and traffic safety; and
      9.   Eliminate clutter and visual distraction by ensuring signs are
appropriate in size and relationship to the subject property, street frontage
and building size; and
      10.   Allow sufficient flexibility and incentive for creative and
innovative sign designs; and
      11.   Safeguard and enhance property values, attract new residents, and
encourage orderly City development; and
      12.   Allow for limited temporary commercial signage in the public right
of way, to provide a flow of truthful and legitimate commercial information to
consumers to enable them to make vital decisions, particularly as it relates to
the purchase of a home, and to further the critical public goal of providing
for equal access to housing; and
      13.    Ensure consistency with the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-1081, 9-8-2021)
13-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign that no longer correctly identifies, exhorts, or
advertises any person, business, lessor, owner, product, or activity conducted
or available on the premises where such sign is located and which has not been
changed or removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of a tenancy change; or
an on-premises sign which is damaged, in disrepair, or vandalized and not
repaired within sixty (60) days of the damaging event.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any permanent sign that flashes or simulates motion with an
electronic or manufactured source of supply or contains wind actuated motion
(excluding flags or banners). Animated signs may include a sign that meets the
definition for revolving signs, or changing message centers.
BANNER SIGN: A temporary sign constructed of fabric or other suitable material
which is attached or suspended at two (2) ends or continuously across the long
side. Attachment or suspension may be from buildings and/or poles. Flags,
insignias, canopy signs, and posters are not considered "banner signs".
BILLBOARD SIGN: A large permanent sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, product, activity, or service which is not conducted, sold, or
offered on the premises where the sign is located. The approximate size of the
billboard faces ranges from twelve to fourteen feet (12' to 14') in height and
twenty four to forty eight feet (24' to 48') in width.
CANOPY SIGN: Any permanent sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, or a
non-rigid, retractable or non-retractable, protective
covering located at the entrance to a structure. Canopy, under canopy,
projected, and wall signs are considered wall signs for the purpose of
determining sign area. Canopy signs must comply with the architectural design
review process stated in
13-6-7 of this code.
CHANGING MESSAGE SIGN: An exterior, electrically controlled permanent sign that
displays different copy changes on the same lamp bank which change at intervals
of thirty (30) seconds or greater. This includes electronic reader boards.
COPY: The linguistic or graphic content of a sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A permanent non-commercial sign used to direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic to a facility, service, or business.
DISPLAY CASE: A permanent, freestanding sign with changeable copy.
ELECTRICAL SIGN: A permanent sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring,
connections, and/or fixtures are used as part of the sign proper.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATED SIGN: A permanent sign illuminated by an external light
source.
FAÇADE: The entire building front, or street wall face, including grade to the
top of the parapet or eaves, and the entire width of the building elevation.
Façade is calculated by multiplying the width of the building front by the
height of the building façade.
FESTOON (GARLAND): A temporary strip or string of lights or other decorations.
FLAG. A temporary sign composed of a fabric sheet of square, rectangular or
triangular shape which is mounted on a pole, cable or rope at one (1) end,
including by way of example and not limitation, feather flags, bow flags,
flutter and such similar flags.
FLAG LOT: A large lot not meeting minimum street frontage requirements where
access to the street is provided by a narrow, private driveway. Development on
flag lots created after November 1, 2005, shall be subject to review and
approval standards.
FLASHING SIGN: An electrical permanent sign or a portion thereof which changes
light intensity in a sudden transitory burst, or which switches on and off in a
constant pattern in which more than one-third of the non-constant light source
is off at any one time.
FLOATING SIGN: A permanent sign that is air or gas filled that floats or has
movement in the air.
FLUTTER SIGN: A sign made of cloth, plastic or similar material affixed to a
pole that is located outdoors. Flutter or flutter signs are “temporary signs,”
securely anchored for safety but not permanently anchored to a structure, or
weighted base. This type of sign is prohibited.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A permanent sign, not attached to any building or structure,
which is securely and permanently attached to the ground or a built-up
landscaped area. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the
crown of the road adjacent to the location of the sign or from the ground at
the base of the sign supports to the top of the sign, whichever is higher in
elevation. Freestanding signs must comply with the architectural design review
process stated in
13-6-7 of this code.
FRONTAGE: The measurement, in linear feet, of the length of the property line
for a single-tenant building or length of leased building frontage for
multitenant buildings or multi building complexes that abuts a public or
private street right-of-way. If the building abuts a public or private right of
way on more than one side, the right of way which the building addresses off of
will be used to determine frontage.
GRADE: The relative existing ground level in the immediate vicinity of the
sign.
GOVERNMENT FLAG. Any flag or badge or insignia of the United States, State of
Washington, Pierce County, or City of Orting.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A permanent sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the property on which it is located, and which is used
to do one or more of the following:
   A.   Direct traffic flow, vehicular or pedestrian, i.e., "one-way",
"crosswalk", "do not enter", etc.
   B.   Clearly indicates location of ingress and egress points, i.e.,
"entrance", "exit";
   C.   Direct certain activities to certain areas, i.e., "parking", "no
parking", "waiting", "loading", etc.; or
   D.   Provide other similar incidental information, i.e., "no trespassing",
"no hunting", "phone", "ATM", "no dumping", "no loitering".
INTERNAL ILLUMINATED SIGN: A permanent sign with an internal light source
shining through the face of the sign. Exposed neon signs are internally
illuminated.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN: A sign relating, through its message and content, to a
business activity, use, product or service not available on the premises upon
which the sign is erected.
ON-PREMISES SIGN: A sign which carries a message and content incidental to a
lawful use of the premises on which it is located, including signs indicating
the business transacted, services rendered, goods sold or produced on the
premises, name of the person, firm or corporation occupying the premises.
PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which is intended to be lasting and is constructed
from an enduring material such as masonry and metal which remains unchanged in
position, character, and condition (beyond normal wear), and is permanently
affixed to the ground, wall or building, provided the sign is listed as a
permanent sign in the ordinance.
PORTABLE SIGN: A temporary sign made of any material, including paper,
cardboard, wood or metal, which is capable of being moved easily and is not
permanently affixed to the ground, structure or building. This also includes
sidewalk or sandwich board signs.
PROJECTING SIGN: A permanent wall sign that is attached perpendicularly to the
façade of the building. Canopy, under canopy, projected, and wall signs are
considered wall signs for the purpose of determining sign area. Projecting
signs must comply with the architectural design review process stated in
13-6-7 of this code.
READER BOARD: A permanent sign face designed to allow copy changes either by
manual or electronic means in which the message is static and can only be
changed physically by the owner and/or operator.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: Any temporary or permanent sign, which is used to offer
property for sale, lease, or rent.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A permanent sign which identifies a residential
development upon which the sign is located.
RETAIL OR MIXED USE CENTER: A shopping center or other mixed use property
having four or more tenants.
REVOLVING SIGN: Any permanent sign that rotates or turns in motion by
electrical or mechanical means in a circular pattern.
SANDWICH BOARD/SIDEWALK SIGN: A portable sign consisting of two (2) sign faces
hinged at the top and separated at the bottom to make it self-standing.
SEARCH LIGHT: An apparatus for projecting light: an apparatus for projecting a
high intensity beam of light in any direction.
SIGN: Any writing, video projection, pictorial representation, number,
illustration, decoration, flag, banner, pennant, emblem, or other device which
is displayed for informational or communicative purposes. The term "sign" shall
include the structure, including all associated brackets, braces, supports,
lighting and wires, specifically intended for supporting a sign, whether the
sign is free standing or attached or affixed to a building.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL. A permanent or temporary sign erected for a business
transaction or advertising the exchange of goods and services.
SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent grade to the
highest point of the sign, except the height of a freestanding sign shall be
measured from the crown of the road adjacent to the location of the sign or
from the ground at the base of the sign supports to the top of the sign,
whichever is higher in elevation.
SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL. Any permanent or temporary sign that is not a commercial
sign. This definition also includes signs regarding fund raising or membership
drive activities for noncommercial or nonprofit entities or groups and
political signs.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting any
sign as defined in this Chapter. A sign structure may be a single pole or may
or may not be an integral part of the building or structure.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, or valance constructed of cloth,
canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials. Any sign
not permanently attached to the ground, wall or building, intended to be
displayed for a short period of time only.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN: Any permanent sign that is mounted underneath a canopy or a
non-rigid, retractable or non-retractable, protective covering located at the
entrance to a structure. Canopy, under canopy, projected, and wall signs are
considered wall signs for the purpose of determining sign area. Under canopy
signs must comply with the architectural design review process stated in
13-6-7 of this code.
WALL SIGN: Any permanent sign attached directly to and supported by the wall of
a building or permanent structure. Canopy, under
canopy, projected, and wall signs are considered wall signs for the purpose of
determining sign area. Wall signs must comply with the architectural design
review process stated in
13-6-7 of this code. (Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-1081, 9-8-2021;
Ord. 2023-1103, 1-25-2023)
13-7-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The standards and regulations set forth in this Chapter apply to all signs
proposed for installation in the City, with the exception of the following:
   A.   Historic site markers or plaques, gravestones, and address numbers not
more than ten (10) inches in height;
   B.    Signs erected on public property by the state of Washington, the
United States, the county of Pierce, or the City of Orting, displaying a public
service message, or other regulatory, statutory, traffic control or directional
message;
   C.   Plaques, tablets, or inscriptions indicating the name of a building,
date of erection, or other commemorative information, which are an integral
part of the building structure or are attached flat to the face of a structure
or other natural surface, and do not exceed two (2) square feet in area;
   D.   Religious displays other than signs regulated by this Chapter;
   E.   A mural, defined as a one-of-a-kind, hand-painted, hand-tiled, or
digitally printed image on the exterior wall of a building that does not
contain any commercial message. Murals require a building permit from the City
through the architectural design review process, section
13-6-7 of this code, prior to installation;
   F.   Signs displayed within the interior of any structure and not visible
from streets or ways open to the public, except when such signs negatively
impact public health and safety;
   G.   Incidental signs that do not exceed three (3) square feet in area;
   H.   Exterior signs bearing the name of the occupant of a dwelling unit,
defined at section
13-2-5 of this code, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area;
   I.   Government flags;
   J.   Official or legal notices issued and posted by any public agency, as
defined by law, or court; and
   K.   Public notices of development applications required per Ch. 15 of this
code.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
13-7-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Conflict: Where regulations conflict within the provisions codified in
this Chapter or with other ordinances, the most stringent regulation shall
apply.
   B.   Visibility: No sign shall be erected that interferes with the
visibility of traffic control devices or street name signs nor shall any sign
be placed so as to cause visual obstruction of a public right of way.
   C.   Permanent Sign Structure And Installation: The structure and
installation of all signs shall comply with this Chapter, Titles 13 and 10 of
the OMC, and the latest adopted edition of the City's building code.
   D.   Architectural Details: Signs shall be located so as to complement the
original architecture features and character of the building. Permanent signs
are subject to the requirements of section
13-6-7 of this title. All signs may not cover or obscure important
architectural details of a building such as stair railings, turnings, windows,
doors, decorative louvers, or similar elements intended to be decorative
features of a building design. All signs must appear to be a secondary and
complementary feature of the building facade. Wall signs must be located within
architectural sign bands or other blank spaces which visually frame the sign.
Blank wall sections above or between windows and doors, for example, may
provide an effective location for signage. Signs hanging between pillars and
archways may also be an effective design solution.
   E.   Owner Shall Maintain: All signs shall be maintained by the owner of the
sign to show no signs of deterioration, including, but not limited to, rust,
holes, discoloration, peeling paint, trash, or overgrowing weeds.
   F.   Illumination: Indirect illumination is preferred and shall be lighted
in such a manner that glare from the light source is not visible to pedestrian
or vehicle traffic. Internally illuminated signs must adhere to the standards
in subsection L. Internally illuminated signs shall be designed to emphasize
the lighting of the sign text, message and/or symbols, while minimizing the
lighting of the background of the sign face. Temporary signs shall not be
illuminated.
   G.   Permanent Freestanding Signs: Permanent freestanding signs are
considered structures for purposes of compliance with required setbacks.
Landscaping shall be used in conjunction with all permanent freestanding signs
and may utilize shrubs and plantings or decorative features such as concrete
bases, planter boxes, or ornaments.
   H.   Ownership And Removal Of Signs:
      1.   Private Property: The property owner or lessee is responsible for
all signs on private property and compliance with this Chapter and all other
applicable regulations. The property owner or lessee shall immediately remove
all illegal, damaged, vandalized or abandoned signs. Signs on private property
in violation of this Chapter shall be abated by the City pursuant to the
process set out in this Chapter.
      2.   Public Right Of Way: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
no permanent signs shall be placed in the public right of way. Temporary non-
commercial signs may be placed in the public right of way with a permit issued
by the City, and are subject to the regulations set forth in this Chapter. The
permittee shall remove permitted temporary sign(s) placed in the public right
of way, pursuant to the terms of the permit. The City or its agents may
summarily remove any sign placed in the right-of-way or public property in
violation of the terms of this Chapter and is entitled to recover the costs of
abatement from the permittee, in accordance with the process set out in this
Chapter.
   I.   Directional Signs: On premises permanent directional signs not
exceeding four (4) square feet in area may be permitted for each entrance or
exit to a surface parking lot. Permanent directional signs may be permitted
within the public right of way with the permission of the immediately adjacent
property owner, pursuant to the permit process stated in this Chapter. Off
premises permanent directional signs, whether on private or public property,
shall only identify the facility or site and its distance and direction from
the sign.
   J.   Sign Area Determinations:
      1.   Sign area for freestanding signs shall be calculated by determining
the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point,
excluding support structures.
      2.   Sign area for letters or symbols painted or mounted directly on wall
or freestanding signs shall be calculated by measuring the smallest single
rectangle which will enclose the combined letters and symbols.
      3.   Sign area for signs contained entirely within a cabinet and mounted
on a wall or freestanding sign shall be calculated by measuring the entire area
of the cabinet.
      4.   Perimeter of all other signs shall be established by the smallest
rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of the letter module or advertising
message being measured.
   K.   Installation Prohibited:
      1.   No sign shall be installed, attached to, supported by or propped up
against any utility pole, light standard, traffic sign, tree, fire hydrant, or
any other public facility located within the public right of way.
      2.   No sign shall be mounted above the roofline and/or on the roof of a
building.
   L.   Internally Illuminated Signs:
      1.   Internally illuminated signs are only permitted as a secondary,
permanent sign, supplementary to a business's primary sign which shall not be
internally illuminated or be a changing message sign.
      2.   The text that changes in a changing message sign is limited to a
single color and must be a warm-toned off-white or similar color and the
background must be a dark toned color as approved by the planning commission in
compliance section
13-6-7 design review standards. The colors of the sign, letters, and background
shall remain fixed.
      3.   Signs shall have a maximum luminance of not more than 0.2 foot-
candles over ambient lighting conditions.
      4.   Changing message signs shall have dimming capability to allow
adjustment of sign brightness when required by the City to accommodate local
ambient conditions.
      5.   An electronic message may not change more frequently than every
thirty (30) seconds;
      6.   Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating light sources,
lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be permitted.
      7.   Electronic signs shall not exceed the number, type, size, and height
requirements set forth in section
13-7-9;
      8.   Electronic signs shall be permitted only in the MUCTN, MUTC, and PF
zones.
      9.   The sign structure must comply with the architectural design review
standards found in section
13-6-7.
   M.   Right of Way Frontage Determination for Flag Lots:
      1.   The maximum sign area for freestanding signs is determined by the
frontage on a public right of way. Frontage for flag lots is determined by the
length, in linear feet, of the building which contains the primary entrance to
the uses within the building.
   N.    Wall Sign Area Determination:
      1.   1. Canopy, under canopy, projected, and wall signs are considered
wall signs for the purpose of determining sign area. (Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-
2019; Ord. 2021-1081, 9-8-2021; Ord. 2023-1103, 1-25-2023)
13-7-5: PERMIT REQUIRED, ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Permanent Signs - Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter, no permanent sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated within the
City without a sign permit issued by the City of Orting Building Department,
following submission, review and approval of the sign through the architectural
design review process, set out in section
13-6-7 of this code. This Chapter shall not be construed to require any permit
for the change of copy (font design must conform to ADR's) on any sign, nor for
the repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or
sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the
sign structure has not been modified in any way.
      1.   Application: A City sign permit application must be completed and
submitted to the City Building Department, and shall include the following:
         a.   All plans and layouts for the proposed sign, including a drawn to
scale site plan to be submitted to the City; and
         b.   Evidence of commercial general liability insurance with a
responsible insurance company, licensed to do business in the state of
Washington, properly protecting and indemnifying the City for injury to or
death of persons and for property damage arising out of the presence of the
permitted sign, including but not limited to a certificate or certificates of
insurance, in a form acceptable to the City, and naming the City as an
additional insured.
      2.   No sign permit shall be issued for any sign subject to design review
and approval until such time as the sign has been approved pursuant to section
13-6-7 of this title.
      3.   Time Limitations: Sign permits authorized by the City of Orting
Building Department shall expire within one hundred eighty (180) days, if the
sign installation has not been completed and approved. If the sign installation
has not been completed and approved within that time period, the permit may be
extended for a single period of up to one hundred twenty (120) days from the
date of expiration of the initial permit, if the request for extension is made
prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. Once the sign is installed
and approved by the Building Department, the permit shall expire one (1) year
from the date of issuance.
   B.   Temporary Signs - Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter, no temporary sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated within the
City without a sign permit issued by the City of Orting. To obtain a permit,
the permittee shall submit an application to the Cashier at City Hall, along
with the proposed sign. The permit shall state the permit's expiration, which
shall be set in accordance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
13-7-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS, ALL ZONES: 
The following signs are prohibited in all zones within the City:
   A.   Permanently constructed signs located in or projecting into the public
right of way, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter;
   B.   Any sign attached to or placed on a vehicle or trailer parked on public
property. The prohibition of this subsection does not prohibit the
identification of a firm or its principal products on a vehicle operating
during the normal course of business;
   C.   Signs which blink, flash, rotate, contain changing images or text that
are electronically generated, or are animated by lighting in any fashion, or
that are internally illuminated;
   D.   Signs which by coloring, shape, wording, or location resemble or
conflict with traffic control signs or devices;
   E.   Off premises signs, signage on fencing, and commercial signs in
primarily residential zones (RC, RU, RMF), except as specifically allowed in
this Chapter;
   F.   Billboard signs;
   G.   Floating signs; and
   H.   Mannequins used for signage. (Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019; amd. Ord.
2021-1081, 9-8-2021)
13-7-7: SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS:
   A.   Sandwich board signs are a type of temporary sign permitted by the City
in accordance with this Chapter.
   B.   Sandwich board signs are allowed subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Sandwich board signs are limited to thirty-six inches (36") in
height and thirty inches (30") in width. They must be constructed of durable
materials.
      2.   Sandwich board signs may be located on public sidewalks or adjacent
areas in a manner so as to allow adequate pedestrian circulation allowing a
minimum of three (3) feet of available sidewalk path, including safe and
unconstrained access to parked vehicles. Sandwich board signs shall be placed
adjacent to the sign owner's business or premises except when the applicant can
demonstrate a need for placement up to one hundred feet (100') from the
business or premises and with the permission of the immediately adjacent
property owner(s).
      3.   No sandwich board sign shall be placed within thirty feet (30') of
another sandwich board sign.
      4.   Under no circumstances may a sandwich board sign be placed on the
portion of the public right of way upon which vehicles regularly traverse or
park. No sign shall be placed in median strips, planter/traffic islands, or in
the roadway, including on vehicles. The City shall determine, at its sole
discretion, the approved location of sandwich board signs to ensure pedestrian
safety and vehicle circulation. Sandwich board signs shall not be located
within thirty feet (30') of street intersections or where they inhibit motorist
sight distances.
      5.   No single business or other party shall site more than one sandwich
board sign within the City.
      6.   Sandwich board signs may only be displayed during the hours the
premises or business is open to the general public, provided non-commercial
sandwich board signs may be placed in the public right of way for a maximum
period of twelve (12) hours per each twenty-four (24) hour period.
      7.   Sandwich board signs that are not permitted or are otherwise out of
compliance with this Chapter shall be abated by the City, pursuant to the
process set out in this Chapter.
      8.   The sign owner shall maintain the sign in the condition originally
approved.
      9.   Sandwich board signs are not subject to the time limits as stated in
section
13-7-8 C-1-iii.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019; Ord. 2023-1103, 1-25-2023; Ord. 2023-1106, 6-14-
2023)
13-7-8: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   Temporary signs are allowed throughout the City, subject to the
restrictions imposed herein and other relevant parts of this code. No temporary
commercial or noncommercial sign shall be located on public property, or within
public easements or street rights of way, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, temporary signs shall be
exempt from the architectural design review requirements of section
13-6-7 of this title.
   B.   General Requirements.
      1.   No temporary signs shall be located within the center median of
principal, minor, and collector arterials or within roundabouts, traffic
circles, or islands, or within ten (10) feet from any intersection so as to
preserve driver site visibility. No temporary signs over thirty-six (36) inches
in height are permitted within fifteen feet (15') of a road or driveway.
      2.   Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
      3.   Temporary signs shall not be attached to any utility pole, fence,
building, structure, object, tree or other vegetation located upon or within
any public right-of-way or publicly owned or maintained land.
      4.   Temporary signs shall not be erected without the permission of the
owner of the property on which they are located, nor shall they be placed in
such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with traffic or endanger the health
or safety of people or endanger property.
      5.   Temporary signs shall be made of weather-resistant materials and
shall be securely anchored to a weighted base or structure or able to stand
freely without toppling or blowing over. Signs and parts of signs that are
blown or carried away from their intended location may be collected and
disposed of as litter.
      6.   Temporary signs shall be maintained in good repair.
      7.   Flutter flag signs are not a permitted type of sign.
      8.   Temporary signs on public property, other than public rights-of-way,
are prohibited, except:
         a.   Two (2) temporary signs may be utilized per business/vendor for
permitted special events (see section
3-2-26) or permitted vendors (see section
8-6-3) on public property, subject to a valid special event permit for the
duration of the special event or valid vendor permit, provided:
            (1)   The temporary signs shall not be affixed to any structures or
fixtures owned by the City; and
            (2)   The temporary signs shall not exceed a maximum height of six
feet (6') from the ground.
   C.   Additional Regulations Specific To Temporary Commercial Signs.
      1.   General Commercial Signs.
         a.   No business or other party shall display more than two (2)
temporary commercial signs simultaneously for no longer than thirty (30)
continuous days.
         b.   No two (2) temporary signs may be closer together than thirty
(30) feet.
         c.   Temporary signs may be displayed for no more than three (3) non-
consecutive 30-day periods, per sign, within a calendar year.
      2.   Construction: Development projects under construction shall be
permitted to place one sign on each street frontage during the period of
construction. The total area of all construction signs for each project shall
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. No construction signs shall be placed
until the City has issued a building permit for the project and the sign has
been issued a Temporary Sign Permit.
      3.   Temporary Signs Placed On Property For Sale Or Lease: Temporary
signs placed on property for sale or lease are permitted, subject to the
following:
         a.   Zones Permitted: Temporary signs placed on property for sale or
lease shall be permitted in all zones except the public facilities, open space
and recreation zones.
         b.   On-Premises: Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street
frontage not to exceed six (6) square feet in sign area per side, placed wholly
on the property for sale. All temporary signs placed on property for sale or
lease shall be removed within five (5) days of the final sale or rental.
         c.   Off-Premises: During any time when a property for sale or lease
is open for public viewing, one (1) sign per dwelling unit or property for sale
or lease may be displayed:
            (1)   On private property, with the consent of the property owner;
or
            (2)   In public rights-of-way, other than paved vehicular travel
lanes, paved parking areas, sidewalks or pedestrian paths, driveway aprons and
center medians.
      4.   Temporary signs advertising the sale of lots located within a
planned development under construction shall be permitted; provided, that there
shall be no more than one sign per entrance, and each sign shall be not greater
than thirty two (32) square feet in area, no greater than eight feet (8') in
height, and erected for no longer than a period of one year.
      5.   Sign Plan: At the time of submittal of an application for final
planned development and/or plat approval, the applicant shall submit a sign
plan which shall identify all proposed on-site and off-site locations, sizes,
and designs for proposed temporary signs advertising the lots and/or houses.
The sign plan shall also describe the applicant's responsibility for sign
maintenance and removal, which shall be prepared in accordance with the terms
of this Chapter. The approved sign plan shall be in force for one year unless
an extension is granted by the City.
   D.   Additional Regulations Specific To Temporary Noncommercial Signs:
      1.    Temporary noncommercial signs on private property shall not exceed
three (3) square feet in area.
      2.    Temporary noncommercial signs may be placed in the public right of
way, subject to the following:
         a.   The sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area;
         b.   The sign shall not be displayed for longer than one hundred
eighty (180) days per calendar year;
         c.   The sign shall be designed and constructed so as not to interfere
with the sight distance of, or otherwise present a hazard to, motorists
proceeding on or approaching on adjacent streets, alleys, driveways, or parking
areas, or of pedestrians proceeding on or approaching on adjacent sidewalks or
pedestrian-ways, as determined in the City's sole discretion; and
         d.   There shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') between each sign
pertaining to the same noncommercial topic, organization, entity or person.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-1081, 9-8-2021)
13-7-9: LIMITATIONS ON PERMANENT SIGNS:
   A.   Number, Type, Size, And Height Limitations: All permanent signs subject
to regulation under this Chapter are subject to the following limitations upon
number, height, size, and type:
 
Frontage On A Number of               Maximum Sign  Maximum Sign
Public Right  Signs     Type Of Signs Area for Wall Area for     Maximum Height
Of Way In     Permitted Permitted     Signs         Freestanding Of Signs
Feet                                                Signs
                                                                 Signs shall
                                                                 not extend
                                                                 above the
                                                                 roofline.
                        Canopy, wall, Maximum of                 Projected
                        under canopy, 10% of square              signs and
Less than 50  2         and           footage of    -            under canopy
                        projecting    building                   signs must
                                      facade                     provide a
                                                                 minimum 7'6"
                                                                 vertical
                                                                 clearance from
                                                                 sidewalk
                                                                 Signs shall
                                                                 not extend
                                                                 above the
                                                                 roofline.
                                                                 Freestanding
                                                                 signs shall
                                                                 not exceed 5
                                                                 feet and must
                        Canopy, wall, Maximum of 10              be set back a
At least 50             under canopy, % of square   72 sf (both  minimum of 5'
but less than 2         projecting,   footage of    faces)       from any
100                     and           building      36 sf (per   property
                        freestanding  facade        face)        lines.
                                                                 Projected
                                                                 signs and
                                                                 under canopy
                                                                 signs must
                                                                 provide a
                                                                 minimum 7'6"
                                                                 vertical
                                                                 clearance from
                                                                 sidewalk
                                                                 Signs shall
                                                                 not extend
                                                                 above the
                                                                 roofline.
                                                                 Freestanding
                                                                 signs shall
                                                                 not exceed 5
                                                                 feet and must
                        Canopy, wall, Maximum of 10              be set back a
At least 100            under canopy, % of square   100 sf (both minimum of 5'
but less than 2         projecting,   footage of    faces)       from any
200                     and           building      50 sf (per   property
                        freestanding  facade        face)        lines.
                                                                 Projected
                                                                 signs and
                                                                 under canopy
                                                                 signs must
                                                                 provide a
                                                                 minimum 7'6"
                                                                 vertical
                                                                 clearance from
                                                                 sidewalk
                                                                 Freestanding
                                                                 signs shall
                                                                 not exceed 5
                                                                 feet and signs
                                                                 shall not
                                                                 extend above
                                                                 the roofline.
                                                                 Freestanding
                                                                 signs must be
                        Canopy, wall, Maximum of 10 130 sf (both set back a
At least 200            under canopy, % of square   faces)       minimum of 5'
but less than 3         projecting,   footage of    65 sf (per   from any
300                     and           building      face)        property
                        freestanding  facade                     lines.
                                                                 Projecte d
                                                                 signs and
                                                                 under canopy
                                                                 signs must
                                                                 provide a
                                                                 minimum 7'6"
                                                                 vertical
                                                                 clearanc e
                                                                 from sidewalk.
                                                                 Freestanding
                                                                 signs shall
                                                                 not exceed 8
                                                                 feet and signs
                                                                 shall not
                                                                 extend above
                                                                 the roofline.
                                                                 Freestanding
                                                                 signs must be
                        Canopy, wall, Maximum of 10 160 sf (both set back a
Greater than            under canopy  % of square   faces)       minimum of 5'
300           3         and           footage of    80 sf (per   from any
                        freestanding  building      face)        property
                                      facade                     lines.
                                                                 Projected
                                                                 signs and
                                                                 under canopy
                                                                 signs must
                                                                 provide a
                                                                 minimum 7'6"
                                                                 vertical
                                                                 clearance from
                                                                 sidewalk.
 
   B.    Retail Or Mixed Use Centers:
      1.   One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of
each center, subject to architectural design review and permitting under
sections
13-6-7 and
13-7-11 of this code. The maximum sign area permitted is one hundred sixty
(160) square feet for the total of all faces, and no one face shall exceed
eighty (80) square feet. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be
eight feet (8').
      2.   A maximum of forty (40) square feet of sign area shall be permitted
for each individual establishment in a center, subject to architectural design
review and permitting under sections
13-6-7 and
13-7-11 of this code. No combination of signs shall exceed ten percent (10%) of
the facade to which they are attached.
   C.   Other Permitted Permanent Signs:
      1.   Permanent Residential Development Signs: One sign at each entrance
into the development from each abutting street is permitted, subject to
architectural design review and permitting under sections
13-6-7 and
13-7-11 of this code. The sign may be a single sign with two (2) faces of equal
size or may be two (2) single faced structures of equal size located on each
side of the entrance. Sign faces shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
in area. Signs may be externally illuminated.
         a.   Development signs shall be maintained perpetually by the
developer, the owner of the sign, the homeowners' association, or some other
entity who is authorized in accordance with the permit.
      2.   Permanent Residential Home Based Business Signs: Home based
businesses may display a limit of one sign. The sign shall be no more than six
(6) square feet in size and requires a city permit. The sign will not require
Architectural Design Review. The sign can be placed on the home or in the yard.
If the sign is placed in the yard it must be at least one (1) foot away from
sidewalks and/or the property line. The sign cannot be more than 3' high from
the ground. No lighting allowed of any type. In neighborhoods with Home Owners
Association Covenants and Restrictions, home based business signs may not be
allowed.
   D.   Projected And Under Canopy Permanent Signs: Projected and under canopy
signs are subject to architectural design review and permitting under sections
13-6-7 and
13-7-11 of this code. A projected sign or under canopy sign may encroach
within, upon or over the public right of way, including any public sidewalk,
provided that, such sign meets the requirements of this Chapter, the proposed
sign is designed and constructed so as not to interfere with the sight distance
of, or otherwise present a hazard to, motorists proceeding on or approaching on
adjacent streets, alleys, driveways, or parking areas, or of pedestrians
proceeding on or approaching on adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian ways, and the
sign meets the provisions of section
13-7-8 of this code. (Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-1103, 1-25-
2023; Ord. 2023-1106, 6-14-2023)
13-7-10: SIGN VARIANCES:
Any person, business or entity seeking to utilize a sign that is not permitted
pursuant to the regulations stated in this Chapter may seek a variance from
these regulations. The planning commission reviews sign variance applications
and determines if the variances are to be granted using the following criteria:
   A.   The granting of the sign variance would not be materially detrimental
to the property owners in the vicinity, and the variance sought is of minimum
sign size, height, and scope to meet the conditions and needs of the applicant;
   B.   The granting of the variance would not be contrary to the objectives of
this Chapter and section
13-6-7 of this title;
   C.   The signage of the property in question cannot be adequately met under
the literal interpretation and strict application of this Chapter; and
   D.   The granting of the variance is necessary because of special
circumstances relating to property location, topography, shape, size, sight
distance, and limited view to property.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
13-7-11: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, a "nonconforming sign" shall be
defined as a sign that meets the following criteria:
      1.   The sign was lawfully erected as evidenced by prior approval by the
Planning Commission; and
      2.   The sign existed prior to the adoption and/or relevant amendment of
these regulations, in the same location affixed in a permanent manner to the
ground or the building without modification other than routine maintenance and
repair; and
      3.   The sign is associated with an existing and operating business or
activity; and
      4.   The sign fails to meet one (1) or more requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   All on-site and off-site nonconforming signs not otherwise prohibited
by the provisions of this Chapter, installed prior to the year 2000, shall be
removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this Chapter when:
      1.   The nonconforming sign is of a temporary nature;
      2.   The nature of the business conducted on the premises changes and the
sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend;
      3.   The name of the business changes and the sign is changed or modified
either in shape, size, or legend; or
      4.   The business is discontinued. In this event, the sign(s) and
supporting structure(s) shall be removed by the property owner. If said sign(s)
is not removed within the specified time period, the City may remove the sign
and file a lien against the property to cover costs associated with said
removal.
   C.   Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged or altered in a way which would
increase nonconformity.
   D.   Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of
more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of damage, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter.
   E.   A nonconforming sign as defined by this section shall be deemed lawful
subject to all requirements of this Chapter and this title with the following
exceptions:
      1.   The requirement to obtain a sign installation permit; and
      2.   Enforcement by the City for exceeding or violating limitations on
size, shape, location or design imposed by this title.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
13-7-12: ABATEMENT OF ILLEGAL SIGNS:
   A.   Public Nuisance Declared: Any sign that violates the provisions of this
Chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, and shall be abated in accordance
with section
5-1-7 of this code, subject to the following:
      1.   If the sign is located on private property, the City shall notify
the property owner of the existence of the public nuisance and shall direct the
owner to remove the sign within ten (10) calendar days after the notice.
Failure to remove the sign in accordance with the notice shall also constitute
a civil violation, in accordance with section 1-13-6 of this code. The City
shall be entitled to recover all costs of abatement from the property owner,
including attorney's fees and costs pursuing abatement for continued
violations.
      2.   The City may remove signs which violate the provisions of this
Chapter and constitute a public nuisance from public rights of way and public
property, at any time. The owner of the sign, if known, shall be given written
notice that the sign shall be destroyed if it is not claimed within ten (10)
days of the notice. Failure to remove the sign in accordance with the notice
shall also constitute a civil violation, in accordance with section
1-13-6 of this code. The City shall be entitled to recover all costs of
abatement from the property owner, including attorney's fees and costs pursuing
abatement for continued violations.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
13-7-13: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This Chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, building, altering, constructing, or
moving any sign in the City for damages to anyone injured or damaged either to
person or property by any defect therein; nor shall the City, or any agent
thereof, be held as assuming such liability by reason of a permit or inspection
authorized herein or a certificate of inspection issued by the City or any of
its agents.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
13-7-14: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter, or
its application to any person or circumstance, be declared unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any portion of this Chapter be pre-
empted by state or federal law or regulation, such decision or pre-emption
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter or its
application to other persons or circumstances.
(Ord. 2019-1041, 5-29-2019)
CHAPTER 8
MEDICAL CANNABIS
SECTION:
13-8-1: Findings
13-8-2: Definitions
13-8-3: Applicability
13-8-4: Restrictions On Medical Cannabis For Personal Use
13-8-5: Collective Gardens
13-8-6: Violations
13-8-7: Penalties
13-8-1: FINDINGS:
The council adopts all of the "whereas" sections of the ordinance codified
herein as findings to support this chapter, as well as the following:
   A.   Through its amendment/adoption of Revised Code Of Washington chapter
69.51A, the state of Washington has found that there is medical evidence to
show that some patients with terminal or debilitating medical conditions
benefit from the medical use of cannabis.
   B.   The state of Washington has determined that qualifying patients with
terminal or debilitating medical conditions, who, in the judgment of their
healthcare professionals, may benefit from the medical use of cannabis, shall
not be arrested, prosecuted or subject to other criminal sanctions or civil
consequences under state law, based solely on their medical use of cannabis,
notwithstanding any other provision of law.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede Washington
state law relating to the acquisition, possession, manufacture, sale or use of
cannabis for nonmedical purposes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
supersede legislation prohibiting persons from engaging in conduct that
endangers others, or to condone the diversion of cannabis for nonmedical
purposes.
   D.   Cannabis plants, whether grown indoors or outdoors, especially as they
mature prior to harvest, may produce a distinctive odor that may be detectable
far beyond property boundaries.
   E.   Where cannabis plants have been grown outdoors in other states, local
authorities have received a significant number of formal complaints of odor
that may be detectable far beyond property boundaries.
   F.   Cannabis, whether grown for medicinal purposes or diverted to the black
market, may be sold for thousands of dollars per pound.
   G.   The strong smell of cannabis may create an attractive nuisance,
alerting persons to the location of the plants, and creating a risk of
burglary, robbery and armed robbery.
   H.   Cannabis that is grown indoors may require excessive use of electricity
which may overload standard electrical systems, creating an unreasonable risk
of fire.
   I.   The ability of qualified patients to cultivate cannabis in collective
gardens for medical purposes does not confer upon them the right to create or
maintain a public nuisance. No more than forty five (45) cannabis plants are
allowed on any one legal parcel, which should keep the complaints regarding
odor and the risks of fire and crime to a minimum.
   J.   Pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 69.51A.130, no civil or criminal
liability may be imposed by any court on cities, towns, or counties or other
municipalities and their officers and employees for actions taken in good faith
under this chapter and within the scope of their assigned duties. (Ord. 941, 7-
24-2013)
13-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
CANNABIS: All parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds,
or resin. For the purposes of this chapter, "cannabis" does not include the
mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made
from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted
therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
incapable of germination. The term "cannabis" includes cannabis products and
usable cannabis.
CANNABIS PRODUCTS: Products that contain cannabis or cannabis extracts, have a
measurable THC ("tetrahydrocannabinol") concentration greater than three-tenths
of one percent, and are intended for human consumption or application,
including, but not limited to, edible products, tinctures, and lotions. The
term "cannabis products" does not include usable cannabis. The definition of
"cannabis products" as a measurement of THC concentration only applies to the
provisions of this chapter and shall not be considered applicable to any
criminal laws related to marijuana or cannabis.
CHURCH: A structure or leased portion of a structure, which is used primarily
for religious worship and related religious activities.
COLLECTIVE GARDEN: Those gardens authorized under Revised Code Of Washington
69.51A.085, which allows qualifying patients or their designated care providers
to assume responsibility for acquiring and supplying the resources required to
produce and process cannabis for medical use such as, for example, a location
for a collective garden; equipment, supplies, and labor necessary to plant,
grow, and harvest cannabis; cannabis plants, seeds, and cuttings; and
equipment, supplies, and labor necessary for proper construction, plumbing,
wiring, and ventilation of a garden of cannabis plants (as limited below).
Qualifying patients or their designated care providers may create and
participate in collective gardens for the purpose of producing, processing,
transporting and delivering cannabis for medical use subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   No more than ten (10) qualifying patients and/or designated care
providers may participate in a single collective garden at any time;
   B.   A collective garden may contain no more than fifteen (15) plants per
qualifying patient or designated care provider, up to a total of forty five
(45) plants;
   C.   A collective garden may contain no more than twenty four (24) ounces of
usable cannabis per qualifying patient or designated care provider, up to a
total of seventy two (72) ounces of usable cannabis;
   D.   A copy of each qualifying patient's or designated care provider's valid
documentation or proof of registration with the registry established in state
law (now or in the future), including a copy of the patient's proof of
identity, must be available at all times on the premises of the collective
garden;
   E.   No usable cannabis from the collective garden may be delivered to
anyone other than one of the qualifying patients or designated care providers
participating in the collective garden; and
   F.   The collective garden is exempt from business license requirements
under this code.
CULTIVATION: The planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of
marijuana plants or any part thereof.
DESIGNATED CARE PROVIDER: A person who:
   A.   Is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   B.   Has been designated in (writing) a written document signed and dated by
a qualifying patient to serve as a designated provider under this chapter and
Revised Code Of Washington 69.51A; and
   C.   Is in compliance with the terms and conditions set forth in Revised
Code Of Washington 69.51A.040. A qualifying patient may be the designated
provider for another qualifying patient and be in possession of both patients'
cannabis at the same time.
INDOORS: Within a fully enclosed and secure structure that complies with the
Washington state building code, as adopted by the city in title 10, chapter 1
of this code and amended in title 10, chapter 2 of this code, that has a
complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground
to the roof, and a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the floor is
securely attached. The structure must be secure against unauthorized entry,
accessible only through one or more lockable doors, and constructed of solid
materials that cannot easily be broken through, such as two inches by four
inches (2" x 4") or thicker studs overlain with three-eighths inch (3/8") or
thicker plywood or equivalent materials. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge,
or similar products do not satisfy this requirement.
LEGAL PARCEL: A parcel of land for which one legal title exists. Where
contiguous legal parcels are under common ownership or control, such legal
parcels shall be counted as a single parcel for purposes of this chapter.
MEDICAL (OR MEDICINAL) USE OF CANNABIS: The manufacture, production,
processing, possession, transportation, delivery, ingestion, application, or
administration of cannabis for the exclusive benefit of a qualifying patient in
the treatment of his or her terminal or debilitating medical condition.
OUTDOORS: Any location that is not "indoors" within a fully enclosed and secure
structure as defined herein.
PARK: Any area of land, including any trail, whether publicly or privately
owned, that is set aside for the enjoyment and recreation of members of the
public or residents of the immediate neighborhood.
PERSON: An individual or an entity.
PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION: Any information that includes, but is not
limited to, data that uniquely identify, distinguish, or trace a person's
identity, such as the person's name, or address, either alone or when combined
with other sources, that establish the person is a qualifying patient or
designated provider.
PLANT: An organism having at least three (3) distinguishable and distinct
leaves, each leaf being at least three (3) centimeters in diameter, and a
readily observable root formation consisting of at least two (2) separate and
distinct roots, each being at least two (2) centimeters in length. Multiple
stalks emanating from the same root ball or root system shall be considered
part of the same single plant.
PROCESS: To handle or process cannabis in preparation for medical use.
PRODUCE: To plant, grow, or harvest cannabis for medical use.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes any street, highway, freeway, bridge, land, path, alley,
court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other
public right of way; buildings and grounds used for school purposes; public
assembly facilities and grounds adjacent thereto; premises where goods and
services are offered to the public for retail sale; public buildings, lobbies,
halls and dining rooms of hotels, restaurants, theaters, stores, garages, and
filling stations which are open to and are generally used by the public and to
which the public is permitted to have unrestricted access; buses, and other
public conveyances of all kinds and character, and the facilities used in
conjunction therewith which are open to unrestricted use and access by the
public; public beaches, parks, or playgrounds; and all other places of like or
similar nature to which the general public has unrestricted right of access,
and which are generally used by the public.
QUALIFYING PATIENT: A person who:
   A.   Is a patient of a healthcare professional;
   B.   Has been diagnosed by that healthcare professional as having a terminal
or debilitating medical condition;
   C.   Is a resident of the state of Washington at the time of such diagnosis;
   D.   Has been advised by that healthcare professional about the risks and
benefits of the medical use of cannabis;
   E.   Has been advised by that healthcare professional that he or she may
benefit from the medical use of cannabis; and
   F.   Is otherwise in compliance with the terms and conditions established in
Revised Code Of Washington chapter 69.51A.
The term "qualifying patient" does not include a person who is actively being
supervised for a criminal conviction by a corrections agency or department that
has determined that the terms of this chapter and Revised Code Of Washington
69.51A are inconsistent with and contrary to his or her supervision and all
related processes and procedures related to that supervision.
SCHOOL: An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private,
offering regular course of instruction required by the Washington education
code, or any child or day care facility. This definition includes a nursery
school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior
high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a
vocational or professional institution of higher learning, including a
community or junior college, college or university.
THC CONCENTRATION: Percent of tetrahydrocannabinol content per weight or volume
of usable cannabis or cannabis product, or the combined twenty five percent
(25%) of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid 26 in any
part of the plant cannabis regardless of moisture content.
TERMINAL OR DEBILITATING MEDICAL CONDITION:
   A.   Cancer, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), multiple sclerosis,
epilepsy or other seizure disorder, or spasticity disorders; or
   B.   Intractable pain, limited for the purpose of this chapter to mean pain
unrelieved by standard medical treatments and medications; or
   C.   Glaucoma, either acute or chronic, limited for the purpose of this
chapter to mean increased intraocular pressure unrelieved by standard
treatments and medications; or
   D.   Crohn's disease with debilitating symptoms unrelieved by standard
treatments or medications; or
   E.   Hepatitis C with debilitating nausea or intractable pain unrelieved by
standard treatments or medications; or
   F.   Diseases, including anorexia, which result in nausea, vomiting,
cachexia, appetite loss, cramping, seizures, muscle spasms, or spasticity, when
these symptoms are unrelieved by standard treatments or medications; or
   G.   Any other medical condition duly approved by the Washington state
medical quality assurance commission in consultation with the board of
osteopathic medicine and surgery as directed in this chapter.
TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility providing for treatment of drug and alcohol
dependency.
USABLE CANNABIS: Dried flowers of the cannabis plant having a THC concentration
greater than three-tenths of one percent. Usable cannabis excludes stems,
stalks, leaves, seeds, and roots. For purposes of this definition, "dried"
means containing less than fifteen percent (15%) moisture content by weight.
The term "usable cannabis" does not include cannabis products.
VALID DOCUMENTATION:
   A.   A statement signed and dated by a qualifying patient's healthcare
professional written on tamper resistant paper, which states that, in the
healthcare professional's professional opinion, the patient may benefit from
the medical use of cannabis;
   B.   Proof of identity such as a Washington state driver's license or
identicard, as defined in Revised Code Of Washington 46.20.035; and
   C.   In the case of a designated provider, the signed and dated document
valid for one year from the date of signature executed by the qualifying
patient who has designated the provider.
YOUTH ORIENTED FACILITY: Elementary school, middle school, high school, public
park, and any establishment that advertises in a manner that identifies the
establishment as catering to or providing services primarily intended for
minors, or individuals who regularly patronize, congregate or assemble at the
establishment are predominantly minors. This shall not include a daycare or
preschool facility. (Ord. 941, 7-24-2013)
13-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
No part of this chapter is intended to or shall be deemed to conflict with
federal law, including, but not limited to, the controlled substances act, 21
USC section 800 et seq., the uniform controlled substances act 1  nor to
otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under either act, or any other
local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. No part of this
chapter is intended to or shall be construed so as to violate any provisions of
the state or federal constitution. (Ord. 941, 7-24-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 69.50.
13-8-4: RESTRICTIONS ON MEDICAL CANNABIS FOR PERSONAL USE:
   A.   Revised Code Of Washington 69.51A.040 allows an individual qualifying
patient or designated provider to cultivate medical cannabis for personal use
within his/her private residence, as long as the qualifying patient or
designated provider:
      1.   Possesses no more than fifteen (15) cannabis plants;
      2.   Possesses no more than twenty four (24) ounces of usable cannabis;
      3.   Possesses no more cannabis product than what could reasonably be
produced with no more than twenty four (24) ounces of usable cannabis; or
      4.   Possesses a combination of usable cannabis and cannabis product that
does not exceed a combination total representing possession and processing of
no more than twenty four (24) ounces of usable cannabis.
If a person is both a qualifying patient and a designated provider for another
patient, Revised Code Of Washington 69.51A.040 allows possession of no more
than twice the amounts described in subsection A of this section, whether the
plants, usable cannabis, and cannabis product are possessed individually or in
combination between the qualifying patient and his or her designated provider.
(This section does not list all of the limitations on such use in Revised Code
Of Washington 69.51A.040 or chapter 69.51A. This section is only meant to
provide sufficient information to distinguish between cultivation of medical
cannabis for personal use, as opposed to cultivation of medical cannabis in a
collective garden, and to establish certain land use restrictions on such
cultivation.)
   B.   Any cultivation of medical cannabis for personal use under chapter
69.51A Revised Code Of Washington shall not exceed the following standards:
      1.   The medical cannabis cultivation area shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet in length and shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height per
residence.
      2.   Medical cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand
two hundred (1,200) watts.
      3.   Use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) for medical cannabis
cultivation or processing is prohibited.
      4.   From a public right of way, there shall be no exterior evidence of
medical cannabis cultivation either within or outside the residence.
      5.   The qualified patient or designated provider shall reside in the
residence where the medical cannabis cultivation occurs.
      6.   The qualified patient or designated provider cultivating cannabis
for personal use shall not participate in any collective garden or other
medical cannabis cultivation in any other residential location.
      7.   The residence shall maintain a kitchen, bathrooms, and primary
bedrooms for their intended use and shall not be used primarily for medical
cannabis cultivation.
      8.   The medical cannabis cultivation area shall be in compliance with
the current, adopted edition of the Washington state building code provisions
regarding natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation (or its equivalents).
      9.   The medical cannabis cultivation area shall not adversely affect the
health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise,
noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be
hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.
(Ord. 941, 7-24-2013)
13-8-5: COLLECTIVE GARDENS:
   A.   No Nonconforming Status: Notwithstanding the provisions of section
13-6-6, "Nonconforming Use Permit", of this title, an existing collective
garden in operation as of the effective date of this chapter shall be brought
into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter within one year of its
effective date.
   B.   Location Restrictions: Collective gardens are subject to the following
location restrictions:
      1.   Collective Gardens Prohibited: Collective gardens may not be
established in the following areas:
         a.   Indoors or outdoors within one thousand feet (1,000') of a youth
oriented facility, a daycare center, a preschool, a school, a park, or any
church or residential treatment facility;
         b.   Outdoors within one hundred feet (100') of any occupied legal
residential structure located on a separate legal parcel;
         c.   Outdoors in a mobile home park within one hundred feet (100') of
an occupied mobile home;
         d.   Indoors or outdoors within one thousand feet (1,000') of any
other collective garden; and
         e.   In any location where the cannabis plants are visible from the
public right of way or publicly traveled private roads.
      2.   Distance: The distance between the above listed uses and the
collective garden where the cannabis is being cultivated shall be measured in a
straight line from the nearest point on the fence required by this chapter, or
if the cannabis is cultivated indoors, from the nearest exterior wall of the
building in which the cannabis is cultivated to the nearest boundary line of
the property on which the facility, building or structure or portion of the
facility, building or structure in which the above listed use occurs is
located. The distance in subsections B1b and B1c of this section between the
collective garden and any residential structure or mobile home shall be
measured from the fence required in this chapter to the nearest exterior wall
of the residential structure or mobile home.
   C.   Operating Standards:
      1.   Indoor Or Outdoor Operation: The following restrictions apply to the
operation of collective gardens, whether they are located indoors or outdoors:
         a.   Odor: The cultivation of cannabis shall not subject residents of
neighboring parcels who are of normal sensitivity to objectionable odors;
         b.   Lighting: All lights used for the cultivation of cannabis shall
be shielded and downcast or otherwise positioned in a manner that will not
shine light or allow light glare to exceed the boundaries of the parcel upon
which they are placed;
         c.   Noise: The cultivation of medical cannabis in a collective garden
shall not exceed the noise level standards as set forth in title 5, chapter 8
of this code;
         d.   Visibility: Cannabis shall not be grown or on display in any
location within the city where the cannabis plants are visible from the public
right of way or a public place;
         e.   Signage: There shall be no exterior signage relating to the
collective garden;
         f.   Gas Prohibited: The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) for
medical cannabis cultivation is prohibited;
         g.   Compliance With Codes: The collective garden shall be in
compliance with the applicable provisions of the currently adopted edition of
the Washington state building code; and
         h.   Nuisance: The collective garden shall not adversely affect the
health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise,
noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other adverse impacts, or be
hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or waste.
      2.   Outdoor Operation: In addition to the operation restrictions in
subsection C1 of this section, the following restrictions apply to collective
gardens located outdoors:
         a.   Lighting: The use of light assistance for the outdoor cultivation
of cannabis shall not exceed a maximum of six hundred (600) watts of lighting
capacity per one hundred (100) square feet of growing area; and
         b.   Fencing: All cannabis grown outside of any structure or building
must be fully enclosed by a secure fence at least six feet (6') in height. The
fence must include a lockable gate that is locked at all times when a qualified
patient is not in the immediate area. Said fence shall not violate any other
ordinance or code provision relating to height and location restrictions and
shall not be constructed or covered with plastic or cloth except shade cloth
may be used on the inside of the fence.
      3.   Indoor Operation: In addition to the operation restrictions in
subsection C1 of this section, the following restrictions shall apply to
collective gardens located indoors:
         a.   Limitation On Square Footage Devoted To Collective Garden: The
indoor collective garden shall be limited to no more than one hundred (100)
contiguous square feet per legal parcel;
         b.   Exterior Appearance: The indoor collective garden shall be
located in a structure within a fully enclosed and secure structure, as defined
in section
13-8-2 of this chapter (definition of "indoors");
         c.   Lighting: Interior structure lighting, exterior structure
lighting and driveway and/or parking area lighting shall be of sufficient foot-
candles and color rendition so as to allow the ready identification of any
individual committing a crime on site at a distance of no less than forty feet
(40') from the structure;
         d.   Security: Security measures at the collective garden shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
            (1)   Robbery and burglary alarm systems which are professionally
monitored and maintained in good working condition;
            (2)   Exterior lighting that illuminates all exterior entrances;
            (3)   Deadbolt locks on all exterior doors; and
            (4)   Windows and roof hatches secured with bars on the windows so
as to prevent unauthorized entry, and be equipped with latches that may be
released quickly from the inside to allow exit in the event of an emergency.
   D.   Delivery Only Among Members: No usable cannabis from the collective
gardens may be delivered to anyone other than one of the qualifying patients
participating in the collective garden. Collective garden employees/volunteers
or collective garden members may not sell any cannabis plants or usable
cannabis. Such activities may be prosecuted under the uniform controlled
substances act, chapter 69.50 Revised Code Of Washington.
   E.   No On Site Sales Of Paraphernalia: There shall be no on site display or
sale of paraphernalia used for the use or consumption of medical cannabis at
the collective garden.
   F.   Home Occupation: Collective gardens permitted as a home occupation are
subject to the following additional conditions:
      1.   No signs, logos, trademarks or other symbols are displayed
indicating the nature or location of the business or occupation;
      2.   No exterior structural alterations are made to accommodate the
occupation; and
      3.   No cannabis or cannabis products may be distributed, sold or
displayed on any exterior portion of the premises.
   G.   Nuisance: Nothing in this section (or this chapter) shall be construed
as a limitation on the city's authority to abate any violation which may exist
from the cultivation of cannabis plants from any location, indoor or outdoor,
including from within a fully enclosed and secure building. (Ord. 941, 7-24-
2013)
13-8-6: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge, control or possession of any parcel of land within
the city to cause or allow such parcel of land, or any portion thereof, to be
used for the indoor or outdoor cultivation of marijuana or cannabis plants for
medicinal purposes in violation of subsection
 13-8-4B1 through B9,
13-8-5A,
 13-8-5B1a through B1e,
13-8-5C1a through C1h,
13-8-5C2a and C2b,
13-8-5C3a through C3d,
13-8-5E, or
13-8-5F1 through F3 of this chapter.
   B.   The cultivation of more than the number of cannabis plants set forth in
this chapter on one legal parcel, either indoors or outdoors, within the city,
regardless of whether the persons growing the cannabis is/are a "qualified
patient", a designated provider, or a member of a "collective garden" as
defined herein, is a prohibited use and a violation of this chapter.
   C.   Any violations of this chapter may be enforced by a city code
enforcement officer(s) in the manner as set forth in title 15, chapter 11,
"Enforcement", and title 1, chapter 13, "Code Enforcement", of this code. Any
violations of the uniform controlled substances act, chapter 69.50 Revised Code
Of Washington, the medical cannabis act, chapter 69.51A Revised Code Of
Washington, or chapter 69.53 Revised Code Of Washington (use of buildings for
unlawful drugs), shall be subject to enforcement by the Orting chief of police,
all duly appointed city of Orting police officers, and all duly appointed law
enforcement officers with jurisdiction in the city. In addition, any violation
of subsection A or B of this section is deemed to be a public nuisance and may
be abated by the city under the procedures set forth in state law and/or this
code for the abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 941, 7-24-2013)
13-8-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsections
13-8-4B1 through B9 of this chapter (cultivations standards) shall constitute a
class 1 civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each violation, not including monetary assessments.
   B.   A violation of subsection
13-8-5A, "No Nonconforming Status", of this chapter shall constitute a class 1
civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each violation, not including monetary assessments.
   C.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsections
13-8-5B1a through B1d of this chapter (collective gardens prohibited) shall
constitute a class 1 civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, not including monetary
assessments. A violation of subsection
13-8-5B1e of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 civil infraction subject
to a maximum penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation, not
including monetary assessments.
   D.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsections
13-8-5C1a through C1c and C1e through C1h of this chapter (operating standards
- indoor or outdoor) shall constitute a class 1 civil infraction subject to a
maximum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, not
including monetary assessments. A violation of subsection
13-8-5C1d of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 civil infraction subject
to a maximum penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation, not
including monetary assessments.
   E.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsections
13-8-5C2a and C2b of this chapter (operating standards - outdoor operations)
shall constitute a class 1 civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, not including monetary
assessments.
   F.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsections
 13-8-5C3a through C3d of this chapter (operating standards - indoor
operations) shall constitute a class 1 civil infraction subject to a maximum
penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, not
including monetary assessments.
   G.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsection
13-8-5E, "No On Site Sales Of Paraphernalia", of this chapter shall constitute
a class 1 civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each violation, not including monetary assessments.
   H.   A violation of any of the provisions of subsections
13-8-5F1 through F3 of this chapter (home occupation) shall constitute a class
1 civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each violation, not including monetary assessments.
   I.   It shall be unlawful to wilfully fail to comply with any provision of
subsection
13-8-4B1 through B9,
13-8-5A,
13-8-5B1a through B1e,
13-8-5C1a through C1h,
13-8-5C2a and C2b,
13-8-5C3a through C3d,
 13-8-5E, or
13-8-5F1 through F3 of this chapter, or to wilfully fail to comply with a civil
regulatory order issued pursuant to this chapter. Such wilful failure shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a maximum penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or ninety (90) days in jail or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 941, 7-24-2013)
CHAPTER 9
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES
SECTION:
13-9-1: Purpose
13-9-2: Applicability
13-9-3: Exemptions
13-9-4: Prohibitions
13-9-5: General Macro Facility Siting Criteria And Design Considerations
13-9-6: Permits And Shot Clocks
13-9-7: Application Requirements
13-9-8: Eligible Facilities Requests
13-9-9: New Building-Mounted Macro Wireless Communications Services Facilities
Standards
13-9-10: New Structure-Mounted Macro Wireless Communications Services
Facilities Standards
13-9-11: New Monopole Macro Wireless Communications Services Facilities
Standards
13-9-12: Temporary Facilities
13-9-13: Small Wireless Communications Services Facilities Standards (Small
Cell)
13-9-14: Abandonment Or Discontinuation Of Use
13-9-15: Maintenance
13-9-16: Definitions
13-9-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction,
modification and appearance of wireless communications services facilities, in
order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while not
unreasonably interfering with the deployment of competitive wireless
communications services facilities throughout the City. The purpose of this
chapter may be achieved through adherence to the following objectives:
      1.   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts that wireless communications services facilities might create,
including but not limited to negative impacts on aesthetics, environmentally
sensitive areas, historically significant locations, and health and safety of
persons and property;
      2.   Establishment of clear and nondiscriminatory local regulations
concerning wireless communications services facilities and services that are
consistent with federal and state laws and regulations;
      3.   Encourage providers of wireless communications services facilities
to locate facilities, to the extent feasible, in areas where the adverse impact
on the public health, safety and welfare is minimal;
      4.   For macro facilities, encourage the location of those facilities in
nonresidential areas and allow macro facilities in residential areas only when
necessary to meet functional requirements of the communications industry as
defined by the Federal Communications Commission;
      5.   Minimize the total number of macro facilities in residential areas;
      6.   Encourage and, where legally permissible, require cooperation
between competitors and, as a primary option, joint use of new and existing
towers, tower sites and suitable structures to the greatest extent possible,
where doing so would significantly reduce or eliminate additional negative
impact on the City;
      7.   Ensure wireless communications services facilities are configured in
a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the facilities, as viewed
from different vantage points, through careful design, landscape screening,
minimal impact siting options and camouflaging techniques, dispersion of
unscreened features to lessen the visual impact upon any one location, and
through assessment of current location options, siting, future available
locations, and innovative siting techniques;
      8.   Enable wireless communication companies to enter into lease
agreements with the City to use city property for the placement of wireless
facilities, where consistent with other public needs, as a means to generate
revenue for the City;
      9.   Balance the City's intent to minimize the adverse impacts of
wireless communications services facilities with the ability of the providers
of communications services to deploy such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently;
      10.   Provide for the prompt removal of wireless communications services
facilities that are abandoned or no longer inspected for safety concerns and
building code compliance, and provide a mechanism for the City to cause these
abandoned wireless communications services facilities to be removed as
necessary to protect the citizens from imminent harm and danger;
      11.   Avoid potential damage to people and adjacent properties from tower
failure and falling equipment, through strict compliance with state building
and electrical codes; and
      12.   Disperse the adverse impacts of small cell facilities as evenly as
possible throughout the community, especially when joint use does not minimize
additional visual impact.
   B.   In furtherance of these objectives, the City shall give due
consideration to the zoning code, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas when approving sites for the location of wireless
communications services facilities.
   C.   These objectives were developed to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, to protect property values, and to minimize and disperse visual
impact, while furthering the development of enhanced communications services in
the City. These objectives were designed to comply with the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and its implementing regulations. The provisions of this chapter
are not intended to, and any ambiguities herein shall not be interpreted in
such a manner that would materially inhibit the deployment of wireless
communications services facilities. This chapter shall not be applied in such a
manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally
equivalent wireless facilities.
   D.   To the extent that any provision of this chapter conflicts with any
other city ordinance, this chapter shall control. Otherwise, this chapter shall
be construed consistently with the other provisions and regulations of the
City.
   E.   In reviewing any application to place, construct or modify wireless
communications services facilities, the City shall act within federally
required time periods. Any decision to deny an application shall be in writing,
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The City shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with
this title, this chapter, the adopted Orting comprehensive plan, and other
applicable ordinances and regulations.
   F.   Alternative Methods of Compliance: The City Administrator or designee
in consultation with other City staff, as applicable, may accept alternative
methods of complying with the development regulations of this chapter, provided
it can be demonstrated that the alternative method is at least equivalent to
such standards in terms of implementing the general purpose of this chapter.
The City Administrator or designee shall not accept alternative methods of
compliance that are inconsistent with the City Comprehensive Plan or with
conditions of approval imposed through a land use action. Decisions on
alternative methods of compliance need to be documented in the project file and
can be appealable in the same manner as an administrative interpretation. The
City Administrator or designee shall periodically forward decisions on
alternative methods of compliance to the Planning Commission for its
information.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Except as provided herein, all wireless communications services
facilities shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   The standards and process requirements of this chapter supersede all other
review process, setback, height or landscaping requirements of the Orting
Municipal Code.
   B.   Environmental: All proposed installations are subject to a threshold
determination under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) according to
Chapter 15-14 OMC unless categorically exempt pursuant to WAC 197-11-800. All
proposals are subject to the critical area requirements and the shoreline
master program (Title 11 of this code.)
   C.   Master Permit Agreement Needed:
      1.   Consistent with RCW chapter 35.99 and Chapter 8-8 of this code, any
person, corporation or entity that proposes to locate any portion of a wireless
communications services facilities within the City right-of-way must have a
valid fully executed master permit with the City before submitting applications
for right-of-way construction permits.
      2.   Wireless providers interested in obtaining a master permit must
apply according to the procedures of Chapter 8-8 of this code as well as
supplying the following, in order to have a complete application:
         a.   Submit three valid fully executed master permits that the
provider has with other cities in Washington state, PROVIDED THAT, this
requirement shall be excused to the extent that the provider does not have
sufficient valid master permits in other jurisdictions to meet that
requirement;
   D.   Right-of-Way Construction Permit: A right-of-way construction permit is
required prior to performing any work within the City right-of-way pursuant to
Title 8 of this code.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exemptions from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Routine maintenance or repair of wireless communication facilities.
   B.   Radar systems for military and civilian communication and navigation.
   C.   Handheld, mobile, marine and portable radio transmitters and/or
receivers.
   D.   Satellite antennas, including direct to home satellite services.
   E.   Licensed amateur (ham) radio stations and citizen band stations.
   F.   Earth station antenna(s) one meter or less in diameter and located in
any zone.
   G.   Earth station antenna(s) two (2) meters or less in diameter and located
in the business and commercial zones.
   H.   A temporary wireless communications facility or COW installed for
providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event,
subject to approval by the City. The wireless facility shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter for up to two (2) weeks before and after the
duration of the special event.
   I.   A temporary wireless communication facility or COW installed for a
period of up to one hundred eighty (180) days, subject to renewals at the
City's discretion, to provide service during repair, replacement, or relocation
of an existing facility or construction of a new facility.
   J.   Subject to compliance with all other applicable standards of this
chapter, in the event of an emergency, the emergency provisions of Chapter 8-
8 of this code shall be followed.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-4: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   The following wireless communications services facilities are
prohibited in Orting:
      1.   Guyed towers.
      2.   Lattice towers.
   B.   Monopoles are prohibited in the following locations:
      1.   All residential zones;
      2.   MUTC Mixed Use-Town Center Zone;
      3.   OS Open Space and Recreation Zone;
      4.   Within the City rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-5: GENERAL MACRO FACILITY SITING CRITERIA AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   The City of Orting encourages wireless communication providers to use
existing sites or more frequent, less noticeable sites instead of attempting to
provide coverage through use of taller towers. To that end, applicants shall
consider the following priority of preferred locations for wireless
communications services facilities:
      1.   Co-location, without an increase in the height of the building, pole
or structure upon which the facility would be located;
      2.   Co-location, where additional height is necessary above existing
building, pole, or structure;
      3.   A replacement pole or structure for an existing one;
      4.   A new pole or structure altogether.
   B.   Co-location shall be encouraged for all wireless communications
services facilities applications and is implemented through less complex permit
procedures.
      1.   To the greatest extent technically feasible, applicants for new
monopole facilities shall be required to build mounts capable of accommodating
at least one other carrier.
      2.   New macro wireless communications services facilities that are not
co-located will require a conditional use permit (C) under the provisions of
section
13-6-2 of this code and shall be processed in accordance with Title 15 of this
code for a Type III permit. Separation requirements will be a condition of
approval.
   C.   Noise: Any facility that requires a generator or other device which
will create noise audible beyond the boundaries of the site must demonstrate
compliance with Chapter 5-8 of this code, Noise Control. A noise report,
prepared by an acoustical engineer, shall be submitted with any application to
construct and operate a wireless communications services facility that will
have a generator or similar device.
      The City may require that the report be reviewed by a third-party expert
at the expense of the applicant.
   D.   Business License Requirement: Any person, corporation or entity that
operates a wireless communications services facility within the City shall have
a valid business license issued annually by the City. Any person, corporation
or other business entity which owns a monopole also is required to obtain a
business license on an annual basis.
   E.   Signage: Only safety signs or those mandated by a government entity
with jurisdiction may be located on wireless communications services
facilities. No other types of signs are permitted on wireless communications
services facilities.
   F.   Any application must demonstrate that there is sufficient space for
temporary parking for regular maintenance of the proposed facility.
   G.   Finish: A monopole may be constructed of laminated wood, fiberglass,
steel, or similar material. The pole shall be a neutral color so as to reduce
its visual obtrusiveness, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or
FCC.
   H.   Design: The design of all buildings and ancillary structures shall use
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the
facilities with the natural setting and built environment. All macro towers
must be approved by the Architectural Design Board.
   I.   Color: All antennas and ancillary facilities located on buildings or
structures other than monopoles shall be of a neutral color that is identical
to or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and ancillary facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible.
   J.   Lighting: Monopoles shall not be artificially lighted unless required
by the FAA, FCC or other government entity with jurisdiction. If lighting is
required and alternative lighting options are permitted, the City shall review
the lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding area. No strobe lighting of any type is
permitted on any monopole, unless required by the FAA.
   K.   Advertising: No advertising is permitted at wireless communications
services facilities sites or on any ancillary structure or facilities equipment
enclosure.
   L.   Equipment Enclosure: Each applicant shall use the smallest equipment
enclosure practical to contain the required equipment and a reserve for
required co-location.
   M.   Radio Frequency Emissions Compliance: The applicant shall demonstrate
that the project will not result in levels of radio frequency emissions that
exceed FCC standards, including FCC Office of Engineering Technology (OET)
Bulletin 65, Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to
Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, as amended.
   N.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   The visual impacts of wireless communications services facilities
should be mitigated and softened through landscaping or other screening
materials at the base of a monopole, facility equipment compound, equipment
enclosures and ancillary structures. If the antenna is mounted flush on an
existing building or camouflaged as part of the building and other equipment is
housed inside an existing structure, no landscaping is required. The City may
reduce or waive the standards for those sides of the wireless communications
services facilities that are not in public view, when a combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features achieve the
same degree of screening as the required landscaping; in locations where the
visual impact of the facility would be minimal; and in those locations where
large wooded lots not capable of subdivision and natural growth around the
property perimeter provide a sufficient buffer.
      2.   Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Existing
vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used
as a substitute for or as a supplement to landscaping or screening
requirements. The following requirements apply:
         a.   A solid screen of evergreen trees or shrubs shall be placed
around the perimeter of the equipment cabinet enclosure, except that a maximum
ten-foot (10’) portion of the fence may remain without landscaping in order to
provide access to the enclosure.
         b.   Landscaping area shall be a minimum of five feet (5’) in width
around the perimeter of the enclosure.
         c.   Vegetation selected should be native and drought tolerant.
         d.   Landscaping shall be located so as not to create sight distance
hazards or conflicts with other surrounding utilities.
      3.   When landscaping is used, the applicant shall submit a performance
assurance pursuant to section
13-5-2 (H) of this code.
      4.   The use of chain link, plastic, or wire fencing is prohibited.
Ornamental metal, stone, wood, or vinyl fencing materials are preferred.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-6: PERMITS AND SHOT CLOCKS:
   A.   No person may place, construct, reconstruct, modify or operate a
wireless communications services facility, subject to this chapter, without
first having in place a master permit agreement for right-of-way locations with
a subsequent right-of-way permit and/or a building permit, as applicable,
issued in accordance with this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein,
the requirements of this chapter are in addition to the applicable requirements
of this title and Title 8 (Public Ways and Property) and Title 11 (Critical
Areas and Shoreline Management) of this code.
   B.   Applications will be reviewed based on the type of wireless
communications services facilities requested to be permitted. Each wireless
communications services facility requires the appropriate type of project
permit review, as shown in Table A. In the event of uncertainty on the type of
a wireless facility, the City Administrator or designee shall have the
authority to determine what permits are required for the proposed facility.
TABLE A
 
                                Building Permit Right-Of-Way    FCC Shot Clocks
Request         Location        Required        (ROW)           For Permit
                                                Permit Required Review
Eligible                        Yes, if any     Yes, if any
facilities      Existing tower  elements on     elements in the 60 days
request         or base station private         ROW
                                property
                                Yes, if any     Yes, if any
New macro       Co-location     elements on     elements in the 90 days
facility                        private         ROW
                                property
                New structure
                or monopole
                (see section
                13-9-4 of this  Yes, if any
New macro       chapter,        elements on     Yes, if any
facility        prohibited      private         elements in the 150 days
                locations, and  property        ROW
                subsection
                13-9-5B2 of
                this chapter
                for C permit)
Small wireless                  Yes, if any     Yes, if any
facility (small Co-location     elements on     elements in the 60 days
cell node)                      private         ROW
                                property
Small wireless  New structure   Yes, if any     Yes, if any
facility (small or freestanding elements on     elements in the 90 days
cell node)      small cell pole private         ROW
                                property
Temporary                       Yes, if         Yes, if any     Standard permit
facility        Varies          applicable      elements in the quotes
                                                ROW
 
   C.   Timelines:
      1.   Macro Cell: The application review period begins when all required
application materials have been received and fees paid. If the City determines
that the application is incomplete and provides notice to the applicant within
thirty (30) calendar days of the date of application, the clock stops. The
clock restarts when the City receives the applicant's supplemental submission
in response to the City's notice of incompleteness. For subsequent
determinations of incompleteness, the clock tolls (pauses) if the City provides
written notice within ten (10) days that a supplemental submission did not
provide the requested information. For new structures or monopoles, see section
13-9-5 (B)(2) above for C Permit requirement.
      2.   Small Wireless Facility (Small Cell Node): The application review
period begins when all required application materials have been received and
fees paid. If the City determines that the application is incomplete and
provides notice to the applicant within ten (10) calendar days of the date of
application, the clock stops. The clock resets to zero (0) when the City
receives the applicant's supplemental submission in response to the City's
notice of incompleteness. For subsequent determinations of incompleteness, the
clock tolls (pauses) if the City provides written notice within ten (10) days
that a supplemental submission did not provide the requested information.
   D.   Batched Small Wireless Facility (Small Cell Node) applications: If an
applicant is applying for a small wireless network in a contiguous service
area, multiple identical small wireless facilities may be batched into one
application. The City may approve, deny or conditionally approve all or any
portion of the small wireless facilities proposed in the application. The
denial of one or more small wireless facility locations within one submission
shall not be the sole basis for a denial of other locations or the entire
batched application for small wireless facilities. Should an applicant file a
single application for a batch that includes both collocated and new structures
for small wireless facilities, the longer 90-day shot clock shall apply to
ensure the City has adequate time to review the new construction sites.
   E.   Any application submitted pursuant to this chapter for projects located
on public or private property shall be reviewed and evaluated by the City as
described in this chapter. The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall
review all proposed wireless communications services facilities that are
located partially or fully within the City rights-of-way. All applications will
be reviewed and evaluated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   All applications for wireless communications services facilities shall
be reviewed for compliance with the applicable design standards. Permits for
all macro towers must be approved by the Architectural Design Board.
   G.   The applicant is responsible for obtaining all other permits and
approvals from any other appropriate governing body or agency with jurisdiction
(i.e., Washington State Department of Labor and Industries, Federal Aviation
Administration, Puget Sound Energy, etc.).
   H.   No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to allow the
installation of a wireless communications services facilities which minimizes
parking, landscaping, or other site development standards established by this
code.
   I.   Wireless communications services facilities that are governed under
this chapter shall not be eligible for variances under section
13-6-3 of this code. Any request to deviate from this chapter shall be based
solely on the exceptions set forth in this chapter, including alternative
methods of compliance under section
13-9-1 (F) of this code.
   J.   Third-Party Review: Applicants may use various methodologies and
analyses, including geographically based computer software, to determine the
specific technical parameters of the services to be provided utilizing the
proposed wireless communications services facilities, such as expected coverage
area, antenna configuration, capacity, and topographic constraints that affect
signal paths. In certain instances, a third-party expert may be needed to
review the engineering and technical data submitted by an applicant for a
permit. The City may at its discretion require third-party engineering and
technical review as part of a permitting process. The costs of the technical
third-party review shall be borne by the applicant.
      1.   The selection of the third-party expert is at the discretion of the
City. The third-party expert review is intended to address interference and
public safety issues and be a site- specific review of engineering and
technical aspects of the proposed wireless communications services facilities
and/or a review of the applicants' methodology and equipment used, and is not
intended to be a subjective review of the site which was selected by an
applicant. Based on the results of the expert review, the City may require
changes to the proposal. The third-party review shall address the following:
         a.   The accuracy and completeness of submissions;
         b.   The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;
         c.   The validity of conclusions reached;
         d.   The viability of other site or sites in the City for the use
intended by the applicant; and
         e.   Any specific engineering or technical issues designated by the
City.
   K.   Notwithstanding other remedies that may be available under federal law,
failure of the City to issue permits within or otherwise comply with the FCC
shot clock requirements does not provide a "deemed" grant of approval for macro
or small wireless facilities, as it does for an eligible facilities request. No
work may occur until the permit issues.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-7: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following information must be submitted as part of a complete application
for a wireless communications services facility permit in the City of Orting:
   A.   Project description including a design narrative and co-location
analysis indicating the alternative locations considered;
   B.   Site information on scaled plans, including:
      1.   Site plan;
      2.   Elevation drawings;
      3.   Utility plan showing existing utilities, proposed facility location,
and undergrounding;
      4.   Screening, camouflaging, or landscaping plan and cost estimate, as
appropriate;
   C.   Photos and photo simulations showing the existing appearance of the
site and appearance of the proposed installation from nearby public viewpoints;
   D.   Noise report, if applicable;
   E.   Radio Frequency (RF) emissions standards. The applicant shall provide
the certification of an RF engineer with knowledge of the proposed development
that the wireless communications services facilities will comply with RF
standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The City
recognizes that the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 gives the FCC sole
jurisdiction in the field of regulation of RF emissions and wireless facilities
that meet FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF
impacts.
   F.   Application for architectural design review.
   G.   Any other documentation deemed necessary by the City in order to issue
a decision.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-8: ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS:
This section implements section 6409 of the Spectrum Act (codified at 47 U.S.C.
1455), which requires the City of Orting to approve any eligible facilities
request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station.
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions only apply to eligible
facilities requests as described in this section and do not apply throughout
this chapter.
      1.   BASE STATION: Is a structure or equipment at a fixed location that
enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as
defined herein nor any equipment associated with a tower. Base station
includes, without limitation:
         a.   Equipment associated with wireless communications services as
well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as
microwave backhaul.
         b.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and back-up power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems ("DAS") and
small cell networks).
         c.   Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant
application is filed (with jurisdiction) under this section, supports or houses
equipment described in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section that has
been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or
under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure
was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.
      The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the City under this section, does not support or
house equipment described in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section.
      2.   COLLOCATION: The mounting or installation of transmission equipment
on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes.
      3.   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST: Any request for modification of an
existing tower or base station that does not substantially increase the
physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
         a.   Collocation of new transmission equipment;
         b.   Removal of transmission equipment; or
         c.   Replacement of transmission equipment.
      4.   ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any tower or base station as defined in
this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant
application is filed with the City.
      5.   EXISTING: A constructed tower or base station is existing if it has
been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or
under another State or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower
that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when
it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this
definition.
      6.   SITE: For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the
current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and
any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other
eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to
the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the
ground.
      7.   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE: A modification substantially changes the
physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the
following criteria:
         a.   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent (10%) or by the
height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for
other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by
more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10’), whichever is greater.
            (1)   Changes in height should be measured from the original
support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated
horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes
in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station,
inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were
approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act;
         b.   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude
from the edge of the tower more than ten feet (10’), or more than the width of
the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for
other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the
body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by
more than six feet (6’);
         c.   For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of
more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology
involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or, for towers in the public
streets and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment
cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated
with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are
more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other
ground cabinets associated with the structure;
         d.   It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
         e.   It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure; or
         f.   It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting
approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure
or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not
apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not
exceed the thresholds identified above.
   B.   Qualification As An Eligible Facilities Request: Upon receipt of an
application for an eligible facilities request, the City will review the
application to determine whether it qualifies as an eligible facilities
request.
   C.   Time Frame For Review: Within sixty (60) days of the date on which a
network provider submits an eligible facilities request application, the City
must approve the application unless it determines that the application is not
covered by this section.
   D.   Tolling Of The Time Frame For Review: The sixty (60) day review period
begins to run when the application is submitted, and may be tolled only by
mutual agreement by the City and the applicant or in cases where the City
determines that the application is incomplete. The time frame for review of an
eligible facilities request is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of
applications.
      1.   To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the City must provide
written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or
information required in the application.
      2.   The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant
makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness.
      3.   Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the
applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide
the information identified in the original notice delineating missing
information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this subsection. Second or
subsequent notice of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
   E.   Determination That Application Is Not An Eligible Facilities Request:
If the City determines that the applicant's request does not qualify as an
eligible facilities request, the City must deny the application.
   F.   Failure To Act: In the event the City fails to approve or deny a
request for an eligible facilities request within the time frame for review
(accounting for any tolling), the request is deemed granted. The deemed grant
does not become effective until the applicant notifies the City in writing
after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the
application has been deemed granted.
   G.   To the extent feasible, additional antennas and equipment shall
maintain the appearance intended by the original facility, including, but not
limited to, color, screening, landscaping, camouflage, concealment techniques,
mounting configuration, or architectural treatment.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-9: NEW BUILDING-MOUNTED MACRO WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES
STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally: Wireless communications services facilities located on the
roof or on the side of the building shall be grouped together, integrated to
the maximum possible degree with the building design, placed toward the center
of the roof and/or thoroughly screened from residential building views and from
public views using radio frequency-transparent panels. Building-mounted
wireless communications services facilities shall be painted with nonreflective
colors to match the existing surface where the antennas are mounted.
   B.   Height: The following requirements shall apply:
      1.   Mixed-Use Town Center And Mixed-Use Town Center North Zones: For
buildings at, or which exceed, the height limit of the underlying zone,
antennas shall be flush-mounted, and no portion of the antenna may extend above
the building on which it is mounted. For buildings below the height limit,
antennas may be built to the maximum height of the zone provided they are
screened consistent with the existing building in terms of color, architectural
style and material. Flush-mounted antennas may encroach into a required setback
or into the City right-of-way if a right-of-way use agreement is established
with the City. Antennas shall not project into the right-of-way by more than
two feet (2’) and shall provide a minimum clearance height of 20 feet (20’)
over any pedestrian or vehicular right-of-way.
      2.   Outside The Mixed-Use Town Center And Mixed-Use Town Center North
Zones: The maximum height of building- mounted facilities and equipment shall
not exceed ten feet (10’) above the top of the roof on which the facility is
located. This standard applies to all buildings regardless of whether they are
at or above the maximum height of the underlying zone. Such antennas must be
well integrated with the existing structure or designed to look like common
rooftop structures such as chimneys, vents and stovepipes.
   C.   Equipment Enclosure: Equipment enclosures for building-mounted wireless
communications services facilities shall first be located within the building
on which the facility is located. If an equipment enclosure within the building
is reasonably unavailable, then an equipment enclosure may be incorporated into
the roof design provided the enclosure meets the height requirement for the
zone. If the equipment can be screened by placing the equipment below existing
parapet walls, no additional screening is required. If screening is required,
then the screening must be consistent with the existing building in terms of
color, architectural style and material. Finally, if there is no other choice
but to locate the equipment enclosure on the ground, the equipment must be
enclosed within an accessory structure which meets the setbacks of the
underlying zone and be screened in accordance this chapter.
   D.   Feed Lines And Coaxial Cables: Feed lines and cables should be located
below the parapet of the rooftop, if present. If the feed lines and cables are
visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, they must be painted
to match the color scheme of the building.
ACCEPTABLE BUILDING-MOUNTED MACRO EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2292.png]
UNACCEPTABLE BUILDING-MOUNTED MACRO EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2294.png]
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-10: NEW STRUCTURE-MOUNTED MACRO WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
FACILITIES STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally: Wireless communications services facilities located on
structures other than buildings, such as utility poles, light poles, flag
poles, transformers, and/or tanks, shall be designed to blend with these
structures and be mounted on them in an inconspicuous manner. Installation of
wireless communications services facilities on utility poles, light poles,
transformers, etc. shall comply with the requirements of Puget Sound Energy, as
applicable.
      1.   Wireless communications services facilities located on structures
within city rights-of- way adjacent to any residential zone shall satisfy the
following requirement:
         a.   No metal pole or tower shall be used within the right-of-way
adjacent to a residentially zoned neighborhood unless required in order to
comply with the provisions of the State Electrical Code. Wooden poles of height
and type generally in use in the surrounding residential neighborhood shall be
used unless prohibited by the State Electrical Code.
      2.   Wireless communications services facilities located on structures
shall be painted with nonreflective colors in a scheme that blends with the
underlying structure.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The maximum height of structure-mounted wireless communications
services facilities shall not exceed the maximum height specified for each
structure or zoning district; provided the wireless communications services
facilities may extend up to six feet above the top of the structure on which
the wireless communications services facilities is installed. Antennas and
related equipment shall be mounted as close as practicable to the structure.
      2.   Only one extension is permitted per structure.
      3.   If installed on an electrical transmission or distribution pole, a
maximum 15-foot vertical separation is required from the height of the existing
power lines at the site (prior to any pole replacement) to the bottom of the
antenna. This vertical separation is intended to allow wireless carriers to
comply with the electrical utility's requirements for separation between their
transmission lines and the carrier's antennas.
   C.   Equipment Enclosure: If the equipment enclosure is within the right-of-
way, the enclosure shall be underground. It is preferred that equipment
enclosures on private property be underground; however, if there is no other
feasible option but to locate the equipment enclosure above ground on private
property, the equipment must be enclosed within an accessory structure which
meets the setbacks of the underlying zone and be screened in accordance this
chapter.
   D.   Feed Lines And Coaxial Cable: Feed lines and cables must be painted to
closely match the color scheme of the structure which supports the antennas.
   E.   Only wireless communication providers with a valid master permit shall
be eligible to apply for a right-of-way construction permit, which shall be
required prior to installation of facilities within the City right-of-way and
be in addition to other permits specified in this chapter.
ACCEPTABLE STRUCTURE-MOUNTED MACRO EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2296.png]
 
UNACCEPTABLE STRUCTURE-MOUNTED MACRO EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2298.png]
 
(Ord. 2019-1 049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-11: NEW MONOPOLE (MACRO WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES)
STANDARDS:
   A.   To the greatest extent technically feasible, applicants for new
monopole facilities must build mounts capable of accommodating at least one
additional carrier.
   B.   No part of a monopole, antennas or antenna equipment may exceed the
maximum height of the zone where the facility is located.
   C.   Monopoles must be completely shrouded. All antennas, equipment and
cables must be concealed.
   D.   All monopole facilities must conform to the following site development
standards:
      1.   To the greatest extent possible, monopole facilities shall be
located where existing trees, existing structures and other existing site
features camouflage these facilities and/or stealth technology is utilized.
Stealth technology will be reviewed by the Architectural Design Board for
compliance with Architectural Design Review (ADR) Guidelines.
      2.   Existing mature vegetation should be retained to the greatest
possible degree in order to help conceal the facility.
      3.   It is preferred that equipment enclosures on private property be
underground; however, if there is no other feasible option but to locate the
equipment enclosure above ground on private property, the equipment must be
enclosed within an accessory structure which meets the setbacks of the
underlying zone and be screened in accordance with this chapter. See section
13-9-4 of this code for monopole prohibited locations.
ACCEPTABLE MONOPOLE MACRO EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.png]
UNACCEPTABLE MONOPOLE MACRO EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.png]
 
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-12: TEMPORARY FACILITIES:
   A.   The installation of a "cell-on-wheels" or COWs and the installation
site shall comply with all applicable laws, statutes, requirements, rules,
regulations, and codes, including, but not limited to, the adopted Building,
Fire, and Electrical Codes.
   B.   All COWs and related appurtenances sited for emergencies, shall be
completely removed from the installation site within 30 days of the date of the
end of the emergency as determined by the City Administrator or designee.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-13: SMALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES STANDARDS (SMALL
CELL):
Unlike macro facilities which are intended to provide wireless coverage over
large areas, the goal of a small wireless deployment is to provide additional
capacity in localized areas, including residential neighborhoods, using smaller
antennas and equipment. The intent of this section is to describe the City's
location options for small cell deployments and provide appropriate design
standards to ensure that the negative visual impacts of wireless facilities are
minimized, and the City's long-term goal of utility undergrounding is not
frustrated.
   A.   Permitted Locations:
      1.   Small cell attachments to buildings are permitted in any zone and
are not subject to the dispersion requirement below.
      2.   Dispersion Requirement: No two small wireless facilities shall be
located within 300 lineal feet of each other as measured along the right-of-way
line.
      3.   Installations in the Mixed-Use Town Center and Mixed-Use Town Center
North zones shall be limited to building attachments or through the replacement
or new installation of a street light designed to contain a small wireless
facility that complies with the adopted architectural design review guidelines.
   B.   Location Options: Wireless providers shall attempt to site their small
wireless communications services facilities pursuant to the following siting
preferences (in descending order starting with the most preferred):
      1.   Outside The Right-of-Way / Private Property:
         a.   Roof-mounted on an existing building.
            (1)   Small cell facilities may be built to the maximum height of
the underlying zone provided they are screened consistent with the existing
building in terms of color, architectural style and materials.
            (2)   Such facilities must be concealed and well-integrated with
the existing structure or designed and located to look like common rooftop
elements such as chimneys, elevator penthouses or screened HVAC equipment.
            (3)   Height Exception: Antennas may be located on buildings that
are nonconforming for height provided that, they are constructed to be no
taller than the adjacent façade or an existing parapet. Equipment may be
located on a roof behind a parapet that is nonconforming for height.
         b.   Façade-mounted on an existing building.
            (1)   Small cell antennas may be mounted to the side of a building
if they do not interrupt and are integrated with the building's architectural
theme.
            (2)   To the extent technically feasible, new architectural
features such as columns, pilasters, corbels, or similar ornamentation that
conceals the antennas should be used if it complements the architecture of the
existing building.
            (3)   If concealment is not feasible, the antennas must be
camouflaged. The smallest feasible mounting brackets must be used, and the
antennas must be painted and textured to match the adjacent building surfaces,
to the extent technically feasible.
            (4)    Facade-mounted antennas may encroach into a required
setback. Antennas may not project into the right-of-way more than twelve inches
(12”) and shall provide a minimum clearance height of twenty feet (20’) over
any pedestrian or vehicular right-of-way.
            (5)   To the extent technically feasible, all other equipment must
be located within the building, screened by an existing parapet, or completely
concealed and well-integrated with the existing structure or designed and
located to look like common rooftop elements such as chimneys, elevator
penthouses or screened HVAC equipment. Exposed cabling/wiring is prohibited.
            (6)   Height Exception: Antennas may be located on buildings that
are nonconforming for height provided that, they are constructed to be no
taller than the adjacent façade or an existing parapet. Equipment may be
located on a roof behind a parapet that is nonconforming for height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2304.png]
 
         c.   Freestanding Small Cell on Private Property:
            (1)   Dimensional Requirements:
               (A)   A freestanding small cell may not exceed fifty feet (50’)
in height measured from the top of the foundation to the top of the cantenna/
antenna.
               (B)   The cantenna/antenna must have a maximum outer diameter of
16 inches, to the extent technically feasible, and be tapered to transition
from the upper pole.
            (2)   Appearance Requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2306.png]
 
               (A)   All small cell carrier equipment must be housed internal
to the equipment cabinet or hidden within the cantenna/antenna. The cantenna/
antenna, upper pole and equipment cabinet must be the same color, unless
otherwise approved by the City.
               (B)   All hardware connections shall be hidden from view.
               (C)   To the extent technically feasible, no equipment may be
attached to the outside of the pole.
               (D)   The freestanding small cell pole must be served by
underground power and fiber, if fiber is to be connected.
               (E)   May provide space for future collocation by another
provider inside the same freestanding small cell pole facilities.
            (3)   Placement requirements. Freestanding small cells shall be
located as follows, to the extent technically feasible:
               (A)   Located such that they in no way impede, obstruct, or
hinder the usual pedestrian or vehicular travel, or violate applicable law.
               (B)   Outside the Residential Zones, Mixed-Use Town Center, and
Mixed-Use Town Center North zones.
               (C)   Not to be located along the frontage of a Historic
building, deemed historic on a federal, state, or local level.
               (D)   Not to significantly create a new obstruction to property
sight lines.
               (E)   In alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
streetlights.
               (F)   With appropriate safety clearance from existing utilities.
               (G)   On the same side of the street as existing power lines,
regardless of whether power is underground or overhead;
               (H)   No two (2) freestanding small cell poles may be located
within 300 lineal feet of each other as measured along the right-of-way line.
      2.   Within The Right-Of-Way - Existing/Replaced Hollow Street Light Pole
Or Utility Pole:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2308.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2310.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2312.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2314.png]
 
         a.   Installation of small wireless communications services facilities
on street lights and utility poles shall comply with the requirements of Puget
Sound Energy, as applicable.
         b.   Combination small cell and streetlight pole should be located
where an existing streetlight pole can be utilized or removed and replaced with
a pole that allows for small wireless facility installation in the same
location.
         c.   Pole design shall match or be compatible with the aesthetics of
existing streetlights installed adjacent to the pole. In the Mixed-Use Town
Center and Mixed-Use Town Center North zones, poles designed to contain a small
wireless facility shall comply with the adopted architectural design review
guidelines.
         d.   A decorative transition shall be installed over the equipment
cabinet upper bolts, or a decorative base cover shall be installed to match the
equipment cabinet size.
         e.   An internal divider shall separate electrical wiring and fiber,
per the pole owner.
         f.   Weatherproof grommets shall be integrated in the pole design to
allow cable to exit the pole, for external shrouds, without water seeping into
the pole.
         g.   For installations on existing street lights, the antenna shall
either be fully concealed within the pole or placed on top of the pole. A
cantenna/antenna on top of a pole shall be integrated into the pole design so
that it appears as a continuation of the original pole, including colored or
painted to match or be compatible with the pole. All cabling and mounting
hardware/brackets from the bottom of the antenna to the top of the pole shall
be fully concealed and integrated with the pole, to the extent technically
feasible.
         h.   Street light pole shall be located as follows, to the extent
technically feasible:
            (1)   In a manner that does not impede, obstruct, or hinder
pedestrian or vehicular travel.
               (A)   In alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
streetlights.
               (B)   Within the street amenity zone wherever possible.
               (C)   Equal distance between trees when possible, with a minimum
of fifteen-foot (15') separation such that no proposed disturbance shall occur
within the critical root zone of any tree.
               (D)   With appropriate clearance from existing utilities.
               (E)   Outside the clear sight triangle, as determined by the
City, at intersection corners.
               (F)   Ten feet (10') away from the intersection of an alley with
a street.
            (2)   All conduit, cables, wires and fiber must be routed
internally in the light pole.
      3.   Within The Right-Of-Way - Existing Single-Phase Power Pole
(Installation On Top Of Pole):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2316.png]
         a.   Installation of small wireless communications services facilities
on existing single-phase power poles shall comply with the requirements of
Puget Sound Energy.
         b.   A cantenna/antenna on top of a pole shall be integrated into the
pole design so that it appears as a continuation of the original pole,
including colored or painted to match or be compatible with the pole. All
cabling and mounting hardware/brackets from the bottom of the antenna to the
top of the pole shall be fully concealed and integrated with the pole, to the
extent technically feasible.
         c.   Equipment enclosures and all ancillary equipment and boxes shall
be colored or painted to match the color of the surface of the pole in which
they are attached. All related equipment shall not be mounted more than five
inches (5") from the surface of the pole, unless a further distance is
technically required, and is confirmed in writing by the pole owner.
         d.   All cables and wires shall be routed through conduit along the
outside of the pole. The outside conduit shall be colored or painted to match
or be compatible with the color of the surface of the pole. The number of
conduit shall be minimized to the number technically necessary to accommodate a
small wireless facility.
         e.   An existing power pole in a proposed location may be replaced
with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating a small wireless facility;
provided, that the height of any replacement pole may not exceed fifty (50)
feet to the top of the antenna(s), or the maximum height allowed by the
definition of "small wireless facility", whichever is greater.
         f.   The replacement pole shall comply with the City's sidewalk
clearance requirements and ADA requirements.
      4.   Within The Right-Of-Way - Freestanding Small Cell Pole Or New Street
Light:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2318.png]
 
         a.   Refer to section
13-9-13, subsections (B)(1)(c) of this code for dimensional and appearance
standards. Installation of small wireless communications services facilities on
street lights shall comply with the requirements of Puget Sound Energy, as
applicable.
         b.   New Street Light: The replacement street light pole requirements
are also applicable to the new street light option, except that a street light
would be incorporated into the design of the facility. In addition, the
following applies, to the extent technically feasible:
            (1)   A street light shall not be installed unless it has been
identified by the Public Works Director or designee that a street light is
necessary at the location in which the small cell facility is proposed. A
street light may be required to be installed instead of a freestanding pole.
            (2)   In the Mixed-Use Town Center and Mixed-Use Town Center North
zones, poles designed to contain a small wireless facility shall comply with
the adopted architectural design review guidelines.     
         c.   Placement requirements for freestanding small cell poles.
Freestanding small cell poles shall be located in compliance with the
following, to the extent technically feasible:
            (1)   Located such that they in no way impede, obstruct, or hinder
the usual pedestrian or vehicular travel, obstruct the legal access to or use
of the public ROW, violate applicable law, violate or fail to substantially
comply with public ROW design standards, specifications, or design district
requirements, violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, or
in any way create a risk to public health, safety, or welfare.
            (2)   Outside the Mixed-Use Town Center and Mixed-Use Town Center
North zones.
            (3)   Not to be located along the frontage of a historic building,
deemed historic on a federal, state, or local level.
            (4)   Not to significantly create a new obstruction to property
sight lines.
            (5)   In alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
streetlights.
            (6)   Within the street amenity zone wherever possible.
            (7)   Equal distance between trees when possible, with a minimum of
15-foot separation such that no proposed disturbance shall occur within the
critical root zone of any tree.
            (8)   With appropriate clearance from existing utilities.
            (9)   Outside the clear sight triangle, as determined by the City,
at intersection corners.
            (10)   Ten feet (10') away from the intersection of an alley with a
street.
            (11)   On the same side of the street as existing power lines,
regardless of whether power is underground or overhead;
            (12)   No two freestanding small cell poles may be located within
300 lineal feet of each other as measured along the right-of-way line.
   5.   Within The Right-Of-Way - Existing Power Pole (Installation Below Top
Of Pole):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2320.png]
 
         a.   Installation of small wireless communications services facilities
on existing power poles shall comply with the requirements of Puget Sound
Energy.
         b.   Antennas should be placed in an effort to minimize visual clutter
and obtrusiveness.
         c.   The inside edge of a side mounted canister antenna/equipment
shroud shall be no more than twelve inches (12") from the surface of the pole.
         d.   Antennas and equipment located within a unified enclosure shall
not exceed twenty eight (28) cubic feet. To the extent possible, the unified
enclosure shall be placed so as to appear as an integrated part of the pole or
behind banners or signs.
         e.   The unified enclosure may not be placed more than six inches (6")
from the surface of the pole, unless a further distance is technically required
and confirmed in writing by the pole owner.
         f.   Equipment enclosures and all ancillary equipment and boxes shall
be colored or painted to match the color of the surface of the pole in which
they are attached. All related equipment shall not be mounted more than six
inches (6") from the surface of the pole, unless a further distance is
technically required, and is confirmed in writing by the pole owner.
         g.   All cables and wires shall be routed through conduit along the
outside of the pole. The outside conduit shall be colored or painted to match
the color of the surface of the pole. The number of conduit shall be minimized
to the number technically necessary to accommodate a small wireless facility.
         h.   An existing power pole in a proposed location may be replaced
with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating a small wireless facility;
provided, that the height of any replacement pole may not extend more than ten
feet (10') above the height of the existing pole, or the maximum height allowed
by the definition of "small wireless facility," whichever is greater, unless a
further height increase is required and confirmed in writing by the pole owner
and that such height increase is the minimum extension possible to provide
sufficient separation and/or clearance from electrical and wireline facilities.
         i.   The replacement pole shall comply with the City's sidewalk
clearance requirements and ADA requirements.
      6.   Within The Right-Of-Way - Strand-Mounted:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2322.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2324.png]
 
         a.   Installation of small wireless communications services facilities
mounted on cables strung between existing utility poles shall comply with the
requirements of Puget Sound Energy.
         b.   Each strand mounted antenna shall not exceed three (3) cubic feet
in volume.
         c.   Only two (2) strand mounted facilities are permitted between any
two (2) existing poles.
         d.   The strand mounted devices shall be placed as close as possible
to the nearest utility pole, in no event more than five feet (5') from the pole
unless a greater distance is technically necessary or required for safety
clearance and confirmed in writing by the pole owner.
         e.   No strand mounted device shall be located in or above the portion
of the roadway open to vehicular traffic.
         f.   Ground mounted equipment to accommodate such strand mounted
facilities is not permitted, except when placed in pre-existing equipment
cabinets, underground or on zoned property or when required by another party,
such as an electrical meter.
         g.   Pole mounted equipment enclosures and all ancillary equipment and
boxes shall be colored or painted to match the color of the surface of the pole
in which they are attached. All related equipment shall not be mounted more
than six inches (6") from the surface of the pole, unless a further distance is
technically required, and is confirmed in writing by the pole owner.
            (1)   All cables and wires shall be routed through conduit along
the outside of the pole. The outside conduit shall be colored or painted to
match the color of the surface of the pole. The number of conduit shall be
minimized to the number technically necessary to accommodate a small cell
wireless facility.
         h.   Such strand mounted devices must be installed with the minimum
excess exterior cabling or wires (other than the original strand) necessary to
meet the technological needs of the facility.
   C.   Location Preference Criteria: A proposed small wireless facility
location shall only be allowed in a lower ranking location as provided in the
location hierarchy in subsection B above, if the applicant can demonstrate that
all higher-ranking locations are not technically feasible to locate the
particular small wireless facility.
   D.   Small Wireless Facility General Standards:
      1.   Ground mounted equipment in the rights-of-way is prohibited, unless
such facilities are placed underground, or the applicant can demonstrate that
pole mounted or undergrounded equipment is technically infeasible. If ground
mounted equipment is necessary, then the applicant must submit a plan of how
the equipment will be concealed that is consistent with these standards.
Generators located in the rights-of-way are prohibited.
      2.   No equipment shall be operated to produce noise in violation of
Chapter 5-8 of this code.
      3.   Replacement poles, new poles, and all equipment shall comply with
the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), city construction and sidewalk
clearance standards, and state and federal regulations in order to provide a
clear and safe passage within the rights-of-way.
      4.   Replacement poles shall be located as near as possible to the
existing pole with the requirement to remove the abandoned pole.
      5.   The design criteria as applicable to small wireless facilities
described herein shall be considered concealment elements and such small cell
facilities may only be expanded upon through an eligible facilities request
described in section 13-9-8 of this code, when the modification does not defeat
the concealment elements of the facility.
      6.   No signage, message, or identification other than the manufacturer's
identification or identification required by governing law is allowed to be
portrayed on any antenna, and any such signage on equipment enclosures shall be
of the minimum amount possible to achieve the intended purpose; provided, that
signs are permitted as concealment techniques where appropriate.
      7.   Antennas and related equipment may not be illuminated except for
security reasons, required by a federal or state authority, or unless approved
as part of a concealment element plan.
      8.   Side arm mounts for antennas or equipment are prohibited.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-14: ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUATION OF USE:
   A.   At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue
operation of a wireless communications services facility, such carrier will
notify the City by certified U.S. Mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than thirty
(30) days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
   B.   In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such notice, the
wireless communications services facilities shall be considered abandoned upon
the discovery of such discontinuation of operations.
   C.   Within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation
of use, the carrier shall physically remove the wireless communications
services facilities. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Removal of antennas, mounts or racks, the equipment enclosure,
screening, cabling and the like from the subject property.
      2.   Transportation of the materials removed to a repository outside of
the City.
      3.   Restoration of the wireless communications services facilities site
to its pre-permit condition, as determined by the City, and that any
landscaping provided by the wireless communications services facilities
operator may remain in place.
      4.   If a carrier fails to remove a wireless communications services
facility in accordance with this section, the City shall have the authority to
enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. Costs for
removal of the wireless communications services facility shall be charged to
the wireless communications services facilities owner or operator in the event
the City removes the facility.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-15: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The applicant shall maintain the wireless communications services
facility to standards that may be imposed by the City by ordinance or through a
permit condition. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, repair
of damaged shrouds or enclosures, painting, structural integrity, and
landscaping.
   B.   In the event the applicant fails to maintain the facility, the City of
Orting may undertake enforcement action as allowed by existing codes and
regulations.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
13-9-16: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   ANTENNA(S): Any apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting
radiofrequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed
location pursuant to Commission authorization, for the provision of personal
wireless service and any commingled information services.
   B.   CELL-ON-WHEELS (COW): Are used to provide temporary service, usually
for special events, before the installation of a permanent wireless site, or in
emergencies.
   C.   CO-LOCATION: Means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an
existing tower, building or structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes, whether or not
there is an existing antenna on the structure.
   D.   CONCEALED FACILITY: A wireless communications services facility where:
      1.   The antennas, mounting apparatus, and any associated equipment are
fully recessed/concealed from all sides with a structure that achieves total
integration with the existing building or structure; and
      2.   All cable is routed internally or completely screened from view; and
      3.   The associated equipment is completely within the building or
structure, placed in an underground vault, or is within another element such as
a bench, mail box or kiosk.
   E.   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS): Is a network of spatially separated
antenna sites connected to a common source that provides wireless service
within a discrete geographic area or structure.
   F.   EQUIPMENT: Any equipment, switches, wiring, cabling, power sources,
shelters or cabinets associated with an antenna, located at the same fixed
location as the antenna, and, when collocated on a structure, is mounted or
installed at the same time as such antenna.
   G.   FREESTANDING SMALL CELL POLE: is a freestanding structure which
consists of a single vertical pole, fixed into the ground and/or attached to a
foundation built for the sole purpose of supporting small wireless antennas and
associated equipment.
   H.   GUYED TOWER: Means a monopole or lattice tower that is tied to the
ground or other surface by diagonal cables.
   I.   LATTICE TOWER: Is a wireless communication support structure which
consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related
equipment.
   J.   LICENSED CARRIER: Is a company authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission to build and operate a commercial mobile radio services system.
   K.   MACRO CELL FACILITY (MACRO FACILITY): A large wireless communications
services facility that provides radio frequency coverage served by a high-power
cellular system. Generally, macro cell antennas are mounted on ground-based
towers, rooftops and other existing structures, at a height that provides a
clear view over the surrounding buildings and terrain. Macro cell facilities
typically contain antennas that are greater than three (3) cubic feet per
antenna and typically cover large geographic areas with relatively high
capacity and are capable of hosting multiple wireless service providers.
   L.   MONOPOLE: Means a freestanding structure which consists of a single
vertical pole, fixed into the ground and/or attached to a foundation with no
guy wires built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting macro antennas
and their associated equipment.
   M.   POLES: Utility poles, light poles or other types of poles, used
primarily to support electrical wires, telephone wires, television cable,
lighting, or guide posts; or are constructed for the sole purpose of supporting
wireless communications services facilities.
   N.   SATELLITE EARTH STATION ANTENNA: Includes any antenna in any zoning
district that:
      1.   Is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including
direct-to-home satellite services, and that is one meter or less in diameter;
      2.   Is two (2) meters or less in diameter in areas where commercial or
industrial uses are generally permitted;
      3.   Is designed to receive programming services by means of multi-point
distribution services, instructional television fixed services, and local
multi-point distribution services, that is one meter or less in diameter or
diagonal measurement; and
      4.   Is designed to receive television broadcast signals.
   O.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY (OR SMALL CELL NODE / SMALL CELL FACILITY): A
wireless facility that meets each of the following conditions:
      1.   The facilities:
         a.   Are mounted on structures fifty feet (50’) or less in height
including their antennas, or
         b.   Are mounted on structures no more than ten percent (10%) taller
than other adjacent structures, or
         c.   Do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a
height of more than fifty feet (50’) or by more than ten percent (10%),
whichever is greater;
      2.   Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding antenna
equipment, is not more than three (3) cubic feet in volume;
      3.   All other wireless equipment associated with the structure,
including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-
existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than twenty eight
(28) cubic feet in volume;
      4.   The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under
FCC rule;
      5.   The facilities do not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified by FCC rule.
   P.   UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICES: Means the offering of communications
services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses
but does not mean the provision of direct- to-home satellite services.
   Q.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES: Means any personal wireless services
as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, including federally
licensed wireless communications services consisting of cellular services,
personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio services (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may be developed in the future.
   R.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES / WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY (WCF): Means an unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception
of radio or microwave signals used for commercial communications. A WCF
provides services which include cellular phone, personal communication
services, other mobile radio services, and any other service provided by
wireless common carriers licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC). WCFs are composed of two or more of the following components:
      1.   Antenna;
      2.   Mount;
      3.   Equipment enclosure;
      4.   Security barrier.
   S.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES / WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY (WCF), BUILDING-MOUNTED: Means a wireless communications services
facility mounted to the roof, wall or chimney of a building.
   T.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES / WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY (WCF), CAMOUFLAGED: Means a wireless communications services facility
that is disguised, hidden, or integrated with an existing structure that is not
a monopole, guyed or lattice tower, or placed within an existing or proposed
structure.
   U.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES / WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY (WCF), EQUIPMENT ENCLOSURE: Means a small structure, shelter, cabinet,
or vault used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary for
processing wireless communication signals. Associated equipment may include air
conditioning and emergency generators.
   V.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES / WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY (WCF), RELATED EQUIPMENT: Is all equipment ancillary to a wireless
communications services facilities such as coaxial cable, GPS receivers,
conduit and connectors.
   W.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITIES / WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY (WCF), STRUCTURE-MOUNTED: Means a wireless communications services
facility located on structures other than buildings, such as light poles,
utility poles, flag poles, transformers, and/or tanks.
(Ord. 2019-1049, 9-25-2019)
CHAPTER 10
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION:
13-10-1: Architectural Design Review
13-10-1: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: These regulations are intended to implement and further the
comprehensive plan of the city by ensuring that all development in the mixed
use-town center and mixed use-town center north, and all commercial and public
development within the city limits, is designed to be consistent with the
adopted theme of "turn of century: western or Victorian". All new installation,
replacement, construction, renovation, remodel or alteration of, or other
modifications to, buildings, miscellaneous structures and street furniture
located on private property, public ways and other exterior public property in
the mixed use-town center and mixed use-town center north; all buildings,
miscellaneous structures and street furniture located on private property,
public ways and other exterior public property used for commercial business or
public facilities within the city limits; all multi-family buildings (which
expressly does not include duplexes) and cottage developments within the city
limits; and, all signs made subject to the requirements of this section
pursuant to chapter 7 of this title, are subject to architectural design review
and approval as described in this section. These regulations are adopted for
the following purposes:
      1.   To promote the public welfare and to provide for the enhancement of
the city and its development in keeping with its historical heritage;
      2.   To attract visitors to the city;
      3.   To improve the visual quality of site development and architecture
of private and public buildings, recognizing the interdependence of land
values, aesthetics and good site planning;
      4.   To minimize discordant and unsightly development, to avoid
inappropriate and poor quality building designs, to enhance the beauty and
balance of the community, which are proper and necessary concerns of city
government;
      5.   To promote economic and environmental well being through the
distinctive character and natural attractiveness of the city; and
      6.   To recognize environmental and aesthetic design as an integral part
of the planning and development process.
   B.   Exemptions: The regulations in this section do not apply to landmarks,
in-kind maintenance, repair, or replacement activities on, or of, existing
structures, signs, street furniture, paint, or other exterior features,
existing as of the time of adoption of this chapter, that are otherwise subject
to these guidelines.
   C.   Turn Of Century: Western Or Victorian: A style of building,
architecture and exterior lighting used in the city and the area from statehood
in 1889, through World War I, adopted as the architectural theme for all
buildings in the mixed use town center (MUTC) zone and all commercial buildings
in all other zones. Examples of such architectural style may be found in the
following publications:
      1.   "The History Of The Town Of Orting", Alice Rushton, Warren's
Printing And Graphic Arts Center, Olympia, Washington.
      2.   "Historic Preservation Of Tacoma", city of Tacoma, department of
community development, Tacoma, Washington, 1979.
      3.   "Ghost Towns Of The West", William Carter, Sunset Publishing
Corporation, Menlo Park, California, 1992.
      4.   "A Victorian Housebuilders Guide", George E. Woodward and Edward G.
Thompson, Dover Publications, Inc., 31 E. 2nd St., Mineola, NY 11501, 1988.
      Copies of said publications, exterior paint color charts, and similar
related reference works shall be available at the Orting City Hall for review
by the public.
   D.   Architectural Design Review And Approval: Any building, structure,
development, sign or other property subject to ADR and approval pursuant to
this section shall conform in exterior design to the turn of century: Western
or Victorian theme according to the design standards adopted by the city. No
building or sign permit shall be issued for any installation, replacement,
construction, renovation, alteration or remodel of, or other modifications to,
any building, structure, development or sign subject to ADR and approval
pursuant to this section, without first obtaining architectural design approval
pursuant to the requirements of this section; this requirement does not
overwhelm nonconforming rights that may apply to a structure as governed by OMC
13-5-9. Evaluation of a project, and the Planning Commission's resulting
decision on an application for architectural design review (ADR) will be based
on an application's consistency with the guidelines, standards, or criterion
set forth in the ADR Guidelines (adopted by reference herein) or in this
chapter.
      1.   ADR applications shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this section and Title 15 of this code. Staff shall
consult the applicant during the review of the ADR permit, as needed, to verify
details of the application. The Planning Commission shall, during no more than
one public meeting, review and consider the final submittal for the ADR
application, the staff report, any comments or submittals from the public or
applicant, the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of
this code, the city of Orting Comprehensive Plan, and any other applicable
laws, rules, regulations and design standards. The planning commission, based
on the above-stated considerations, shall either approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the submittal with written findings. Approvals may be
conditioned by the planning commission to resolve any inconsistencies between
the proposal and the ADR standards. The decision of the planning commission may
be appealed as per title 15, chapter 10 of this code.
   E.   Architectural Design Review Standards: The following standards shall be
employed in determining whether the application is consistent with turn of
century: Western or Victorian design theme:
      1.   Relationship To Building Site:
         a.   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition
with the streetscape and to facilitate pedestrian movement. This can be
achieved by:
            (1)   Installing planted areas or planter boxes separating the
building from the pedestrian path;
            (2)   Installing outdoor customer seating or plaza area;
            (3)   Locating parking behind or between buildings, when feasible;
            (4)   Locating service areas in a manner which is screened from
public view; or
            (5)   Through other methods of connecting the site to its fronting
street and pedestrian paths proposed by the applicant.
         b.   The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with
its site and adjoining buildings. This can be achieved by:
            (1)   Maintaining alignment of horizontal elements along adjoining
buildings, including window heights, windowsills, moldings, or height of
commercial ground floor space; or
            (2)   Through other methods of creating consistency among the scale
of a building and its surrounding buildings proposed by the applicant.
      2.   Relationship Of Building And Site To Adjoining Area:
         a.   Harmony in design with adjoining areas in materials, building
scale, and other architectural design features is encouraged. This can be
achieved by:
            (1)   Paint that is complementary and contrasting to adjoining
structures;
            (2)   Using building materials, colors, textures, and other design
features that vary from adjoining buildings; or
            (3)   Through other methods of creating consistency among the scale
of the building and its surrounding buildings proposed by the applicant.
         b.   Attractive landscape transitions to adjoining properties will be
provided. This can be achieved by:
            (1)   Adhering to the "Landscaping & Site Treatment" provisions in
the ADR Guidelines and as codified in OMC 13-10-1(E)(3).
      3.   Landscape And Site Treatment:
         a.   Preserve existing physical features through site design and
create inviting landscaped areas. Inviting landscaped areas include those that:
            (1)   Include street trees listed on the City's Approved Street
Tree List, or other trees approved through the ADR permitting process;
            (2)   Include plantings that are maintained to not obstruct
walkways or limit pedestrian movement;
            (3)   Do not include nuisance species, which are chiefly those with
thorns, spines, spinose teeth, or prickles, and
            (4)   Do not include any species included on the State or County
noxious weed lists.
            The City maintains all above-referenced lists at City Hall and can
provide them, on request.
         b.   Design landscape treatments that enhance architectural features,
strengthen vistas, and provide shade. This can be accomplished by:
            (1)   Installing landscaping in a manner that frames views of
vistas. When landscaping to frame views of vistas, applicants are encourage to
select deciduous species; or
            (2)   Using landscaping to add depth, texture, or interruption to a
building façade; or
            (3)   Through other methods of designing landscape treatments to
enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas, and provide shade proposed
by the applicant.
         c.   Provide screening of service areas using landscaping, fences,
walls, or a combination thereof. In this context, service areas shall be
considered "screened" provided an opaque fence of at least six feet (6') in
height, or similar vegetative or structural screening, separates the service
area from public view.
         d.   Provide exterior lighting that is subtle and attractive and that
enhances the building and site. This can be achieved by:
            (1)   Shielding light sources so that light bulbs do not extend
below the horizontal plane of the bottom of the shield; or
            (2)   On lighting affixed to structures, directing light at an
angle toward the structure; or
            (3)   Selecting era-appropriate lighting fixture styles. Lighting
fixture styles representative of the early twentieth century typify Orting's
adopted architectural theme and are encouraged; these include carriage lamp
fixtures and gaslights of wrought iron and glass.
      4.   Building Design: The adopted architectural theme in Orting is "turn
of century: Western or Victorian". The Planning Commission's evaluation of a
project design will include a review of the building design's consistency with
the following standards:
         a.   Western architecture of the 1800s and early 1900s usually
involved wooden false front effects, wooden porches, cornices, and wooden post
supported canopies. Building styles also included    exteriors of masonry,
brick, and stone. Dimensional lumber or rough sawn unplugged plywood with
wooden batts, spaced not more than eighteen inches (18") on center, can be used
as an exterior building material, as well as masonry, brick, and stone. Siding
with metal, T1-11, particle board, chipboard, and other similar wood product is
prohibited.
         b.   On site construction is the preferred building method for
commercial structures subject to this chapter. The use of factory-built
structures, mobile homes, and trailers is discouraged because of the difficulty
in modifying them to meet the requirements of this chapter. Construction
trailers are allowed temporarily and must comply with OMC 13-4-2.
         c.   The front facade of the building shall provide a well-
proportioned and interesting three-dimensional spatial quality. In this
context, "well-proportioned and interesting" can be achieved by incorporating
one or more of the following:
            (1)   Horizontal Or Vertical Shifts.
               (A)   A façade may not exceed eighty feet (80') in length
without a horizontal shift in the building footprint measuring one-tenth of the
façade length. A shift alteration in the roof design shall accompany horizontal
shifts.
               (B)   No single run of ridge, cornice, or fascia (excluding
eaves) may exceed eighty feet (80') in length without a five-foot transition in
height. Cupolas and other minor projections above roof lines do not meet the
vertical shift requirement.
            (2)   Visual Terminus To Tops Of Buildings.
               (A)   A roof must have a minimum 4/12 pitch with eaves extending
at least two feet (2') beyond exterior building walls, or must be a flat roof
with projecting cornices.
            (3)   Use false fronts to enhance the front façade of low-rise
buildings with flat rooflines.
            (4)   Through other methods of designing the building to be well-
proportioned and interesting proposed by the applicant.
         d.   All facades of the building shall be compatible with the front
facade. This can be achieved by:
            (1)   Maintaining alignment of horizontal elements along facades,
including window heights, windowsills, moldings, or height of commercial ground
floor space.
            (2)   Using building materials, colors, textures, and other design
features similar to the front façade.
            (3)   Incorporating other design solutions that create
compatibility among all building facades proposed by the applicant.
         e.   Canopies, awnings or marquees can be pitched and covered with
shake shingles or other period material. Flat canopies/porches enclosed by an
ornate wooden banister and toprail are allowed. Ornate banisters and trim may
be used to enhance building design as representative of the adopted design
theme, "turn of the century: Western or Victorian."
         f.   Window shapes shall be square, arched, or rectangular and shall
incorporate grids creating the appearance of more than one window pane. A
wooden window frame with mullions, grilles, muntins, or similar material
creating the appearance of multiple panes is appropriate. Decorative pediments
and sills may be used to enhance window design as representative of Orting's
adopted design theme, "turn of the century: Western or Victorian."
         g.   Colors shall be harmonious with adjacent buildings and
characteristics of colors used in the early 1900s. City of Orting Planning
staff maintain a color palette of acceptable colors for use in Orting that can
be provided to applicants for reference of permissible exterior paint colors.
      5.   Signs: The following standards may be used by the Planning
Commission to interpret and apply the provisions of OMC 13-7-4 to site specific
conditions:
         a.   Signs are part of the architectural theme. Size, materials,
color, lettering, location, number, and arrangement shall be characteristic of
the early 1900s;
         b.   The number and size of signs shall be minimized to avoid visual
clutter;
         c.   All exterior signs subject to ADR shall comply with the
provisions of this section and chapter 7 of this title. The following signs
shall be exempt:
            (1)   Flags, insignias, the United States flag are exempt, not to
include flutter signs (as they are defined in OMC 13-7-2);
            (2)    Commemorative plaques with engraved lettering less than one
inch (1") in height;
            (3)   Window signs;
            (4)   Temporary signs, provided they are used for only a period of
less than thirty (30) days. Temporary signs are limited in size to six (6)
square feet per side of the sign or twelve (12) square feet in area in total.
Only one temporary sign visible from the public right-of-way is allowed per
tenant in a commercial space;
         d.   Illuminated exterior signs are not characteristic of early 1900s
design and shall not be allowed as the primary business sign; and
         e.   Signs are preferred to be illuminated by indirect lighting which
shall be lighted in such a manner that glare from the light source is not
visible to pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
   F.   Applications: Applications for ADR shall be submitted to the City and
processed as a Type 2a permit application in accordance with OMC 15-4-2. ADRs
may be consolidated with other required City permits and processed according to
OMC 15-5-1. Applications shall provide the following information with the
adopted application fee to the City:
      1.   Site plans showing buildings, parking areas, landscaping signs, and
other architectural features of the site conditions in their existing state and
as proposed;
      2.   Building elevations showing all features of the proposal including,
but not limited to, doors, windows, signs, canopies, parapets, and finish
materials;
      3.   Detail drawings showing moldings, light fixtures, sign lettering,
and other features;
      4.   Color selections consistent with subsection (E)(4)(g) of this
chapter;
      5.   Any other written or graphic information describing and illustrating
the proposal;
      6.   A completed application form; and
      7.   Data to be obtained to address feasibility of incorporating LID
BMPs, if proposed to be used.
      All application materials shall become the property of the city after it
is submitted for review.
   G.   Architectural Design Review: Applications for ADR shall be processed by
the Planning Commission as a Type 2a application consistent with OMC Chapter
15-4 and related provisions in Title 15. A staff report shall be prepared and
made available to the public at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the
Planning Commission public meeting for an ADR
      application. The Planning Commission shall deliberate the ADR application
at no more than one public meeting before issuing a decision on the
application. The Planning Commission findings and record of decision shall be
in writing and published within two (2) weeks of the decision. The record of
decision shall be placed in the permit file.
      Minor amendments to a design approved by the Planning Commission shall be
processed administratively as a Type 1 permit application pursuant to section
15-12-2 of this code. Major amendments to the design approved by Planning
Commission shall be processed by the Planning Commission as a Type 2a permit
application through a new design review pursuant to section 15-12-3 of this
code.
   H.   ADR Preapplication Review: Applicants for ADR may participate in an ADR
Preapplication meeting as set forth in OMC 15-5-2 to seek early feedback from
the Planning Commission on the proposed design's consistency with the ADR
provisions set forth in the ADR Guidebook and in OMC 13-10-1(E). An ADR
Preapplication may be requested via written request to the Planning Commission
Secretary; the written request may be accompanied by any drawings, renderings,
plans, details, or other project materials for the preliminary review and
feedback of the Planning Commission. ADR Preapplication meetings are offered at
no charge to the applicant.
      Participation in an ADR Preapplication meeting could afford an
opportunity for the applicant to incorporate any feedback from staff and
Planning Commission into its proposal before applying for an ADR permit. The
ADR Preapplication is voluntary; it does not constitute a formal required
component of the design review process, and its review by the Planning
Commission does not amount to the limit of one public meeting allowed for
review of ADR applications set forth via OMC 13-10-1(G).
   I.   Financial Security: The city may require a reasonable bond, letter of
credit, assignment of funds or similar financial instrument, to secure the
installation of required improvements that are a condition of design review
approval.
   J.   Time Limit: Unless the owner submits a fully completed building or sign
permit application necessary to bring about the approved installation,
replacement, construction, renovation, alteration, remodel, or other
modifications, or if no building or sign permit application is required,
substantially commences the uses allowed, within eighteen (18) months from the
date of ADR approval, such ADR approval shall expire and be null and void. For
the purposes of this section, the date of approval shall be the date on which
the final written decision of the Planning Commission as adopted is transmitted
to the applicant. In the event of appeal, the date of approval shall be the
date on which a final decision is entered by the City Council or court of
competent jurisdiction. A request for extension may be granted as a minor
amendment in accordance with section 15-12-2 of this code; provided that, a
written request is submitted at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the
expiration date, the extension is for no longer than twelve (12) months, and
good cause in the opinion of the Administrator is shown for the requested
      extension. The applicant is responsible for knowledge of the expiration
date. (Ord. 886, 9-8-2010; amd. Ord. 943, 5-14-2014; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020;
Ord. 2021-1081, 9-8-2021; Ord. 2025-1145, 6-11-2025)
TITLE 14
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD PLANNING MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
14-1-1: Statutory Authorization
14-1-2: Findings Of Fact
14-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
14-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
14-1-5: Definitions
14-1-6: General Provisions
14-1-7: Habitat Impacts
14-1-8: Administration
14-1-9: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
14-1-10: Standards For Protection Of Structures
14-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Washington has delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of
Orting does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord.
913, 9-28-2011)
14-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   Areas of Orting are subject to periodic inundation and channel
migration which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for protection and relief from flooding and channel migration, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   B.   When floodplains and watersheds are developed without taking
appropriate care and precautions, flood heights, frequencies, and velocities
increase, causing a greater threat to humans, damage to property, destruction
of natural floodplain functions, and adverse impacts to water quality and
habitat.
   C.   Rivers, streams, lakes, estuarine and marine areas and their
floodplains are major elements of healthy aquatic and riparian habitats and
conveyance of floodwaters. If watersheds, rivers, streams, lakes, estuaries,
floodplains and other systems are not viewed holistically as biological and
geomorphologic units, it can lead to serious degradation of habitat and
increased flood hazards to people and human development.
   D.   Over the years, natural processes have evolved that manage floodwaters
and channel flows in the most effective and efficient manner. Disruption of
these processes by altering land cover, stream channels, wetlands, and other
water bodies leads to increased flood hazards, loss of life and property,
threats to public health, and loss of habitat. (Ord. 2017-1006, 2-22-2017)
14-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life, health, safety and welfare from the dangers of
flooding;
   B.   To the extent possible, retain the natural channel, shoreline, and
floodplain creation processes and other natural floodplain functions that
protect, create, and maintain habitat for threatened and endangered species;
   C.   Prevent or minimize loss of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological
functions of floodplains and stream channels;
   D.   Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
   E.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   F.   Minimize prolonged business and governmental interruptions;
   G.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, roadways, and bridges and
culverts located in areas of special flood hazard;
   H.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   I.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard;
   J.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   K.   Qualify the city for participation in the national flood insurance
program, thereby giving citizens and businesses the opportunity to purchase
flood insurance;
   L.   Maintain the quality of water in rivers, streams, lakes, estuaries, and
marine areas and their floodplains so as to protect public water supplies,
areas of the public trust, and wildlife habitat protected by the endangered
species act;
   M.   Retain the natural channel, shoreline, and floodplain creation
processes and other natural floodplain functions that protect, create, and
maintain habitat for threatened and endangered species; and
   N.   Prevent or minimize loss of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological
functions of floodplains and stream channels. (Ord. 2017-1006, 2-22-2017)
14-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
This chapter shall apply to the regulatory floodplain, which is comprised of
the special flood hazard area and all protected areas within the jurisdiction
of the city.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage throughout their intended
life span;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas;
   F.   Defining and clarifying the terms and phrases used in section
14-1-5 of this chapter;
   G.   Identifying the regulatory floodplain, the special flood hazard area,
and the protected area and the supporting technical data needed to delineate
those areas;
   H.   Establishing a permit requirement in section
14-1-8 of this chapter so that all human development that may affect flood
hazards, water quality, and habitat are reviewed before it is constructed;
   I.   Setting minimum protection standards in section
14-1-10 of this chapter for all development to ensure that the development will
not increase the potential for flood damage or adversely affect natural
floodplain functions; and
   J.   Setting minimum standards to protect new and substantially improved
structures from flood damage in section
14-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-1006, 2-22-2017)
14-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application. Other pertinent definitions
are included in titles 12, 13, and 15 of this code.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the city of Orting's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one foot (1') to three feet
(3'); a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is
characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The area subject to the base flood is the special
flood hazard area designated on flood insurance rate maps as zones "A" or "V"
including AE, AO, AH, A1-99 and VE.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation of the base flood above the datum of the
effective FIRM.
BASEMENT: Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
CHANNEL MIGRATION AREA: The area within the lateral extent of likely stream
channel movement due to stream bank destabilization and erosion, rapid stream
incision, aggradations, avulsions, and shifts in location of stream channels.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility necessary to protect the public health, safety
and welfare during a flood. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency operations
installations, water and wastewater treatment plants, electric power stations,
and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous
waste (other than consumer products containing hazardous substances or
hazardous waste intended for household use).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate in the
regulatory floodplain, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, grading, paving, excavating or drilling
operations, or storage of materials or equipment, subdivision of land, removal
of more than five percent (5%) of the native vegetation on the property, or any
other activity which results in the removal of substantial amounts of
vegetation or in the alteration of natural site characteristics located within
the area of special flood hazard.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any city permit involving approval of development.
DRY FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural measures
that prevent floodwaters from entering a structure.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The official form (FEMA form 086-0-33) used to track
development and provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance
with provisions of this chapter and determine the proper flood insurance
premium rate with section B completed by community officials.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective
date of the flood insurance rate map. This term may also be referred to as
"existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the city of Orting.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency, the agency responsible for
administering the national flood insurance program.
FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREA: Lands needed to maintain species
in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that
isolated subpopulations are not created. These areas are designated by the city
of Orting, pursuant to the Washington state growth management act 1 .
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): The official map of a community, on
which the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) has delineated the areas
of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): The official map of a community, issued by
FEMA, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard area have been
identified as zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map of a community on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation above the datum of the
effective FIRM to which new and substantially improved structures must be
protected from flood damage.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed wall of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in the
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
secretary of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
HYPORHEIC ZONE: A saturated layer of rock or sediment beneath and/or adjacent
to a stream channel that contains some proportion of channel water or that has
been altered by channel water infiltration.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: As defined in Title 9, Chapter 5A, Section 4A of this code.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE: A flood insurance claim payment up to thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) directly to a property owner for the cost to
comply with floodplain management regulations after a direct physical loss
caused by a flood. Eligibility for an ICC claim can be through a single
instance of "substantial damage" or as a result of a "cumulative substantial
damage".
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure will comply with standards for residential structures at subsection
14-1-9B1 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
MITIGATION CONTRIBUTION: A cash donation or other valuable consideration
offered by the applicant in lieu of: a) a required dedication of land for
public park, recreation, open space, public facilities, or schools; or b) road
improvements needed to maintain adopted levels of service or to ameliorate
identified impacts and accepted on the public's behalf as a condition of
approval of a subdivision, plat or binding site plan. Voluntary contributions
may be accepted by the city.
NATIVE VEGETATION: Plant species that are indigenous to the local geography and
that reasonably could be expected to naturally occur on the site.
NATURAL FLOODPLAIN FUNCTIONS: The contribution that a floodplain makes to
support habitat, including, but not limited to, providing flood storage and
conveyance, reducing flood velocities, reducing sedimentation, filtering
nutrients and impurities from runoff, processing organic wastes, moderating
temperature fluctuations, and providing breeding and feeding grounds, shelter,
and refugia, for aquatic or riparian species.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date hereof and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY: Also known as an eligible community, means a community
in which FEMA has authorized the sale of flood insurance.
PROTECTED AREA: Comprised of those lands that lie within the boundaries of the
floodway, the riparian habitat zone, and the channel migration zone. Because of
the impact that development can have on flood heights and velocities and
habitat, special rules apply in the protected area.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle, which is defined at OMC
13-2-19.
REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: The area of the special flood hazard area plus the
protected area.
RIPARIAN HABITAT ZONE: The water body and adjacent land areas that are likely
to support aquatic and riparian habitat.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land subject to inundation by the base
flood. Special flood hazard areas are designated on flood insurance rate maps
with the letters "A" or "V" including AE, AO, AH, A1-99 and VE. The special
flood hazard area is also referred to as the area of special flood hazard or
SFHA subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in a given
year.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing and grading; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood related damage sustained
by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   B.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which has been
previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which is
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be a violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER DEPENDENT: A structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any
other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature
of its operations.
WATER TYPING: A system for classifying water bodies according to their size and
fish habitat characteristics. The Washington department of natural resources'
forest practices water typing classification system (222-16 WAC) is hereby
adopted by reference. The system defines four (4) water types:
   A.   Type "S" = Shoreline: Streams that are designated "shorelines of the
state", including marine shorelines.
   B.   Type "F" = Fish: Streams that are known to be used by fish or meet the
physical criteria to be potentially used by fish.
   C.   Type "Np" = Nonfish perennial streams.
   D.   Type "Ns" = Nonfish seasonal streams.
ZONE: One or more areas delineated on the FIRM. The following zones may be used
on the adopted FIRM. The special flood hazard area (SFHA) is comprised of the A
and V zones.
   A: SFHA where no base flood elevation is provided.
   A#: Numbered A zones (e.g., A7 or A14), SFHA with a base flood elevation.
   AE: SFHA with a base flood elevation.
   AO: SFHA subject to inundation by shallow flooding usually resulting from
sheet flow on sloping terrain, with average depths between one and three feet
(3'). Average flood depths are shown.
   AH: SFHA subject to inundation by shallow flooding (usually areas of
ponding) with average depths between one and three feet (3'). Base flood
elevations are shown.
   B: The area between the SFHA and the 500-year flood of the primary source of
flooding. It may also be an area with a local, shallow flooding problem or an
area protected by a levee.
   C: An area of minimal flood hazard, as above the 500-year flood level of the
primary source of flooding. B and C zones may have flooding that does not meet
the criteria to be mapped as a special flood hazard area, especially ponding
and local drainage problems.
   D: Area of undetermined but possible flood hazard.
   V: The SFHA subject to coastal high hazard flooding including waves of three
feet (3') or greater in height. There are three (3) types of V zones: V, V#,
and VE, and they correspond to the A zone designations.
   X: The area outside the mapped SFHA.
   Shaded X: The same as a zone B, herein.
(Ord. 2017-1010, 3-6-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-1053, 11-25-2019; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-
8-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 36.70A.
14-1-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to the
regulatory floodplain, which is comprised of the special flood hazard area and
all protected areas within the city.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Special Flood Hazard Area: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study For
Pierce County And Incorporated Areas" dated March 7, 2017, and any revisions
thereto, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and any revisions
thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter. The flood insurance study and the FIRM special flood hazard area
(SFHA) is the area subject to flooding by the base flood and subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The flood insurance study and the FIRM are on file
at city offices at 110 Train Street SE.
Upon receipt of a floodplain development permit application, the floodplain
administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. A development project is not subject to the requirements of this
chapter if it is located on land that can be shown to be:
      1.   Outside the protected area, and
      2.   Higher than the base flood elevation.
The administrator shall inform the applicant that the project may still be
subject to the flood insurance purchase requirements unless the owner receives
a letter of map amendment from FEMA.
   C.   Flood Hazard Data:
      1.   Base Flood Elevation For SFHAs In The City Of Orting: The base flood
elevation for the SFHAs of the city of Orting shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the adopted Pierce County flood insurance study and
FIRM.
      2.   Base Flood Elevations For SFHAs In The AH Or AO Zone: The base flood
elevation for each SFHA delineated as a "zone AH" or "zone AO" shall be that
elevation (or depth) delineated on the flood insurance rate map. Where base
flood depths are not available in zone AO, the base flood elevation shall be
considered to be two feet (2') above the highest grade adjacent to the
structure.
      3.   Base Flood Elevation For Other SFHAs: The "base flood elevation" for
all other SFHAs shall be as defined in section
14-1-5 of this chapter.
      4.   Flood Protection Elevation: The flood protection elevation (FPE)
shall be the base flood elevation plus one foot (1').
      5.   Uses Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has
not been provided (in A or V zones) in accordance with subsection B of this
section, the city shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source,
in order to administer subsections
14-1-9B and C of this chapter.
   D.   Protected Area:
      1.   The protected area is comprised of those lands that lie within the
boundaries of the floodway, the riparian habitat zone, and the channel
migration area.
      2.   In riverine areas, where a floodway has not been designated in
accordance with this chapter the protected area is comprised of those lands
that lie within the boundaries of the riparian habitat zone, the channel
migration area, and the SFHA.
   E.   Riparian Habitat Zone: The riparian habitat zone includes those
watercourses within the SFHA and adjacent land areas that are likely to support
aquatic and riparian habitat.
      1.   The size and location of the riparian habitat zone is dependent on
the type of water body. The riparian habitat zone includes the water body and
adjacent lands, measured perpendicularly from ordinary high water on both sides
of the water body:
         a.   Type S streams that are designated "shorelines of the state": Two
hundred fifty feet (250').
         b.   Type F streams (fish bearing) greater than five feet (5') wide
and marine shorelines: Two hundred feet (200').
         c.   Type F streams less than five feet (5') wide and lakes: One
hundred fifty feet (150').
         d.   Type N (nonsalmonid bearing) perennial and seasonal streams with
unstable slopes: Two hundred twenty five feet (225').
         e.   All other type N (nonsalmonid bearing) perennial and seasonal
streams: One hundred fifty feet (150').
      2.   The riparian habitat zone shall be delineated on the site plan by
the applicant at the time of application for subdivision approval or floodplain
development permit for all development proposals within three hundred feet
(300') of any stream or shoreline.
   F.   Channel Migration Area: In areas with base flood elevations (but a
regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
zones A1-30 and AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing or
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point.
      1.   The channel migration area shall be the channel migration zone as
delineated by Pierce County.
   G.   New Regulatory Data:
      1.   All requests to revise or change the flood hazard data, including
requests for a letter of map revision and a conditional letter of map revision
shall be reviewed by the administrator.
         a.   The administrator shall not sign the community acknowledgment
form for any requests for development, unless the applicant for the letter
documents that such development is in compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Where base flood elevation data are not available, applicants for
approval of new subdivisions and other proposed developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than fifty (50)
lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include such data with
their permit applications.
      3.   Where channel migration zone data are not available in accordance
with this chapter, the permit applicant shall either:
         a.   Designate the entire SFHA as the channel migration zone; or
         b.   Identify the channel migration zone for the area one river mile
upstream to one river mile downstream of the site in accordance with "Regional
Guidance For NFIP-ESA Floodplain Mapping", published by FEMA region X.
      4.   All new hydrologic and hydraulic flood studies conducted pursuant to
this chapter shall consider future conditions and the cumulative effects from
anticipated future land use changes in accordance with "Regional Guidance For
Hydrologic And Hydraulic Studies In Support Of The Model Ordinance For
Floodplain Management Under The National Flood Insurance Program And The
Endangered Species Act", FEMA region X, 2010.
   H.   Floodways:
      1.   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development is prohibited unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is
prohibited within designated floodways, except for: a) repairs, reconstruction,
or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and
b) repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which
does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
either:
         a.   Before the repair, or reconstruction is started, or
         b.   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to structures identified as
historic places, may be excluded in the fifty percent (50%).
      3.   If subsections H1 and H2 of this section are satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of section
14-1-10 of this chapter.
   I.   Penalties For Noncompliance:
      1.   Compliance; Violation A Misdemeanor: No structure or land shall
hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
      2.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case.
      3.   Remedial Action: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
   J.   Abrogation Of Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   K.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   L.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or FEMA, for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
   M.   Severability: The provisions of this section shall be deemed separable
and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity
of the remainder. (Ord. 2017-1010, 3-6-2017)
14-1-7: HABITAT IMPACTS:
   A.   Nondevelopment Activities: Activities that do not meet the definition
of "development" are allowed in the regulatory floodplain without the need for
a floodplain development permit under this chapter, provided all other federal,
state, and local requirements are met. The following are examples of activities
not considered development or "manmade changes to improved or unimproved real
estate".
      1.   Routine maintenance of landscaping that does not involve grading,
excavation, or filling;
      2.   Removal of noxious weeds and hazard trees and replacement of
nonnative vegetation with native vegetation;
      3.   Normal maintenance of structures, such as reroofing and replacing
siding, provided such work does not qualify as a substantial improvement;
      4.   Normal maintenance of aboveground utilities and facilities, such as
replacing downed power lines and utility poles;
      5.   Normal street and road maintenance, including filling potholes,
repaving, and installing signs and traffic signals, but not including expansion
of paved areas; and
      6.   Normal maintenance of a levee or other flood control facility
prescribed in the operations and maintenance plan for the levee or flood
control facility are allowed in the regulatory floodplain without need for a
floodplain development permit. Normal maintenance does not include repair from
flood damage, expansion of the prism, expansion of the face or toe or addition
for protection on the face or toe with rock armor.
   B.   Activities Allowed With A Floodplain Permit: The following activities
are allowed in the regulatory floodplain without the habitat impact assessment
required under subsection C of this section, providing all other requirements
of this chapter are met, including obtaining a floodplain development permit:
      1.   Repairs or remodeling of an existing structure, provided that the
repairs or remodeling are not a substantial improvement or a repair of
substantial damage.
      2.   Expansion of an existing structure that is no greater than ten
percent (10%) beyond its existing footprint, provided that the repairs or
remodeling are not a substantial improvement or a repair of substantial damage.
This measurement is counted cumulatively from the effective date hereof. If the
structure is in the floodway, there shall be no change in the dimensions
perpendicular to flow.
      3.   Activities with the sole purpose of creating, restoring or enhancing
natural functions associated with floodplains, streams, lakes, estuaries,
marine areas, habitat, and riparian areas that meet federal and state
standards, provided the activities do not include buildings, liquid or gas
storage tanks, or impervious surfaces.
      4.   Development of open space and recreational facilities, such as
parks, trails, and hunting grounds, that do not include structures, fill,
impervious surfaces or removal of more than five percent (5%) of the native
vegetation on that portion of the property in the regulatory floodplain.
      5.   Repair to on site septic systems provided the ground disturbance is
the minimum necessary.
   C.   Habitat Impact Assessment: Unless allowed under subsections A and B of
this section, a permit application to develop in the regulatory floodplain
shall include an assessment of the impact of the project on federal, state or
locally protected species and habitat, water quality and aquatic and riparian
habitat. The assessment shall be:
      1.   A biological evaluation or biological assessment developed per 50
CFR 402.12 to initiate federal interagency consultation under endangered
species act section 7(a)(2); or
      2.   Documentation that the activity fits within section 4(d) of the
endangered species act; or
      3.   Documentation that the activity fits within a habitat conservation
plan approved pursuant to section 10 of the endangered species act, where any
such assessment has been prepared or is otherwise made available; or
      4.   An assessment prepared in accordance with "Regional Guidance For
Floodplain Habitat Assessment And Mitigation", FEMA region X, 2010. The
assessment shall determine if the project would adversely affect:
         a.   Species that are federal, state or local listed as threatened or
endangered,
         b.   The primary constituent elements for critical habitat, when
designated,
         c.   Essential fish habitat designated by the national marine
fisheries service,
         d.   Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas,
         e.   Other protected areas and elements necessary for species
conservation.
   D.   Habitat Mitigation Plan:
      1.   If the assessment conducted under subsection C of this section
concludes the project is expected to have an adverse effect on water quality
and/or aquatic or riparian habitat or habitat functions, the applicant shall
provide a plan to mitigate those impacts, in accordance with "Regional Guidance
For Floodplain Habitat Assessment And Mitigation", FEMA region X, 2010.
         a.   If the project is located outside the protected area, the
mitigation plan shall include such avoidance, minimization, restoration, or
compensation measures as are appropriate for the situation.
         b.   No new stream crossings are allowed within the special flood
hazard zone, but outside the protected area.
         c.   If the project is located in the protected area, the mitigation
plan shall stipulate avoidance measures as are needed to ensure that there is
no adverse effect during any phase of the project.
      2.   The plan's habitat mitigation activities shall be incorporated into
the proposed project. The floodplain development permit shall be based on the
redesigned project and its mitigation components.
      3.   The floodplain administrator shall not issue a certification of use
or a certificate of occupancy until all work identified in the biological
evaluation, biological assessment, or mitigation plan has been completed or the
applicant has provided the necessary assurance that unfinished portions of the
project will be completed. (Ord. 913, 9-28-2011)
14-1-8: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Flood Damage Prevention Chapter Administrator: The city
of Orting hereby appoints the city administrator or his/her designee to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter, and is hereinafter
referred to as the floodplain administrator.
   B.   Duties Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all floodplain development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required, including those
local, state or federal permits that may be required to assure compliance with
the endangered species act and/or other appropriate state or federal laws.
      3.   Review all floodplain development permits to determine if the
proposed development is located in the protected area. If located in the
protected area, ensure that the provisions of this chapter are met.
      4.   Ensure that all development activities within the regulatory
floodplain of the jurisdiction of the city of Orting meet the requirements of
this chapter.
      5.   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter,
including proper elevation of the structure.
      6.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter on a permanent basis.
      7.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program.
      8.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
      9.   Cooperate with state and federal agencies to improve flood and other
technical data and notify FEMA of any new data that would revise the FIRM.
   C.   Records:
      1.   Where base flood elevation data have been obtained pursuant to this
chapter, the administrator shall obtain, record, and maintain the actual
"finished construction" elevation. This information shall be recorded on a
current FEMA elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31), signed and sealed by a
professional land surveyor, currently licensed in the state of Washington.
      2.   For all new or substantially improved dry floodproofed
nonresidential structures, where base flood elevation data has been obtained
pursuant to this chapter, the administrator shall obtain, record and maintain
the elevation (in relation to the datum of the effective FIRM) to which the
structure was floodproofed. This information shall be recorded on a permanent
basis on a current FEMA floodproofing certificate (FEMA form 81-65),
professional engineer, currently licensed in the state of Washington.
   D.   Development Permits: All required land use and building permits granted
by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Establishment; Development Permit Required: A development permit
shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in this chapter. The permit shall be for all
structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in this chapter, and for
all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in this
chapter.
      2.   Application For Development Permit: Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city and may include, but not be
limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevations of the area of development in relation to mean sea
level (such as a contour map) for both existing and proposed development;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
         c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
         d.   Elevations of the 10-, 50-, 100-, and 500-year floods, where the
data are available;
         e.   The riparian habitat zone shall be delineated on the site plan
for all development proposals within three hundred feet (300') of any stream or
shoreline;
         f.   Certification by a registered professional surveyor that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing
criteria in subsection
14-1-9B2 of this chapter;
         g.   Existing and proposed infrastructure. If the proposed project
includes a new structure, substantial improvement, or repairs to a
substantially damaged nonresidential structure that will be dry floodproofed,
the application shall include the FPE for the building site and the elevation
in relation to the datum of the effective FIRM to which the structure will be
dry floodproofed and a certification by a registered professional engineer or
licensed architect that the dry floodproofing methods meet the floodproofing
criteria;
         h.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         i.   Description of the extent to which a stream, lake, or other water
body, including its shoreline, will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development;
         j.   Designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and
habitat areas identified for conservation or protection under state or federal
or local laws or regulations (e.g., endangered species act, Magnuson-Stevens
fishery conservation and management act, growth management act, shorelines
management act, priority habitat and species list);
         k.   Existing native vegetation and proposed revegetation;
         l.   Documentation that the applicant will apply for all necessary
permits required by federal, state, or local law. The application shall include
written acknowledgment that the applicant understands that the final
certification of use or certificate of occupancy will be issued only if the
applicant provides copies of the required federal, state, and local permits or
letters stating that a permit is not required. The floodplain permit is not
valid if those other permits and approvals are not obtained prior to any ground
disturbing work or structural improvements; and
         m.   Acknowledgment by the applicant that representatives of any
federal, state or local unit of government with regulatory authority over the
project are authorized to enter upon the property to inspect the development.
      3.   Construction Stage: If the floodplain encroaches five feet (5') into
the subject property line, then a flood floor elevation certificate will be
required. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever
means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain
management administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor
or floodproofed elevation, as built in relation to mean sea level. A registered
land surveyor who is authorized to certify such information in the state of
Washington shall prepare said certification. Any work undertaken prior to the
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The administrator shall review the lowest floor elevation and floodproofing
certificate. Should these documents be found not in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter the permit holder shall immediately cease further
work, and shall correct the deficiencies. Failure of the permit holder to
submit the surveyed lowest floor elevation and floodproofing certificates, and
failure to correct said deficiencies required, shall be the cause to issue a
stop work order for the project.
   E.   Administration By City; Grant Or Deny Permits: The city is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
   F.   Duties And Responsibilities Of City: Duties of the city shall include,
but not be limited to:
      1.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the Washington state department
of ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the federal insurance administration.
         b.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
   G.   Certificate Of Occupancy:
      1.   A certification of use for the property or a certificate of
occupancy for a new or substantially improved structure or an addition shall
not be issued until:
         a.   The permit applicant provides a properly completed, signed and
sealed elevation or floodproofing certificate showing finished construction
data as required by this chapter;
         b.   If a mitigation plan is required by this chapter, all work
identified in the plan has been completed according to the plan's schedule;
         c.   The applicant provides copies of all required federal, state, and
local permits noted in the permit application instructions; and
         d.   All other provisions of this chapter have been met.
      2.   The floodplain administrator may accept a performance bond or other
security that will ensure that unfinished portions of the project will be
completed after the certification of use or certificate of occupancy has been
issued.
   H.   Floodplain Development Permit Expiration: If there has been no start of
construction, a floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty
(180) days after the date of issuance. Where the applicant documents a need for
an extension beyond this period due to conditions beyond the applicant's
control, the floodplain administrator may authorize one or more extensions.
   I.   Variance Procedure: Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall
be processed as described in title 15 of this code. Approved variances shall
permit structures to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base
flood elevation and shall assert that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation. The findings and conclusions of approved variances shall be recorded
with the Pierce County auditor and shall run with the land.
      1.   Variance Considerations: In considering such variances, the hearings
examiner shall consider the following factors:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands at the
risk of injury to others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         f.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         h.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      2.   Conditions For Variances:
         a.   Upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
of a historic structure will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
         b.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         c.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         d.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
         e.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         f.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight
or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low
damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria in this section and
otherwise complies with subsections of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-1010, 3-6-2017)
14-1-9: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following
standards are required:
      1.   Anchoring:
         a.   All new construction including manufactured housing and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure.
         b.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas"
guidebook for additional techniques).
      2.   Construction Materials And Methods:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         b.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         c.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
      3.   Utilities:
         a.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
         b.   Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the
floodway;
         c.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
         d.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. A habitat impact
assessment shall be conducted in accordance with subsection
14-1-7B5 of this chapter as a condition of approval of an on site waste
disposal system to be located in the regulatory floodplain.
      4.   Subdivision Proposals 1 : This section applies to all subdivision
proposals, short subdivisions, short plats, planned developments, and new and
expansions to manufactured housing parks.
         a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
         b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
         c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood damage;
         d.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less);
         e.   The proposed subdivision should have one or more new lots in the
regulatory floodplain set aside for open space use through deed restriction,
easement, subdivision covenant, or donation to a public agency. The density of
the development in the portion of the development outside the regulatory
floodplain may be increased to compensate for the amount of land in the
regulatory floodplain preserved as open space in accordance with Orting
development regulations. Optionally, the city may choose to accept a mitigation
contribution in lieu of dedicated open space; and
         f.   The final recorded subdivision plat shall include a notice that
part of the property is in the SFHA, riparian habitat zone and/or channel
migration area, as appropriate.
      5.   Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative
source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that
proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of
reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high
water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to
elevate at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade in these zones
may result in higher insurance rates.
      6.   Shoreline Modifications:
         a.   The proposed project must be designed and located so that new
structural flood protection is not needed.
         b.   Bank stabilization measures must be minimized to the maximum
extent possible. If bank stabilization measures are necessary, bioengineered
armoring of stream banks must be used per the "Integrated Streambank Protection
Guidelines" 2003.
      7.   Hazardous Materials: No new development shall create a threat to
public health, public safety, or water quality. Chemicals, explosives,
gasoline, propane, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other materials that are hazardous, toxic, or a threat
to water quality are prohibited from the regulatory floodplain. This
prohibition does not apply to small quantities of these materials kept for
normal household use. This prohibition does not apply to the continued
operations of existing facilities and structures, reuse of existing facilities
and structures, or functionally dependent facilities or structures. If the
proposed project cannot meet these requirements, then a habitat assessment must
be conducted in accordance with section
14-1-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in subsection
14-1-6B of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction:
         a.   New construction, substantial improvements and/or reconstruction
due to substantial damage of any residential structure, including machinery and
equipment shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot
(1') or more above base flood elevation.
         b.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall be used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. These enclosed areas
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot (1')
or more above the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
         a.   Be floodproofed so that below one foot (1') above the base flood
level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
         c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official;
         d.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed,
must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection B1b of this section; and
         e.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
(1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to 1 foot
above the base flood level will be rated as at the base flood level).
      3.   Critical Facility: Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of
new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor elevated to three feet (3') or more above the level
of the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures
must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or
released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the
base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the
maximum extent possible.
      4.   Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is one foot (1') or more above the base flood elevation; and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance
with the provisions of subsection A.1.b. of this section.
      5.   Site Design:.
         a.   Structures and other development shall be located to avoid flood
damage.
            (1)   If a lot has a buildable site out of the regulatory
floodplain, all new structures shall be located in that area, when possible.
            (2)   The structure shall be aligned parallel with the direction of
flood flows where practicable.
            (3)   If a lot does not have a buildable site out of the regulatory
floodplain, all new structures, pavement, and other development must be sited
in the location that has the least impact on habitat by locating the structures
as far from the water body as possible or placing the structures on the highest
land on the lot.
            (4)   A minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from the protected
area shall be required for all structures.
            (5)   If the proposed project does not meet the criteria of this
section, a habitat impact assessment shall be conducted pursuant to subsection
14-1-7C of this chapter and, if necessary, a habitat mitigation plan shall be
prepared and implemented pursuant to subsection
 14-1-7D of this chapter.
         b.   All new development shall be designed and located to minimize the
impact on flood flows, flood storage, water quality, and habitat.
            (1)   Stormwater and drainage features shall incorporate LID BMPs
in accordance with section
9-5A-9D of this code unless, based on the Stormwater Management Manual, LID
BMPs are infeasible.
            (2)   If the proposed project will create new impervious surfaces
where no more than ten percent (10%) of the lot in the regulatory floodplain is
covered by impervious surface, it must comply with title 9, chapter 5,
"Stormwater Regulations", of this code, and mitigate adverse impacts as
provided by this chapter.
            (3)   Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is
prohibited within designated floodways, except for: a) repairs, reconstruction,
or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area, and
b) repairs, reconstruction, or improvements which do not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure as specified in Washington
administrative code 173-158-070.
   C.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection
14-1-6B of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practices that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is
prohibited within designated floodways, except for: a) repairs, reconstruction,
or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and
b) repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which
does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
either: 1) before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement is started, or 2)
if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to structures
identified as historic places shall not be included in the fifty percent (50%).
      3.   If subsection B of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
   D.   Wetlands Management: To the maximum extent possible avoid the short and
long term adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of
wetlands, especially those activities that limit or disrupt the ability of the
wetland to alleviate flooding impacts. The following process should be
implemented:
      1.   Review proposals for development within base floodplains for their
possible impacts on wetlands located within the floodplain.
      2.   Ensure that development activities in or around wetlands do not
negatively affect public safety, health, and welfare by disrupting the
wetlands' ability to reduce flood and storm drainage.
      3.   Request technical assistance from the department of ecology in
identifying wetland areas. Existing wetland map information from the national
wetlands inventory (NWI) can be used in conjunction with the community's FIRM
to prepare an overlay zone indicating critical wetland areas deserving special
attention.
   E.   Native Vegetation: The site plan required in section
14-1-8 of this chapter shall show existing native vegetation.
      1.   In the riparian habitat zone, native vegetation shall be left
undisturbed, except as provided in sections 7.1 and 7.2.C.
      2.   Outside the riparian habitat zone, removal of native vegetation
shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the surface area of the portion
of the site in the regulatory floodplain. Native vegetation in the riparian
habitat zone portion of the property can be counted toward this requirement.
      3.   If the proposed project does not meet the criteria of sections 7.4.A
and B, a habitat impact assessment shall be conducted pursuant to section 7.7
and, if necessary, a habitat mitigation plan shall be prepared and implemented
pursuant to section 7.8.
   F.   Compensatory Storage: New development shall not reduce the effective
flood storage volume of the regulatory floodplain. A development proposal shall
provide compensatory storage if grading or other activity eliminates any
effective flood storage volume. Compensatory storage shall:
      1.   Provide equivalent volume at equivalent elevations to that being
displaced. For this purpose, "equivalent elevation" means having similar
relationship to ordinary high water and to the best available 10-year, 50-year
and 100-year water surface profiles;
      2.   Be hydraulically connected to the source of flooding;
      3.   Provide compensatory storage in the same construction season as when
the displacement of flood storage volume occurs and before the flood season
begins; and
      4.   The newly created storage area shall be graded and vegetated to
allow fish access during flood events without creating fish stranding sites.
   G.   Additional Standards; Crawl Space Construction For Buildings Located In
Special Flood Hazard Areas:
      1.   The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more
than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown as D
in figure 3 of this section.
      2.   The height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall
must not exceed four feet (4') (shown as L in figure 3 of this section) at any
point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height
according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood
hazard areas.
      3.   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space. The enclosed area should be drained
within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will
vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as
soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well
drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles, or
gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.
      4.   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet
(5') per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of five feet (5')
per second, other foundation types should be used.
      5.   Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated
above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the
system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either
be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
      6.   Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation
walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE.
      7.   Below grade crawl space construction in accordance with the
requirements listed above will not be considered basements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2397.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2395.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1dd777a57011ea3e42c658472303f516c127e2a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2393.png]
 
   H.   Critical Facilities:
      1.   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the regulatory floodplain (SFHA).
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities to the maximum extent possible.
      2.   Construction of new critical facilities in the regulatory floodplain
shall be permissible if no feasible alternative site is available, provided:
         a.   Critical facilities shall have the lowest floor elevated three
feet (3') above the base flood elevation or to the height of the 500-year
flood, whichever is higher. If there is no available data on the 500-year
flood, the permit applicants shall develop the needed data in accordance with
FEMA mapping guidelines.
         b.   Access to and from the critical facility shall be protected to
the elevation of the 500-year flood.
(Ord. 913, 9-28-2011; amd. 2017-1006, 2-22-2017; Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020; Ord.
2021-1072, 1-27-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
14-1-10: STANDARDS FOR PROTECTION OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Applicability: All permit applications will be reviewed to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall: 1) be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, 2) be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, 3) be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and 4) be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
This section's protection requirement applies to all new structures and
substantial improvements, which include:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new structure.
      2.   Reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement that will
result in a substantially improved building.
      3.   Repairs to an existing building that has been substantially damaged.
      4.   Placing a manufactured home on a site.
      5.   Placing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   B.   Flood Protection Standards:
      1.   All new structures and substantial improvements shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the FPE.
      2.   The structure shall be aligned parallel with the direction of flood
flows where practicable.
      3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure.
      4.   The structure shall be aligned parallel with the direction of flood
flows where practicable.
      5.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure.
      6.   All materials below the FPE shall be resistant to flood damage and
firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
      7.   Materials harmful to aquatic wildlife, such as creosote, are
prohibited below the FPE.
      8.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be elevated above the
FPE. Water, sewage, electrical, and other utility lines below the FPE shall be
constructed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within them
during conditions of flooding.
      9.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be used only for parking, storage, or building access and shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement shall either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or licensed architect and/or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   C.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall be elevated in accordance with this chapter. As an alternative to
elevation, a new or substantial improvement to a nonresidential structure and
its attendant utility and sanitary facilities, may be dry floodproofed in A
zones. The project must meet the following:
      1.   The structure is not located in zones V, V1-30, or VE; and
      2.   Below the FPE the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; and
      3.   The structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      4.   The plans are certified by a registered professional engineer or
licensed architect that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this
subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design,
specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator as set forth in this chapter.
   D.   Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved on sites shall be:
      1.   Elevated on a permanent foundation in accordance with this chapter,
and
      2.   Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to other applicable anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces. (For more detailed information, see the
"FEMA Guidebook" p-85.)
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days, or
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions.
   F.   Appurtenant Structures: A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure and is not used for human habitation may be
exempt from the elevation requirement of this chapter, provided:
      1.   It is used only for parking or storage;
      2.   It is constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      3.   It is anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to
other structures;
      4.   All portions of the structure below the FPE must be constructed of
flood resistant materials;
      5.   Service utilities such as electrical and heating equipment meet the
standards of this chapter;
      6.   It has openings to allow free flowage of water that meet the
criteria in this chapter;
      7.   The project meets all the other requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Utilities:
      1.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      2.   Water wells shall be located outside the floodway and shall be
protected to the FPE;
      3.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
      4.   New on site waste disposal systems are prohibited in the city.
   H.   Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
      2.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage;
      4.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authorized source, it shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50)
lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 2017-1009, 3-1-2017)
TITLE 15
DEVELOPMENT CODE ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SECTION:
15-1-1: Intent
15-1-2: Rules Of Interpretation
15-1-1: INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to combine and consolidate the application,
review, and approval procedures for land development within the city to ensure
that procedures are clear and concise. It is further intended to comply with
state guidelines for combining and expediting development review and
integrating environmental review and land use development plans. (Ord. 778, 10-
30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-1-2: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   For the purposes of the development code, all words used in this code
shall have their normal and customary meanings, unless specifically defined
otherwise in this code.
   B.   Words used in the present tense include the future.
   C.   The plural includes the singular and vice versa.
   D.   The words "will" and "shall" are mandatory.
   E.   The word "may" indicates that discretion is allowed.
   F.   The word "used" includes designed, intended, or arranged to be used.
   G.   Distances shall be measured horizontally unless otherwise specified.
   H.   The word "building" includes a portion of a building or a portion of
the lot on which it stands. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15-2-1: General Provisions
15-2-2: A
15-2-3: B
15-2-4: C
15-2-5: D
15-2-6: E
15-2-7: F
15-2-8: G
15-2-9: H
15-2-10: I
15-2-11: J
15-2-12: K
15-2-13: L
15-2-14: M
15-2-15: N
15-2-16: O
15-2-17: P
15-2-18: Q
15-2-19: R
15-2-20: S
15-2-21: T
15-2-22: U
15-2-23: V
15-2-24: W
15-2-25: X
15-2-26: Y
15-2-27: Z
15-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this title and titles 12 and 13 of
this code; other definitions may be found in individual titles. (Ord. 778, 10-
30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-2: A:
ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator, chief supervisory staff person or his/
her designee.
APPLICANT: A person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity seeking
development approval from the city.
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW: Review and approval conducted pursuant to section
13-6-7  of this code. (Ord. 886, 9-8-2010; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-3: B:
BINDING SITE PLAN: An alternative method of land division for the sale or lease
of commercial or industrial properties, condominiums and manufactured home
parks that is more flexible than traditional subdivision procedures.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof for the shelter of persons or property.
BUILDING AREA, BUILDING SITE: An area within a lot upon which a building to
accommodate the principal use of the lot could be practicably built, bound by
the setbacks. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 830, 6-28-2006)
15-2-4: C:
CITY: The city of Orting.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Orting or his or her
designee.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Orting.
CLOSED RECORD APPEAL: An administrative appeal on the record to a local
government body or officer, including the legislative body, following an open
record hearing on a project permit application when the appeal is on the record
with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only
appeal argument allowed.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The Director of the City of Orting’s Department
of Community Development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Orting comprehensive plan adopted in 1996, as amended.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT: An amendment or change to the text or maps of the
comprehensive plan.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT, EMERGENCY: An amendment or change to the text or
maps of the comprehensive plan made when an emergency exists or to resolve an
appeal of a comprehensive plan filed with the growth management hearings board
or with the court, in accordance with RCW 36.70A.130(2)(b).
CONDITIONAL USE: A use allowed in one or more zones as defined by the zoning
title, but which because of characteristics peculiar to such use, the size,
technological processes or equipment, or because of the exact location with
reference to surroundings, streets, and existing improvements or demands upon
public facilities, requires a special permit in order to provide a particular
degree of control to make such uses consistent and compatible with other
existing or permissible uses in the same zone and mitigate adverse impacts of
the use.
CRITICAL AREAS: Areas of environmental sensitivity, which include the following
areas and ecosystems: a) wetlands; b) areas with a critical recharging effect
on aquifers used for potable water; c) fish and wildlife habitat conservation
areas; d) frequently flooded areas; and e) geologically hazardous areas as
defined by title 11 of this code. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-5: D:
DATE OF DECISION: The date on which final action occurs and from which the
appeal period is calculated.
DAY: A twenty four (24) hour period commonly referred to as “calendar day” and
not “work day.”
DESIGN STANDARDS: Dimensional and other quantitative standards, including, but
not limited to, lot sizes and dimensions, setbacks, building placement and
design requirements for improvements such as streets, sidewalks, storm drainage
facilities and other standards used by the city to control physical
development.
DEVELOPER: Any person who proposes an action or seeks a permit regulated by
this title and titles 10, 12 and 13 of this code, inclusive.
DEVELOPMENT: Any land use permit or action regulated by this title and titles
12 and 13 of this code, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, planned
unit developments, binding site plans, rezones, conditional use permits, or
variances.
DEVELOPMENT CODE: Orting Municipal Code, this title and titles 12 and 13.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping
facilities for one family or household unit. Dwelling unit does not include
recreational vehicles or mobile homes. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003;
amd. Ord. 808, 6-30-2005; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-6: E:
EFFECTIVE DATE: The final decision of the decision maker shall be effective on
the date stated in the decision, motion, resolution, or ordinance; provided,
that the date from which appeal periods shall be calculated shall be the date
of the written decision of the decision maker. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-
11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-7: F:
FINAL DECISION: The final action by the administrator, planning commission,
hearing examiner, or city council. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-8: G:
15-2-9: H:
HEARING, OPEN RECORD: A hearing, conducted by a single hearing body or officer
authorized by the local government to conduct such hearings, that creates the
local government's record through testimony and submission of evidence and
information, under procedures prescribed by the local government by ordinance
or resolution. An open record hearing may be held prior to a local government's
decision on a project permit to be known as a "open record predecision
hearing." An open record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be known as an
"open record appeal hearing," if no open record predecision hearing had been
held on the project permit.
HEARING, CLOSED RECORD: Also known as “Closed Record Appeal.” A hearing,
conducted by a single hearing body or officer authorized by the local
government to conduct such hearings, that review the local government's record
of testimony and evidence and information. A closed record hearing or “closed
record appeal” follows an open record hearing on a project permit application
when the appeal is on the record with no or limited new evidence or information
allowed to be submitted and only appeal argument allowed.
HEARING EXAMINER: The official appointed by the mayor to adjudicate land use
decisions as set forth in this title. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-10: I:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-11: J:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-12: K:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-13: L:
LOT: A fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of
sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and
area. The term shall include tracts or parcels.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The adjustment of a boundary line between existing lots
which results in no more lots than existed before the adjustment.
LOT OF RECORD: An area or parcel of land as shown on an officially recorded
plat or subdivision, or an area or parcel of land to which a deed or contract
is officially recorded as a unit of property, or which is described by metes
and bounds or as a fraction of a section. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003)
15-2-14: M:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-15: N:
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lawfully established lot which does not conform to the
provisions of the development code.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A lawfully erected structure which does not conform to
the provisions of the development code.
NONCONFORMING USE: A lawfully established use which does not conform to the
provisions of the development code. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-16: O:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-17: P:
PARTY OF RECORD: Any person who has testified at a hearing or has submitted a
written statement related to a development action and who provides the city
with a complete address and/or email address.
PERSON: Any person, firm, business, corporation, partnership of other
associations or organization, marital community, municipal corporation, or
governmental agency.
PLANNED ACTION: A significant development proposal as defined in Revised Code
of Washington 43.21C.031, as amended.
PLAT: A scale drawing of a subdivision showing lots, blocks, streets or tracts
or other divisions or dedications of land to be subdivided.
PLAT, FINAL: A precise drawing of a subdivision and dedications which conforms
to the approved preliminary plat, meets all the conditions of preliminary
approval and meets the requirements of the Pierce County auditor for recording.
PLAT, FINAL SHORT: A precise drawing of a short subdivision and dedications
which conforms to the approved preliminary short plat, meets all the conditions
of approval and meets the requirements of the Pierce County auditor for
recording.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A neat and approximate scale drawing of a proposed
subdivision, showing the existing conditions and the proposed layout of
streets, lots, blocks and other information needed to properly review the
proposal.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY SHORT: A neat and approximate scale drawing of a proposed
short subdivision, showing the existing conditions and the proposed layout of
streets, lots, blocks and other information needed to properly review the
proposal.
PLAT, SHORT: The plat of a short subdivision.
PRIMARY OR PRINCIPAL USE: The predominant use of the land or building to which
all other uses are secondary.
PROJECT: A proposal for development.
PROJECT PERMIT or PROJECT PERMIT APPLICATION: Any land use or environmental
permit or license required from a local government for a project action,
including but not limited to subdivisions, binding site plans, planned unit
developments, conditional uses, shoreline substantial development permits, site
plan review, permits or approvals required by critical area ordinances, site-
specific rezones which do not require a comprehensive plan amendment, but
excluding the adoption or amendment of a comprehensive plan, subarea plan, or
development regulations except as otherwise specifically included in this
subsection.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND UTILITIES: Land or structures owned by or operated for
the benefit of the public use and necessity, including, but not limited to,
public facilities defined in Revised Code of Washington 36.70A.030, as amended.
PUBLIC HEARING: An open record hearing at which evidence is presented and
testimony is taken or a closed record hearing conducted to review the record
and render a final decision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any structure, utility, roadway or sidewalk for use by the
public, required as a condition of development approval.
PUBLIC MEETING: An informal meeting, hearing, workshop, or other public
gathering of people to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a
proposed project permit prior to the local government's decision. A public
meeting may include, but is not limited to, a design review or architectural
control board meeting, a special review district or community council meeting,
or a scoping meeting on a draft environmental impact statement. A public
meeting does not include an open record hearing. The proceedings at a public
meeting may be recorded and a report or recommendation may be included in the
local government's project permit application file.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned land, including, but not limited to,
parks, playgrounds, waterways, and trails. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-18: Q:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-19: R:
REZONE: A change in classification from one zoning district to another. (Ord.
778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-20: S:
SIGN: A structure or graphic display designed to inform or attract the
attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located.
SITE PLAN: A scale drawing which shows the areas and locations of all
buildings, streets, roads, improvements, easements, utilities, open spaces and
other principal development features for a specific parcel of property.
SITE PLAN, BINDING: A site plan reviewed and approved pursuant to title 13 of
this code, containing the inscriptions or attachments setting forth the
limitations and conditions of use for a specific parcel of property and meeting
the requirements of the Pierce County auditor for recording.
STREET: A public or private right of way or easement which provides vehicle
access to more than three (3) lots or potential lots.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials constructed and erected permanently in or
on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground, not including utility poles and related ground or pad mounted
equipment, residential fences less than six feet (6') high, retaining walls,
rockeries and other similar improvements of a minor character less than three
feet (3') high.
SUBDIVISION: A division of land into ten (10) or more lots, tracts, parcels,
sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership,
including resubdivision of previously subdivided land, except as provided in
this title.
SUBDIVISION CODE: Title 12 of this code.
SUBDIVISION, SHORT: A division of land into nine (9) or fewer lots, tracts,
parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of
ownership, except as provided in this title. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003; amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-2-21: T:
TRACT OR PARCEL: A portion of a subdivision having fixed boundaries. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-22: U:
USE: The purpose which lands or structures serve or for which they are
occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003,
eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-23: V:
VARIANCE: A permissible modification of the application of title 13 of this
code, to a particular property, subject to approval of the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-24: W:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-25: X:
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-26: Y:
YARD: The lot area between lot lines and the building area. (Ord. 778, 10-30-
2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-2-27: Z:
ZONE, ZONE DISTRICT: A defined area of the city within which the use of land is
regulated and certain uses permitted and other uses excluded as set forth in
title 13 of this code.
ZONING CODE: Title 13 of this code. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
15-3-1: Roles And Responsibilities
15-3-2: City Administrator
15-3-3: City Council
15-3-4: Planning Commission
15-3-5: Hearing Examiner
15-3-1: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Regulation Of Land Development: The regulation of land development is a
cooperative process involving different elected and appointed boards and city
staff. The specific responsibilities of these bodies are set forth below.
   B.   Developers: A developer is expected to read and understand the city
development code and be prepared to fulfill the obligations placed on the
developer by this title and titles 12 and 13 of this code. (Ord. 778, 10-30-
2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-3-2: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The administrator shall review and act on the following:
   A.   Authority: The administrator is responsible for the administration of
this title and titles 12 and 13 of this code.
   B.   Administrative Interpretation: Upon request or as determined necessary,
the administrator shall interpret the meaning or application of the provisions
of said titles and issue a written administrative interpretation within thirty
(30) days. Requests for interpretation shall be written and shall concisely
identify the issue and desired interpretation.
   C.   Administrative Approvals: Administrative approvals are set forth in
chapter 4 of this title.
   D.   Permit Procedures: The administrator shall determine the proper
procedure for all development applications. (See section
15-4-2 of this title.) (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-3-3: CITY COUNCIL:
In addition to its legislative responsibility, the city council shall review
and act on the following subjects:
   A.   Recommendations of the planning commission;
   B.   Appeals of planning commission recommendations and decisions, with the
exception of decisions of the planning commission pursuant to section
13-6-7 , "Architectural Design Review", and title 13, chapter 7, "Sign
Regulations", of this code that are subject to appeal to the hearing examiner,
in which case the city council shall review and act on the recommendation of
the hearing examiner on appeal; and
   C.   Appeals of determinations of significance under chapter 14 of this
title.
The review criteria for the above actions are contained in chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord. 886, 9-8-2010; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-3-4: PLANNING COMMISSION:
The planning commission shall review and render decisions on architectural
design review applications, sign permits, sign code hardship variances, plat
vacation and alterations, site plans and major amendments thereto, and shall
review and make recommendations on the following applications and subjects:
   A.   Amendments to the comprehensive plan.
   B.   Amendments to the environmentally critical areas code, title 11 of this
code.
   C.   Amendments to the subdivision title, title 12 of this code.
   D.   Amendments to the zoning title, title 13 of this code, or the official
map.
   E.   Applications for preliminary plats, plat alterations, and planned unit
developments.
   F.   Other legislative actions as requested by the city council.
The review criteria for the above actions are contained in chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-3-5: HEARING EXAMINER:
The hearing examiner shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The hearing
examiner shall interpret, review and implement land use regulations as provided
by ordinance and may perform other quasi-judicial functions as are delegated by
ordinance. Unless otherwise specified, the term "hearing examiner" shall also
mean deputy examiners and examiners pro tem. Hearing examiners shall be
appointed based on their qualifications for the duties of the office including
education and experience.
   A.   Influence And Conflict Of Interest: No person, including city
officials, elected or appointed, shall attempt to influence the hearing
examiner in any matter pending before him/her, except at a public hearing duly
called for such purpose, or to interfere with the hearing examiner in the
performance of his/her duties in any way; provided, that this section shall not
prohibit the city attorney from rendering legal service to the hearing examiner
upon request. The hearing examiner shall be subject to same code of ethics as
set forth in Revised Code Of Washington 35A.63.170 and 42.23.
   B.   Rules: The hearing examiner shall have the power to prescribe rules for
the scheduling and conduct of hearings and other procedural matters related to
his/her duties.
   C.   Powers: The hearing examiner shall have the authority to:
      1.   Review and decide the following land use permit matters pursuant to
Revised Code Of Washington 35A.63.170:
         a.   Conditional use permits.
         b.   Variances.
         c.   Appeals of administrative decisions or determinations.
         d.   Appeals of administrative decisions or determinations pursuant to
Revised Code Of Washington 43.21C.
         e.   Amortization periods for nonconforming signs.
         f.   Nonconforming use permits.
         g.   Appeals of SEPA determinations of the underlying land use action.
      2.   Review and decide civil violations in conjunction with enforcement
actions of the city as described in chapter 11, "Enforcement", of this title.
   D.   Procedures: The hearing examiner shall:
      1.   Receive and examine available information;
      2.   Conduct public hearings in accordance with the provisions of this
title, Revised Code Of Washington 42.32 and all other applicable law, and
prepare a record thereof;
      3.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      4.   Issue subpoenas and examine witnesses; provided that no person shall
be compelled to divulge information which he/she could not be compelled to
divulge in a court of law;
      5.   Regulate the course of the hearing;
      6.   Make and enter findings of fact and conclusions to support his/her
decisions;
      7.   Conduct conferences for the settlement or simplification of the
issues;
      8.   Conduct discovery;
      9.   Dispose of procedural requests or similar matters;
      10.   Take official notice of matters of law or material facts;
      11.   Issue summary orders in supplementary proceedings; and
      12.   Take any other action authorized by or necessary to carry out this
chapter.
The above authority may be exercised on all matters for which jurisdiction is
assigned to the hearing examiner by city ordinance, code or other legal action
of the city council. The nature of the hearing examiner's decision shall be as
specified in this chapter and in each ordinance or code which grants
jurisdiction to the hearing examiner. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003;
amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 4
TYPES OF PERMIT ACTIONS
SECTION:
15-4-1: Procedures For Processing Permit Applications
15-4-2: Determination Of Procedure Type
15-4-3: Exemptions
15-4-1: PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
All development permit applications shall be classified as one of the
following: type 1, type 2, type 2a, type 3, type 3a or type 4. Legislative
decisions are type 5 actions. Exclusions from the requirements of permit
applications procedures are included at section
15-4-3 of this chapter.
Table 15-4-1 of this section describes the city's permit processing procedures.
TABLE 15-4-1
 Procedure For Permit Applications           Legislative
 Type 1 Type 2 Type 2a Type 3 Type 3a Type 4 Type 5
               Procedure For Permit Applications                                        Legislative
               Type 1        Type 2        Type 2a       Type 3   Type 3a    Type 4     Type 5
Recommendation n/a           n/a           Administrator n/a      n/a        Planning   Planning
by                                                                           commission commission
Final decision Administrator Administrator Planning      Hearing  Planning   City       City
by                                         commission    examiner commission council    council
Notice of      No            No            No            Yes      Yes        Yes        No
application
                                           Only if
                                           appealed.
                                           Open record
Open record    Only if       Only if       hearing with
public hearing appealed.     appealed.     hearing       Yes,     Yes,       Yes,       Yes, before
or open record Open record   Open record   examiner;     before   before     before     planning
appeal of      hearing with  hearing with  recommendati  hearing  planning   planning   commission
final decision hearing       hearing       on made by    examiner commission commission
               examiner      examiner      hearing
                                           examiner to
                                           the city
                                           council
                                                         No,                            Yes, or
Closed record  No, unless    No, unless                  unless   No, unless Yes,       council may
appeal/final   appealed to   appealed to   City council  appealed appealed   before     hold
decision       council       council                     to       to council council    another
                                                         council                        public
                                                                                        hearing
                                                                                        Yes (or
                                                                                        appeal to
Judicial                                                                                the Growth
appeal         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes        Management
                                                                                        Hearings
                                                                                        Board, as
                                                                                        applicable)
 
Table 15-4-2 of this section describes the types of decisions rendered in each
permit procedure category.
TABLE 15-4-2
DECISIONS
 
Type 1          Type 2           Type 2a       Type 3      Type 3a      Type 4      Type 5
(Administrator) (Administrator)  (Planning     (Examiner)  (Planning    (Council)   (Council)
                                 Commission)               Commission)
Permitted uses;
boundary line
adjustments;
cottage
development;    Short plats;                                                        Comprehensive
home            land clearing                                                       plan
occupations;    and grading;                                                        amendments;
minor           shoreline                                  Sign code                development
amendments to   permits;                       Conditional hardship                 regulations;
subdivisions    administrative                 use         variances;   Preliminary shoreline
and PUD;        variances;       Architectural permits1;   plat         plats;      master
nonconforming   administrative   design        general     vacations    preliminary program
use permit;     interpretations; review; sign  variances;  and          PUDs; final amendments;
temporary       landscape plan   permits       sign permit alterations; PUDs;       zoning text
construction    modifications;                 variances;  major        certain     amendments;
trailer; minor  alternative                    certain     amendments   appeals     zoning map
amendments to   landscape plans;               appeals     to PUDs                  amendments;
site plans;     site plans and                                                      annexations;
final plats;    major amendments                                                    development
mobile/         thereto 2                                                           agreements
manufactured
home parks or
subdivisions;
binding site
plans
Notes:
1.   All applications for conditional use permit approval shall be accompanied
by a site plan.
2.   In accordance with RCW 35.70B.140(3) projects with only interior
alterations are exempted from site plan review provided no new sleeping
quarters or bedrooms are added and certain other thresholds are not exceeded.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 830, 6-28-2006; Ord. 886, 9-
8-2010; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2021-1074, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024)
15-4-2: DETERMINATION OF PROCEDURE TYPE:
   A.   The administrator shall determine the proper procedure for all
development applications. Questions concerning an appropriate procedure for a
specific project shall be resolved by using the higher numbered procedure.
   B.   An application that involves two (2) or more procedures may be
processed collectively under the highest numbered procedure that is required
for any part of the application. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-4-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following permits or approvals are specifically excluded from the
provisions of this title:
      1.   Landmark designations;
      2.   Street vacations;
      3.   Street use permits;
      4.   Impact fee decisions; and
      5.   Concurrency determinations.
   B.   Pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 36.70B.140(2), building permits,
boundary line adjustments, or other construction permits, or similar
administrative approvals categorically exempt from environmental review under
SEPA 1  or permits and approvals for which environmental review has been
completed in conjunction with other permit procedures, are excluded from the
following:
      1.   Notice of application unless an open public hearing is required;
      2.   Consolidated permit review processing except as provided in Revised
Code Of Washington 36.70B.140;
      3.   Joint public hearings;
      4.   Single report stating all of the decisions and recommendations made
as of the date of the report do not require an open public record hearing; and
      5.   Notice of decision. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 43.21C. See chapter 14 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
APPLICATION PROCESS
SECTION:
15-5-1: Application
15-5-2: Preapplication Meetings
15-5-3: Contents Of Applications
15-5-4: Letter Of Completeness
15-5-5: Technical Review Committee
15-5-6: Environmental Review
15-5-1: APPLICATION:
   A.   Consolidation: To the extent possible, the city shall consolidate
development applications and reviews and coordinate the development permit and
environmental review process, to avoid duplication of the review processes.
B.   Submittal: All applications for development permits, design review
approvals, variances and other city approvals under the development code shall
be submitted on forms provided by the city. All applications shall be signed by
the property owner, lessee, contract purchaser, or a city agency, or by an
authorized agent thereof, or by a person otherwise authorized by the owner to
make application for a development permit. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003; amd. Ord. 887, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-5-2: PREAPPLICATION MEETINGS:
   A.   Informal: Applicants for development are encouraged to contact the city
prior to scheduling a preapplication meeting to discuss the proposed
development, city design standards, design alternatives, and required permits
and application and approval procedures.
   B.   Formal: Every person proposing a development in the city, including
sign permits, with the exception of building permits, shall attend a
preapplication meeting unless waived by the City Administrator. The purpose of
the meeting is to discuss the nature of the proposed development, application
and permit requirements, fees, review process and schedule, applicable plans,
policies and regulations. In order to expedite development review, the city may
invite all affected jurisdictions, agencies and/or special districts to the
preapplication meeting.
      1.   A description of the requirements for a complete application; a
general summary of the permit review procedures; references to the relevant
code provisions or development standards that may apply to the proposal; and
any other relevant information that the city may deem pertinent to the proposal
may be provided by the city at the meeting or immediately following the meeting
at the request of the applicant.
      2.   It is impossible for the meeting to be an exhaustive review of all
potential issues. The discussions at the meeting or the materials cited in
subsection B1 of this section shall not bind the city or prohibit the city's
future application or enforcement of all applicable law.
      3.   The fee associated with a formal preapplication meeting shall be the
fee set forth in the adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003; amd. Ord. 887, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-5-3: CONTENTS OF APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Specified Information: All applications for approval under this title
and titles 12, 13 and 14 of this code shall include the information specified
in the applicable title. The administrator may require additional information
as reasonably necessary to fully and properly evaluate the proposal.
   B.   Permits: The applicant shall apply for all permits required by the city
as identified in the preapplication meeting. It is the applicant's
responsibility to determine if additional permits are required by other
jurisdictions. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
15-5-4: LETTER OF COMPLETENESS:
   A.   Time Limit: Within twenty eight (28) days of receiving a date stamped
application, the city shall review the application and, as set forth below,
provide applicants with a written determination that the application is
complete or incomplete (except as described in subsection D of this section).
   B.   Complete Application; Materials Required: A project permit application
shall be declared complete only when it contains all of the following
materials:
      1.   A fully completed, signed, and acknowledged development application
and all applicable review fees.
      2.   A fully completed, signed, and acknowledged environmental checklist
for projects subject to review under the state environmental policy act (SEPA),
if applicable.
      3.   Information addressing the approval criteria associated with the
application(s) for the desired project.
      4.   Any supplemental information or special studies identified during
the preapplication meeting.
   C.   Incomplete Applications; Determination: For applications determined to
be procedurally incomplete, the city shall identify, in writing, the specific
requirements or information necessary to constitute a procedurally complete
application. Upon submittal of the additional information, the city shall,
within fourteen (14) days, issue a letter of completeness or identify what
additional information is required. The city's determination of completeness
shall not preclude the city from requesting additional information or studies
either at the time of notice of completeness or at a later time, if new
information is required or where there are substantial changes in the proposal.
      1.   If the applicant receives a determination from the city that an
application is procedurally incomplete, the applicant shall have ninety (90)
days to submit the additional required information. Within fourteen (14) days
after submittal of the additional material, the city shall make a determination
as described in this section.
      2.   If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit the additional
material or fails to meet the deadline for resubmittal, the application shall
lapse.
      3.   In those situations where the application has lapsed because the
applicant has failed to submit the required material within the necessary time
period, or the applicant has elected to withdraw the application, the applicant
may request a refund of the application fee unrelated to the city's
determination of completeness. The amount of the refund shall be determined by
the city based on its expenditures associated with the administration of the
application.
   D.   Complete Application: A project permit application shall be deemed
procedurally complete under this section on the twenty-ninth day after
receiving the application, if the city does not provide a written determination
to the applicant that the application is procedurally incomplete as provided in
subsection C of this section within twenty eight (28) days of the application.
The determination of completeness shall be made when the application is
sufficiently and procedurally complete for review even though additional
information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken
subsequently. The determination of completeness, or the city's failure to
provide a written determination of completeness, shall not preclude the city's
ability to request additional information or studies whenever new information
is required, or when substantial changes have been made to the proposal.
   E.   Other Agencies: To the extent known by the city, other agencies with
jurisdiction over the application shall be identified in the city's
determination of completeness. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-5-5: TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   Meeting; Notification: Immediately following the issuance of a letter
of completeness, the city shall schedule a meeting of the technical review
committee (TRC) and notify the applicant of the meeting. The TRC may be
composed of representatives of all affected city departments, utility
districts, the fire department, and any other entities or agencies with
jurisdiction. The TRC shall be chaired either by the administrator, city
engineer, or building inspector.
   B.   Review: The TRC shall review the development application for compliance
with city plans and regulations, coordinate necessary permit reviews, and
identify the development's environmental impacts. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff.
11-11-2003)
15-5-6: ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW:
   A.   Policies And Procedures: Developments and planned actions subject to
the provisions of the state environmental policy act (SEPA), Revised Code Of
Washington chapter 43.21C shall be reviewed in accordance with the policies and
procedures contained in chapter 14 of this title.
   B.   Exemptions: Environmental review shall be conducted concurrently with
development project review. The following are exempt from concurrent review:
      1.   Projects categorically exempt from SEPA.
      2.   Components of previously completed planned actions, to the extent
permitted by law and consistent with the EIS for the planned action. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 6
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
15-6-1: Authority And Purpose
15-6-2: Applicability
15-6-3: Geographic Scope
15-6-4: Imposition Of Impact Fees
15-6-5: Approval Of Development
15-6-6: Fee Schedules And Establishment Of Service Area
15-6-7: Calculation Of Impact Fees
15-6-8: Impact Fee Account Funds Established
15-6-9: Use Of Funds
15-6-10: Assessment And Collection
15-6-11: Adjustments, Independent Calculations
15-6-12: Credits
15-6-13: Refunds
15-6-14: Appeals And Payments Under Protest
15-6-15: Council Review
15-6-16: Administrative Fees
15-6-17: Exemption Or Reductions
15-6-18: Relationship To Environmental Impact Mitigation
15-6-19: Severability
15-6-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's police powers, Revised
Code of Washington 82.02, 58.17, and 43.21C. The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Maintain a program for financing school, park, and transportation
capital improvements necessitated in whole or in part by development within the
city consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan;
      2.   Ensure adequate levels of service within the city;
      3.   Establish means to charge and collect impact fees to ensure that all
new development bears its proportionate share of the capital costs of off site
facilities reasonably necessary to accommodate the growth and maintain adopted
level of service standards;
      4.   Ensure that the city pays its fair share of the capital cost of
facilities necessitated by public uses unrelated to new growth; and
      5.   Ensure fair collection and administration of impact fees.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to
effectively carry out its purpose in the interests of public health, safety and
welfare. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all development
regulated by this title and titles 12 and 13 of this code unless otherwise
exempted.
   B.   Mitigation of impacts on schools, parks and transportation facilities
located in jurisdictions outside the city will be required when:
      1.   The other affected jurisdiction has reviewed the development's
impact(s) under its adopted impact fee regulations and has recommended to the
city that there be a requirement to mitigate the impact; and
      2.   There is an interlocal agreement between the city and the affected
jurisdiction specifically addressing impact analysis and mitigation.
   C.   The following are exempted from impact fees:
      1.   Alteration, expansion, reconstruction, or replacement of existing
single-family or multi-family dwelling units that does not result in additional
dwelling units.
      2.   As for school impact fees only, any new dwelling unit subject to
restrictions that may be legally enforced by a private party or governmental
entity limiting occupants to a minimum adult age or to populations that do not
include children under the age of eighteen (18), including nursing homes and
retirement centers; provided that this exclusion ceases if the exempted
dwelling unit(s) is later converted to permanent use as a dwelling not subject
to the restrictions.
      3.   As for school impact fees only, hotels, motels, and other transient
accommodations provided that this exclusion ceases if the exempted development
is later converted to permanent use as a dwelling not subject to these
restrictions.
      4.   Accessory dwelling units (exemption applies to school and park
impact fees only).
      5.   Development which has impact mitigation provided through
environmental review under the state environmental policy act addressing the
impact.
      6.   Development for which school facility impacts or park impacts have
been mitigated by the payment of, or promise or obligation to pay fees,
dedicate land, or construct or improve school facilities as part of a permit
approval process granted prior to the effective date of this chapter unless the
terms of the agreement expressly provide otherwise.
      7.   Development that meets the requirements for exemption per section
15-8-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 808,
6-30-2005; Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-3: GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE:
Impact fees shall be charged and collected for development within the corporate
city limits. All unincorporated areas annexed to the city on and after the
effective date hereof shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. After
the adoption of interlocal agreements with other local, regional or state
jurisdictions, the geographic boundaries may be expanded accordingly. (Ord.
778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-4: IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Impact fees may be required pursuant to the fee schedule adopted
through the process described herein, or mitigation may be provided through
other means such as the purchase, installation and/or improvement of
facilities; or the dedication of land.
   B.   Impact fees shall:
      1.   Only be imposed for school, park, and transportation facilities
needs that are reasonably related to the impacts of development;
      2.   Not exceed the proportionate share of the costs of school, park, and
transportation facilities that will reasonably benefit the new development;
      3.   Be used for school, park and transportation facilities that will
reasonably benefit the new development;
      4.   Not be used to correct existing deficiencies;
      5.   Not be imposed to mitigate impacts or meet facility needs that are
being addressed through other laws or programs;
      6.   Not be collected for improvements to other jurisdictions’ facilities
unless the city and the other affected jurisdiction have an interlocal
agreement;
      7.   Not be collected for projects vested prior to the adoption date
hereof unless changes or modifications to the development proposal require an
amendment to the previous city approval and result in greater impacts than
previously addressed by the vested approval;
      8.   Be collected only once for each development, unless changes or
modifications to the development proposal require an amendment to the previous
city approval and result in greater impacts than previously addressed by the
vested approval;
      9.   Be collected for system improvement costs previously incurred by the
city, to the extent that said improvements are intended to serve new
development and that additional fees shall not be collected for system
deficiencies; and
      10.   Be only collected on residential developments for school and park
impact mitigation. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136,
12-11-2024)
15-6-5: APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT:
Approvals and permits granted by the city shall include findings and
conclusions pertaining to impact mitigation fees consistent with this chapter.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-6: FEE SCHEDULES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREA:
   A.   Impact fees are established by city council resolution.
   B.   The boundaries of the service area are the same as the corporate city
limits. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-
2024)
15-6-7: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   School impact fees are based on planned school facility development
provided by the Orting School District and included in the comprehensive plan
and in Pierce County code 4A.30.
      1.   The impact fee schedule is calculated based upon the formula set
forth in table
15-6-1 of this section. The formula in table
15-6-1 of this section is the city's determination of the appropriate
proportionate share of the costs of public school capital facilities needed to
serve new growth and development to be funded by school impact fees.
      2.   The impact fee schedule, as enacted, includes a maximum fee
obligation. The actual fee obligation is the lesser of the fee calculation or
the maximum fee obligation.
      3.   Separate fees shall be calculated for single-family and multi-
family types of dwelling units, because of their different impact on school
facilities. Separate student generation rates (student factor) must be
determined by the district for each type of dwelling unit. For purposes of this
title, mobile homes shall be subject to the single-family dwelling unit fee and
duplexes and zero lot line homes shall be subject to the multi-family dwelling
units fee.
      4.   The fee calculations shall be made on a districtwide basis to assure
maximum utilization of all school facilities in the district currently used for
instructional purposes.
      5.   The formula in table
15-6-1 of this section also provides for a credit for school sites or
facilities actually provided by a fee payer which are included in a school
district capital facilities plan and that are required by the city as a
condition of development approval. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
      6.   Effective February 13, 2007, the maximum fees for single- family
dwelling units shall be two thousand seven hundred eighty dollars ($2,780.00)
and for multi-family dwelling units shall be one thousand four hundred sixty
five dollars ($1,465.00). The maximum fee obligation in this chapter continues
until adjusted by ordinance. (Ord. 845, 1-31-2007)
SCHOOL IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE, TABLE 15-6-1
Given the following variables:
A  = Full cost fee for site acquisition costs = A1+A2+A3
A1 = Elementary school site cost per student x the student factor
A2 = Middle school site cost per student x the student factor
A3 = High school site cost per student x the student factor
B  = Full cost fee for school construction = B1+B2+B3
B1 = Elementary school construction cost per student x the student factor
B2 = Middle school construction cost per student x the student factor
B3 = High school construction cost per student x the student factor
C  = Full cost fee for temporary facilities construction = C1+C2+C3
C1 = Elementary school temporary facility cost per student x the student factor
C2 = Middle school temporary facility cost per student x the student factor
C3 = High school temporary facility cost per student x the student factor
D  = State match credit = D1+D2+D3
D1 = Cost index x SPI square footage per student for elementary school x state
     match % x student factor
D2 = Cost index x SPI square footage per student for middle school x state
     match % x student factor
D3 = Cost index x SPI square footage per student for high school x state match
     % x student factor
TC = Tax payment credit = the net present value of the average assessed value
     for the dwelling unit type in the school district,
   <(1+I)n>-1
   I(1=I)nx the current school district capital property tax levy rate, I
     (1+I)n, where
   I=the current interest rate for outstanding bond issues
   n=the number of years left before the bond or capital levy is retired, up
     to a maximum of 10 years.
FC = Facilities credit = the per dwelling unit value of any site or facilities
     provided directly by the development
   FC = value of fee payer's contribution
   number of dwelling units in the development
 
Then the unfunded need (UN):
UN = A+B+C-D-TC-FC
The fee obligation:
Total unfunded need x 50% = fee calculation
Fee obligation is the lesser of the fee calculation or the maximum fee
obligation as set by resolution of the city council.
Where:
"Capacity" means the number of students a school district's facilities can
accommodate districtwide at each grade span, based on the district's adopted
level of service.
"Classrooms" means educational facilities of the district required to house
students for its basic educational program. The classrooms are those facilities
the district determines are necessary to serve its student population.
Specialized facilities identified by the district, including, but not limited
to, gymnasiums, cafeterias, libraries, administrative offices, special
education classrooms not suitable for general use because of design or
equipment needs, and child daycare centers, shall not be counted as classrooms.
"Construction Cost Per Student" means the estimated cost of construction of a
permanent school facility in the district for the grade span of school to be
provided, as a function of the district's design standard per grade span and
taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. A district
shall establish construction costs based upon the district's experience with
comparable projects, adjusted for inflation, or the cost of similar projects in
other districts.
"Cost Index" means the area allowance for school construction determined under
WAC 180-27-060.
"Facilities Credit" means the value of any site, school facilities, or monetary
compensation the district has agreed to accept as an offset against a school
impact fee from a fee payer regarding the development activity.
"Grade Span" means the categories into which a district groups its grades of
students; i.e., elementary, middle or junior high school, and high school.
"Level Of Service (For Schools)" means the standard adopted by each district
that identifies the program year, the class size by grade span, and taking into
account the requirements of students with special needs, the number of
classrooms presently available of facilities the district believes will best
serve its student population, the student population for new school facilities
per grade span, and other factors as identified by the school district. Unless
a district adopts by board resolution, a standard of service that specifically
deems all or any portion of its relocatable facilities to be permanent
facilities, a district's standard of service shall not include any classrooms
or other educational facilities housed in relocatable facilities or in
transitional facilities. Except as otherwise defined by the school board
pursuant to a board resolution, transitional facilities shall mean those
facilities, including relocatable facilities or leased space, that are used to
cover the time required for the construction of permanent facilities called for
in the capital facilities plan.
"Permanent Facilities" means facilities of the district with a fixed foundation
that are not relocatable facilities.
"Relocatable Or Temporary Facilities" means any factory built structure,
transportable in one or more sections that is designed to be used as an
education space and is needed to prevent the overbuilding of school facilities,
to meet the needs of service areas within a district, or to cover the gap
between the time that families move into new residential developments and the
date that construction is completed on permanent school facilities.
"Relocatable Or Temporary Facilities Cost Per Student" means the estimated cost
of purchasing and siting a relocatable facility in the district for the grade
span of school to be provided, as a function of the district's design standard
per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with
special needs.
"Site Cost Per Student" means the estimated cost of a site in the district for
the grade span of school to be provided as a function of the district's design
standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students
with special needs. A district shall determine site costs based on past
experience or the acquisition costs for similar sites in comparable school
districts.
"SPI Square Footage Per Student" means the space allocations per grade span
determined by WAC 180-27-035. State board of education.
"State Matching Credit" means the calculation set forth in attachment A of the
district's Boeckh index times SPI square footage per student per grade span
times state match percentage times applicable student factor.
"State Match Percentage" means the percentage of school construction costs for
which a district is eligible to receive state funding pursuant to Revised Code
of Washington 28A.525.166 and the rules applicable thereto.
"Student Factor" means the number derived by a school district to describe how
many students of each grade span are expected to be generated by development
activity. Student factors shall be based on district records of average actual
student generated rates for new developments constructed over a period of not
more than five (5) years prior to the date of the fee calculation; provided
that, if such information is not available in the district or if there are no
developments in the district similar to that being proposed, the district may
use data from districts with similar demographics, or, if no other data sources
are reasonably available, countywide averages. Student factors shall be
separately determined for single-family dwelling units and dwelling units
within multi-family residences. For purposes of this chapter, mobile homes
shall be considered single-family residences.
"Tax Payment Credit Or ’TC’" means the calculation set forth in attachment A of
the district's average real property tax determined value for single-family
dwelling units or multi-family dwelling units times the district's capital
property tax rate as adjusted by the current interest rate for any bonds being
retired by a capital tax and the number of years each capital levy tax shall be
imposed, up to ten (10) years. The district's capital tax rate consists of
authorized tax levies to retire bonded indebtedness incurred for school
district capital purposes under chapter 28A.530 Revised Code of Washington and
school facility levies for construction, remodeling, and modernization under
Revised Code of Washington 84.52.053.
   B.   Park impact fees are based on the level of service standards for parks
and trails established in the comprehensive plan.
      1.   It is the city’s intent to maintain the ratio of park land to
population established in the comprehensive plan land use element. Dedication
of land for public parks and recreation facilities is the preferred method for
mitigating impacts on such facilities caused by the development of new
households.
      2.   When creation of a new household (in the form of a subdivision,
short plat, planned unit development, manufactured housing park, or residential
building permit on a lot for which a parks impact fee has not been collected)
is proposed, the city shall require dedication of land necessary to meet the
park land to population ratio established in the comprehensive plan land use
element. In the event that land dedication is determined by the city to be
unfeasible, a mitigation fee in accordance with table
15-6-3 of this section shall be assessed. The amount of land to be dedicated
for each dwelling unit shall be as shown in table
15-6-2 of this section:
PARKS LAND DEDICATION FORMULA, TABLE 15-6-2
   Park land area per household: 8*43,560/322.58 = 1,080 square feet/ household
(rounded)
   Given the following variables:
   a)   Comprehensive plan park land-to-population ratio = eight (8) acres per
thousand (1,000)
   b)   Average household size = three and one-tenth (3.1) persons per
household
   c)   Households per thousand (1,000) = 1,000/3.1 = 322.58
   3.   The fee value of land to be dedicated may be determined by either of
the following methods:
      a.   The applicant may provide a fair market appraisal of the improved
property value. The appraisal shall be prepared by a member of the Appraisal
Institute (MAI).
      b.   The city may calculate the average improved land value using Pierce
County assessor’s data for all new dwelling units constructed in the previous
calendar year.
   4.   Park impact fee (PIF) assessments in lieu of land dedication shall be
collected based on table 15-6-3 of this section and specified by city council
resolution:
   TABLE 15-6-3
   PARKS IMPACT FEE FORMULA
Given the following variables:
           Adjustment in accordance with Revised Code of Washington 82.02.050
A    =     and 060 to provide a balance between impact fees and other sources
           of public funds to meet capital facilities needs. For park
           improvements this adjustment is fifty (50) percent, so that A = 0.5.
HS   =     Average household size of three and one-tenth (3.1) persons.
PLOS =     Adopted park land level of service standard of eight (8) acres per
           thousand (1,000) population.
PLR  =     Proportionate land requirement per new household of two-one-
           hundredths (0.0248) acre calculated as PLOS ÷ 1,000 x HS.
           Park land value of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) per acre and
PV   =     park improvement value of one hundred and four thousand dollars
           ($104,000).
TLOS =     Adopted trails level of service standard of one-fourth mile per
           thousand (1,000) population.
TV   =     Trails land and improvement value of thousand dollars ($44,000) per
           mile.
PTR  =     Proportionate trail requirement per new household of 0.000775
           calculated as TLOS ÷ 1,000 x HS.
           PIF = A x [PLR x PV + PTR x TV]
Therefore: PIF = 0.5 x [0.0248 x $119,000 + 0.000775 x $44,000] = $1,492 per
           new household (unless amended by city council resolution)
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2022-1092, 3-30-2022; Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-8: IMPACT FEE ACCOUNT FUNDS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Park Impact Fee Fund: There is hereby created and established a special
purpose park and recreation facilities impact fee fund to receive park impact
fees. All park impact fees and investment income received pursuant to this
title shall be deposited into the park impact fee fund. Procedures for
administration of the funds shall be established by the administrator.
Expenditures from these funds shall be made in accordance with the city's
normal budget procedures. Annually, the city shall prepare a report on each
impact fee account showing the source and amount of all monies collected,
interest earned, and capital or system improvements that were financed in whole
or in part by impact fees.
   B.   School Impact Fee Fund: The Orting school district shall maintain a
school impact fee suspense fund into which all school impact fees shall be
deposited. Annually, in accordance with the interlocal agreement, the school
district shall prepare and submit to the city a report on school impact fees
and the school impact fee account, showing the source and amount of all monies
collected, earned, or received, and the public improvements that were financed
in whole or in part by the impact fees.
   C.   Transportation Impact Fee Fund: There is hereby created and established
a special purpose transportation facilities impact fee fund to receive
transportation impact fees. All transportation impact fees and investment
income received pursuant to this title shall be deposited into the
transportation impact fee fund. Procedures for administration of the funds
shall be established by the administrator. Expenditures from these funds shall
be made in accordance with the city's normal budget procedures. Annually, the
city shall prepare a report on each impact fee account showing the source and
amount of all monies collected, interest earned, and capital or system
improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-9: USE OF FUNDS:
   A.   Impact fees shall be used for public facility improvements that will
reasonably benefit the new development; shall not be imposed to make up for
deficiencies in the facilities serving existing developments; and shall not be
used for maintenance or operation.
   B.   Impact fees may be spent for improvements, including, but not limited
to, facility planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off site
improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing,
grant matching funds and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or
mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to public facilities, and any
other expenses which can be capitalized and are consistent with the
comprehensive plan.
   C.   Impact fees may also be used to recoup public facility improvement
costs previously incurred to the extent that new growth and development will be
served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.
   D.   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been
issued for the construction of public facility or system improvements for which
impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on
such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or
improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and
are used to serve the new development. Capital facilities plans using impact
fees for the purpose of assisting in the provision of capital facilities or
facility systems must clearly differentiate between funds used for new
improvement and those funds used to correct existing deficiencies. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-10: ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Fee Determination: For all development activity subject to this
chapter, the city shall determine the total impact fee at the time of
application for a building permit or for installation of a mobile/manufactured
home, based on the capital facilities plan element of the Orting comprehensive
plan and the resulting fee schedule in effect at the time of application. (Ord.
778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
   B.   Collection Time: Collection shall occur prior to the time of building
permit issuance unless the fee payer requests a deferral as outlined below and
provides the city with proof that a voluntary impact fee lien in the form
provided for in subsection C of this section has been executed by all legal
owners of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the
building permit is to occur, and the form has been recorded in the office of
the Pierce County auditor. If a voluntary impact fee lien has been recorded,
then the following collection shall occur:
      1.   Pursuant to Revised Code Of Washington 82.02.050, applicants for
single-family attached or single-family detached residential building permits
may request to defer payment, for no more than eighteen (18) months from the
date of building permit issuance, of required impact fees until final
inspection, which request shall be granted so long as the requirements of this
chapter are satisfied. If a deferral request is granted under this section, the
city may withhold certification of final inspection until the impact fees have
been paid in full.
         a.   A request for impact fee deferral shall be made in writing on a
form provided by the city, and submitted contemporaneously with the associated
building permit application. Any request for impact fee deferral must be
accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount determined by resolution of
the city council.
         b.   The deferral entitlements allowed under this chapter shall be
limited to the first twenty (20) single-family residential construction
building permits per applicant, as identified by contractor registration number
or other unique identification number, per year.
      2.   For dwelling units other than single-family, prior to the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy. The applicant must provide evidence to the
county that the fee has been paid.
      3.   If development activity originally excluded from the scope of this
chapter is converted to a residential use creating an impact on schools and/or
parks, the appropriate fee shall be immediately determined and become due for
payment. (Ord. 2016-991, 8-31-2016)
   C.   Title Notification: The owner of any property for which a school impact
fee is not paid prior to issuance of a building permit shall record a voluntary
impact fee lien with the Pierce County auditor in the applicable form set forth
below:
VOLUNTARY IMPACT FEE LIEN
   Parcel Number:
   Address:
   Legal Description:
   Present Owner:
Notice: The site was the subject of a development proposal for building permit
application number (# ) filed on (date).
A (school) (park) (transportation) impact fee in the amount established in
15-6-6 is due to the City of Orting upon the earlier of: transfer of title,
refinancing, or 18 months from the date of issuance of the building permit. The
fees are a lien on the property. In the event the fee is not paid when due,
Orting shall foreclose it in the same manner as an assessment. This lien shall
earn interest at the applicable statutory rate from the date of default. The
owner shall also pay the City's reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred
in the foreclosure process. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not
commence foreclosure proceedings less than 30 calendar days prior to providing
written notification to the then present owner of the property via certified
mail with return receipt requested advising of its intent to commence
foreclosure proceedings. If the present owner cures the default within the 30-
day cure period, no attorney's fees and/or costs will be owed.
Signature of Owner(s)
   D.   Collection Of Fee Or Record Of Lien: The city shall not issue a
building permit for any development activity until applicable school and parks
impact fees are paid or the fee payer has provided the city with satisfactory
evidence that the applicable voluntary impact fee lien has been recorded
against the property for which the building permit is issued. Notwithstanding
the recording of a voluntary impact fee lien, the city may collect the fee when
it becomes due from either the person or entity: 1) whose development activity
creates the demand for additional public facilities which requires approval, 2)
who applies for issuance of the building permit, or 3) the owner of the real
property subject to the lien; provided the city shall not collect from any one
or all of the above referenced persons and/or entities an amount that exceeds
the fee, if any, due for the dwelling unit(s), including interest, attorney
fees and costs authorized by the lien. If the fee is collected from a person or
entity who is or which is not the current owner of the real property subject to
the lien, the city shall assign its interest in the lien to the person or
entity who or which paid the fee.
   E.   Record Satisfaction Of Lien: Unless the city has assigned its interest
in the lien as provided for in subsection D of this section, upon payment of
any voluntary impact fee lien, the city shall promptly record a satisfaction of
lien. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-11: ADJUSTMENTS, INDEPENDENT CALCULATIONS:
   A.   A fee payer may request an adjustment to the impact fees set forth in
this title by preparing and submitting to the city and Orting school district
(for school impact fees) an independent fee calculation for the development
activity for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted
shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.
      1.   If the city agrees with the independent fee calculation, a written
agreement shall be transmitted to the fee payer for recording.
      2.   If the city does not agree with the independent fee proposal, the
fee payer may request a third party review. The third party reviewer will be
selected by the city.
         a.   The fee payer shall pay the third party reviewer for services and
the city for analysis of the independent fee calculation.
         b.   While there is a presumption that the calculations set forth in
the capital facilities plan element of the comprehensive plan are valid, the
third party reviewer shall consider the documentation submitted by a fee payer
and the analysis prepared by the city.
         c.   The third party reviewer may result in the city acceptance,
rejection, or revision of the independent fee calculation after consideration
of documentation submitted in support of or in opposition to the independent
fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, principles of
fairness, and/or other relevant information. The fees or alternative fees and
the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the fee
payer, and the school district (for school impact fees).
   B.   Determinations made pursuant to this section may be appealed to the
hearing examiner subject to the procedures set forth in this title. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-12: CREDITS:
   A.   The fee payer shall be entitled to a credit against the applicable
impact fee component for the value of any dedication of land for, improvement
to, or new construction of any system improvements provided by the fee payer,
to facilities that are identified in the capital facilities plan and that are
required by the city as a condition of approval for the development activity.
   B.   The amount of the credit shall be the higher of either the value of the
land or improvements established in the adopted comprehensive plan capital
facilities element or by an appraisal conducted by an independent professional
appraiser mutually agreeable to the city and the fee payer. Either the fee
payer or the city may request an appraisal, in which event the cost of the
appraisal shall be borne by the requesting party. Determinations made pursuant
to this section may be appealed to the examiner subject to the procedures set
forth in this title.
   C.   After the effective date of this chapter, the developer shall be
entitled to a credit for the value of the land or actual costs of capital
facility construction against the fee that would be chargeable under the
formula provided by this chapter, whenever a development is granted approval
subject to the following conditions: that the developer actually provide school
sites, school facilities, or improvements to school facilities that are
identified in the comprehensive plan capital facilities element, or whenever
the developer has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a voluntary agreement with
the school district, to provide land, provide school facilities, or make
improvements to existing facilities. The land value or costs of construction
shall be determined pursuant to subsection B of this section.
   D.   After the effective date of this chapter, the developer shall be
entitled to a credit for the value of the land or actual costs of capital
facility construction against the fee that would be chargeable under the
formula provided by this chapter, whenever a development is granted approval
subject to the following condition(s): that the developer park, open space, or
linear trail park facilities that are identified in the capital facilities
element, or whenever the developer has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a
voluntary agreement with the city, to provide land for parks, open space, or
linear trails that are identified in the capital facilities element, or make
improvements to existing facilities. The land value or costs of construction
shall be determined pursuant to subsection B of this section.
   E.   When a subdivision or other type of development is conditioned upon the
dedication of land, or purchase, installation or improvement of school, park,
or transportation facilities, a final plat, final PUD, or short plat shall not
be recorded, nor a building permit issued until:
      1.   The city has determined in writing that any land to be dedicated is
shown on the face of the final plat, final PUD, or short plat, or a deed
conveying the land to the city or school district, as appropriate, has been
recorded with the Pierce County auditor; and
      2.   The city has determined in writing, after consultation with the
designated public owner responsible for permanent, continuing maintenance and
operation of the facilities, that the developer has satisfactorily undertaken,
or guaranteed to undertake in a manner acceptable to the city, any required
purchase, installation or improvement of the required school, park, or
transportation facilities. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-13: REFUNDS:
   A.   The current owner of property on which impact fees have been paid may
receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or
encumbered within six (6) years of their receipt. In determining whether impact
fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a
first in, first out basis.
   B.   (For school impact fees) the city shall, through the interlocal
agreement with the Orting School District, provide for the district to refund
fees according to the requirements of this chapter.
      1.   The district shall notify potential claimants by first class mail
deposited with the United States postal service addressed to the owner of the
property as shown in the county tax records.
      2.   An owner's request for a refund must be submitted to the Orting
School District superintendent in writing within one year of the date the right
to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is
later.
   C.   Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered within these time
limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within
this one year period, shall be retained and expended consistent with the
provisions of this section.
   D.   Refunds of impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact
fees.
   E.   Should the city seek to terminate any or all impact fee requirements,
all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be
refunded to the current owner of the property for which an impact fee was paid.
Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the
city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in
a newspaper of general circulation at least two (2) times and shall notify all
potential claimants by first class mail addressed to the owner of the property
as shown in the county tax records. All funds available for refund shall be
retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds
shall be retained by the city, but must be expended for the original purposes,
consistent with the provisions of this section. The notice requirement set
forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances
within the account or accounts being terminated.
   F.   An owner/applicant may request and shall receive a refund, including
interest earned on the impact fees, when:
      1.   The owner/applicant does not proceed to finalize the development
activity as required by statute, city code, or the uniform building code; and
      2.   The district or the city has not expended or encumbered the impact
fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund. In the event that the
district or the city has expended or encumbered the fees in good faith, no
refund shall be forthcoming. However, if within a period of three (3) years,
the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or
substantially similar development activity, the owner shall be eligible for a
credit. The owner must petition the city in writing and provide receipts of
impact fees paid by the owner for a development of the same or substantially
similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The city shall
determine whether to grant a credit, and such determinations may be appealed by
following the procedures set forth in this title.
   G.   The amount to be refunded shall include the interest earned by this
portion of the account from the date that it was deposited into the impact fee
fund. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-14: APPEALS AND PAYMENTS UNDER PROTEST:
   A.   An appeal of the decision of the city, the third party reviewer, or the
hearing examiner with regard to the imposition of an impact fee or fee amounts
may be filed by the fee payer or by the school district (for school impact
fees). Any appeal shall follow the appeal process for the underlying permit and
shall not be subject to a separate appeal process.
   B.   Any fee payer may pay the impact fees imposed by this title under
protest in order to obtain a building permit. No appeal shall be permitted
until the impact fees at issue have been provided.
   C.   Further appeals of a decision under this title shall be considered by
the city according to procedures in this title.
   D.   The examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the
applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the
availability or amount of credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an
independent fee calculation. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-15: COUNCIL REVIEW:
   A.   Computation And Schedules: The fee schedules set forth in this chapter
shall be reviewed by the city council as it deems necessary and appropriate in
conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities element of the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-16: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
The cost of administering the impact fee system for school, park, and
transportation impact fees shall be a one time charge established by the city.
This fee, in addition to the actual impact fees, shall be paid by the developer
to the city at the time of building permit issuance. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003,
eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-17: EXEMPTION OR REDUCTIONS:
   A.   Public housing agencies or private nonprofit housing developers
participating in publicly sponsored or subsidized housing programs, or
constructing emergency housing, may apply for exemptions or reductions from the
requirements of this chapter. Private for- profit developers may apply for
exemptions or reductions from the requirements of this chapter for when all or
a portion of the project is designed to accommodate low income residents or
special populations that will result in lower impacts on schools, parks, or
transportation facilities. The determination of the amount of any requested
exemptions or reductions shall be based on the procedures of section
15-6-11 of this chapter.
   B.   The amount of impact fees exempted or reduced for low income subsidized
units shall be replaced by other public funds.
   C.   Dwelling units qualifying for impact fee exemptions or reductions shall
be occupied by low income or special population residents for a minimum of
fifteen (15) years.
   D.   An applicant constructing early learning facilities may apply for
exemptions or reductions from the requirements of this chapter if a covenant is
recorded to ensure that at least twenty five percent (25%) of the families
using the facility qualify for state-subsidized childcare.
   E.   Exemptions for early learning facilities, low income housing, and
emergency housing shall comply with the standards set forth in RCW 82.02.060.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-6-18: RELATIONSHIP TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MITIGATION:
   A.   As provided by Revised Code of Washington 82.02.100, development
required to mitigate environmental impacts pursuant to Revised Code of
Washington 43.21C.060 shall not be required to pay impact fees under this
chapter for the same system improvements.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the city's
authority to deny development permit applications when a proposal would result
in significant adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental review
under SEPA where reasonable mitigation measures are insufficient to address the
identified impact. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-6-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this title or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the remainder of this regulation or the application of the
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
ARTICLE A. TRAFFIC IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
15-6A-1: Authority And Purpose
15-6A-2: Definitions
15-6A-3: Applicability
15-6A-4: Geographic Scope
15-6A-5: Imposition Of Transportation Impact Fees
15-6A-6: Fee Schedules And Establishment Of Service Area
15-6A-7: Calculation Of Impact Fees
15-6A-8: Payment Of Fees
15-6A-9: Project List
15-6A-10: Funding Of Projects
15-6A-11: Refunds
15-6A-12: Appeals
15-6A-13: Relationship To SEPA
15-6A-14: Relationship To Concurrency
15-6A-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This article is enacted pursuant to the city's police powers, the
growth management act as codified in chapter 36.70A Revised Code Of Washington,
the enabling authority in chapter 82.02 Revised Code Of Washington, chapter
58.17 Revised Code Of Washington relating to platting and subdivisions, and the
state environmental policy act (SEPA), chapter 42.21C Revised Code Of
Washington.
   B.   The purpose of this article is to:
      1.   Maintain a transportation impact fee program consistent with the
Orting comprehensive plan and the six (6) year transportation improvements
necessitated in whole or in part by development in the city;
      2.   Ensure adequate levels of transportation and traffic service within
the city consistent with the comprehensive plan;
      3.   Create a mechanism to charge and collect fees to ensure that all new
development bears its proportionate share of the capital costs of off site
transportation facilities directly necessitated by new development, in order to
provide an adequate level of transportation service consistent with the
comprehensive plan;
      4.   Ensure that the city pays its fair share of the capital costs of
transportation facilities necessitated by public use of the transportation
system; and
      5.   Ensure fair collection and administration of such impact fees.
   C.   The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to
effectively carry out its purpose in the interests of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following are definitions provided for administering the transportation
impact fee and supplement those definitions already set forth in chapter 2 of
this title. The city shall have the authority to resolve questions of
interpretation or conflicts between definitions.
ADEQUATE LEVEL OF TRANSPORTATION SERVICE: A system of transportation
facilities, which has the capacity to serve development without decreasing
levels of service below the city's minimum established in the city of Orting
transportation plan.
ATTACHMENT A: The "attachment A - transportation impact fee methodology"
included in the city of Orting 2030 transportation plan technical appendices
and future amendments or modifications thereof.
CAPACITY: The maximum sustainable flow rate at which vehicles or persons can be
expected to traverse a point or uniform segment of a lane or roadway during a
specified time period, usually expressed as vehicles per hour, passengers per
hour, or persons per hour.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Orting or his/her designee.
CITY TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city of Orting or his/her designee.
DEVELOPER: Any person who proposes an action or seeks a permit regulated by
this title or title 10, 12, or 13 of this code.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, or
structure, or use, or any changes in the use of land, that creates additional
demand and need for public facilities.
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of public works of the city of Orting
or his/her designee.
IMPACT FEE OR TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed upon
development approval to pay for public streets and roads needed to serve new
growth and development, and that is reasonably related to the new development
that creates additional demand and need for public streets and roads, that is a
proportionate share of the cost of the public streets and roads, and that is
used for public streets and roads that reasonably benefit the new development.
"Impact fee" does not include a reasonable permit or application fee otherwise
established by city council resolution.
JURISDICTION: The authority of the city of Orting to regulate development
within its limits.
OFF SITE TRANSPORTATION ROAD IMPROVEMENT: Improvement, except a frontage
improvement, to an existing or proposed city road or street outside the
boundaries of a development, which improvement is required or recommended in
accordance with this title.
OWNER: The person(s) with legal right of possession or lawful title.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and
designed to provide service for a particular development project that are
necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project,
and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in the
capital facilities element or the six (6) year plan approved by the city
council shall be considered a project improvement.
SERVICE AREA: A geographic area defined by ordinance or intergovernmental
agreement in which a defined set of public streets and roads provides service
to the development within the area.
SIX YEAR TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (TIP): A subset of projects
contained in the city's capital improvement element. The TIP is a set of
comprehensive street programs/projects which after a public hearing is annually
adopted by the city council for the purpose of advancing plans for not less
than six (6) years as a guide for carrying out the coordinated transportation/
street construction program. The six (6) year TIP shall contain a small group
of capacity projects, which will be considered reasonably funded for
determining transportation concurrency and impact fees. The adoption of the six
(6) year TIP will obligate the city to actively pursue funds to implement the
capacity component of the transportation improvement program as best as is
possible with the available resources.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: Public facilities that are included in the capital
facilities plan and are designed to provide service areas within the community
at large, in contrast to project improvements. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014)
15-6A-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The requirements for this article apply to all development activity in
the city of Orting.
   B.   Mitigation of impacts on transportation facilities located in
jurisdictions outside the city will be required when:
      1.   The other affected jurisdiction has reviewed the development's
impact under its adopted impact fee/mitigation regulations and has recommended
to the city that the city impose a requirement to mitigate the impacts; and
      2.   There is an interlocal agreement between the city and the affected
jurisdiction specifically addressing transportation impact identification and
mitigation. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-4: GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE:
The boundaries within which impact fees shall be charged and collected are
coextensive with the corporate city limits, and shall include all
unincorporated areas annexed to the city on and after the effective date
hereof. After the adoption of interlocal agreements with other local and
regional governments, geographic boundaries may be expanded consistent
therewith. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-5: IMPOSITION OF TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES:
   A.   The city is hereby authorized to impose transportation impact fees on
new development according to the provisions of this article.
   B.   Transportation impact fees:
      1.   Shall only be imposed for system improvements that are reasonably
related to the new development;
      2.   Shall not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of system
improvements that are reasonably related to the new development;
      3.   Shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit
the new development;
      4.   Shall be collected and spent only for system improvements which are
addressed by the six (6) year transportation improvement program, based on the
city of Orting's capital facilities element, identifying:
         a.   Deficiencies in public facilities serving existing development
and the means to eliminate them within a reasonable period of time;
         b.   Additional demands placed on existing public facilities by new
developments; and
         c.   Additional public facility improvements required to serve new
development;
      5.   Shall not be imposed to mitigate the same off site transportation
facility impacts that are mitigated pursuant to any other law;
      6.   Shall not be collected for improvements to state transportation
facilities outside the city boundaries unless the state requests such
improvements and an agreement to collect such fees has been executed between
the state/county and the city;
      7.   Shall not be collected for improvements to transportation facilities
in other jurisdictions unless the affected jurisdiction requests such
improvement and an interlocal agreement has been executed between the city and
the affected jurisdiction for the collection of such fees;
      8.   Shall be collected only once for each building permit, unless
changes or modifications to the building permit are proposed which result in
greater direct impacts on transportation facilities than were considered when
the building permit was first approved; and
      9.   Shall not be collected from any new or expanded city facilities,
post offices, libraries and schools. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-6: FEE SCHEDULES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREA:
   A.   The impact fee methodology setting forth the amount of the
transportation impact fees to be paid by a development is set out in attachment
A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article and incorporated herein by this reference.
   B.   The impact fee schedule of costs, as set out in attachment A as
referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article, shall be updated periodically at the discretion of the
city of Orting as the project list changes or to update project costs.
   C.   For the purpose of this article, the entire city shall be considered
one service area. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-7: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   The city shall calculate the transportation impact fees as set forth in
attachment A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article subject to the provisions of this article.
   B.   In determining the proportionate share, the method of calculating
impact fees shall use trip generation methodology consistent with the latest
edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual.
Accessory dwelling units shall be calculated using ITE Use Number 220,
apartment customer type. The calculation shall incorporate, among other things,
the following:
      1.   The cost of public streets and roads necessitated by new
development;
      2.   An adjustment to the cost of the public streets and roadways for
past or future payments made or reasonably anticipated to be made by new
development to pay for particular system improvements in the form of user fees,
debt service payments, taxes, or other payments earmarked for or proratable to
the particular system improvement;
      3.   The availability of other means of funding public street and roadway
improvements;
      4.   The cost of existing public street and roadway improvements; and
      5.   The methods by which public street and roadway improvements were
financed.
   C.   A credit, not to exceed the impact fee otherwise payable, shall be
provided for the value of any dedication of land for, improvement to, or new
construction of any system improvements provided by the developer, to
facilities that are identified in the transportation impact fee project list
and that are required by the city as a condition of approving the development
permit. The determination of "value" shall be consistent with the assumptions
and methodology used by the city in estimating the capital improvements costs.
   D.   The director may adjust the standard impact fee at the time the fee is
imposed to consider unusual circumstances in specific cases to ensure that
impact fees are imposed fairly.
   E.   The amount of fee to be imposed on a particular development may be
adjusted by the director giving consideration to studies and other data
available to the director or submitted by the developer demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the director that an adjustment should be made in order to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   F.   The impact fee shall provide for system improvement costs previously
incurred by the city to the extent that new growth and development will be
served by the previously constructed improvements; provided, that such fees
shall not be imposed to make up for any system improvement deficiencies. (Ord.
808, 6-30-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-1073, 3-10-2021)
15-6A-8: PAYMENT OF FEES:
   A.   All developers shall pay an impact fee in accordance with the
provisions of this article at the time that the applicable building permit is
ready for issuance. The fee paid shall be the amount in effect as of the date
of the building permit being deemed completed.
   B.   All developers shall pay an impact administrative fee at the time of
issuance of a building permit as set forth in section
15-6-16 of this chapter.
   C.   If the development is modified or conditioned in such a way as to alter
the trip generation rate for the development after building permit issuance,
the impact fee will be recalculated accordingly.
   D.   No building permit shall be issued until the transportation impact fee
is paid.
   E.   Impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain a permit or
other approval of development activity. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-9: PROJECT LIST:
   A.   The director shall recommend annual updates to city's comprehensive
plan, capital facilities element, the six (6) year TIP, and the projects in
attachment A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article and shall:
      1.   Identify proportion of each project that is growth related;
      2.   Forecast the total funding available from taxes and other public
sources for transportation improvements necessary in the next six (6) years;
      3.   Calculate the amount of impact fees associated with those projects
that have already been paid.
   B.   The director may use this information to prepare an annual draft
amendment to attachment A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article, which shall comprise:
      1.   The projects on the comprehensive plan that are growth related and
that should be funded with forecast public monies and the impact fees already
paid;
      2.   The projects already built or funded pursuant to this article whose
performance capacity has not been fully utilized; and
      3.   An update of the estimated costs of the projects listed.
   C.   The council, at the same time that it adopts the annual budget and
appropriates funds for capital improvement projects, shall by separate
ordinance establish the annual attachment A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article by adopting, with or without modification, the
director's draft list.
   D.   Once a project is placed on attachment A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article, a fee shall be imposed on every development that
impacts the project until the project is removed from the list by one of the
following means:
      1.   The council by ordinance removes the project from attachment A as
referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article, in which case the fees already collected will be
refunded if necessary to ensure that impact fees remain reasonably related to
the traffic impacts of development that have paid an impact fee; provided, that
a refund shall not be necessary if the council transfers the fees to the budget
of another project that the council determines will mitigate essentially the
same traffic impacts; or
      2.   The impact fee share of the project has been fully funded, in which
case the director shall administratively remove the project from the project
list. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-10: FUNDING OF PROJECTS:
For funding of projects, see the provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord.
808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-11: REFUNDS:
See section
15-6-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-12: APPEALS:
A developer may appeal the amount of an impact fee determined by the director
as provided in section
15-6-14 of this chapter. The developer shall bear the burden of proving:
   A.   That the director committed material and substantial error in
calculating the developer's proportionate share, as determined by an individual
fee calculation or, if relevant, as set forth in the fee schedule, or in
granting credit for the benefit factors; or
   B.   That the director's decision was based on data that was materially and
substantially incorrect and which, therefore, necessarily resulted in an
erroneous decision. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-13: RELATIONSHIP TO SEPA:
   A.   All development shall be subject to environmental review pursuant to
SEPA and other applicable city ordinances and regulations. The need for a
traffic impact analysis (TIA) and requirements for a TIA are established in the
city of Orting 2030 transportation plan technical appendices "Traffic Impact
Analysis Guidelines".
   B.   Payment of the impact fee shall constitute satisfactory mitigation of
those traffic impacts related to the specific improvements identified on the
project list. (See attachment A as referenced in section
15-6A-2 of this article.)
   C.   Further mitigation in addition to the impact fee shall be required for
identified adverse impacts appropriate for mitigation pursuant to SEPA that are
not mitigated by an impact fee.
   D.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the city's
authority to deny building permits when a proposal would result in significant
adverse traffic impacts identified in an environmental impact statement and
reasonable mitigation measures are insufficient to mitigate the identified
impact. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
15-6A-14: RELATIONSHIP TO CONCURRENCY:
Neither compliance with this article or the payment of any fee hereunder shall
constitute a determination of concurrency under section
15-8-4 of this title. (Ord. 808, 6-30-2005)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
15-7-1: Notice Of Application
15-7-2: Administrative Approval
15-7-3: Public Hearing
15-7-4: Appeal Hearing
15-7-5: Decision
15-7-1: NOTICE OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Included Information: Within fourteen (14) days of issuing a letter of
completeness under chapter 5 of this title, the city shall issue a notice of
application. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The name of the applicant.
      2.   Date of application.
      3.   Date of the letter of completeness.
      4.   Date of notice of application.
      5.   The location of the project, including street address and legal
description.
      6.   A project description.
      7.   The requested approvals, actions, and/or required approvals, actions
or studies.
      8.   A statement of the public comment period which shall be not less
than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days following the date of
the notice of application, and a statement of the right of any person to
comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings,
request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights. Also, a
statement that comments on the notice are due by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on
the last day of the comment period, or, on the first working day following the
last day if the last day falls on a weekend or holiday.
      9.   Identification and location of existing environmental documents and
the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed.
      10.   A city staff contact and phone number.
      11.   The date, time, and place of a public hearing if one has been
scheduled.
      12.   Preliminary determination, if made, of SEPA threshold and/or
development regulations that will be used for project impact mitigation.
      13.   The identification of other permits not included in the application
to the extent known by the local government.
   B.   Posting; Publication: The notice of development application shall be
posted on the subject property and notification shall be published once in a
local newspaper for general circulation, and on the City's website.
   C.   Issuance: The notice of development application shall be issued prior
to required notice of a public hearing and is not a substitute for the notice
of a public hearing.
   D.   Exceptions: A notice of application is not required for the following
actions, when the referenced actions are categorically exempt from SEPA or
environmental review has been completed:
      1.   Application for building permits;
      2.   Application for lot line adjustments;
      3.   Application for administrative approvals; and
      4.   Application for architectural design review. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003,
eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 886, 9-8-2010; Ord. 2021-1079, 6-30-2021; Ord. 2024-
1136, 12-11-2024)
15-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL:
   A.   Type 1 administrative approvals do not require notice.
   B.   Notice of type 2 administrative approvals shall be made as follows:
      1.   Notification Of Preliminary Approval: The administrator shall notify
the adjacent property owners of his or her intent to grant approval at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the effective date of the approval. Notification
shall be made by mail and posted on the city's website. The notice shall
include:
         a.   A description of the preliminary approval granted, including any
conditions of approval.
         b.   A place where further information may be obtained.
         c.   A statement that final approval will be granted unless an appeal
requesting a public hearing is filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the notice. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd.
Ord. 2021-1074, 3-10-2021; Ord. 2021-1079, 6-30-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-
2024)
15-7-3: PUBLIC HEARING:
Notice of a public hearing for all project permit applications that require a
hearing and all open record appeals shall be given as follows:
   A.   Time Of Notices: Except as otherwise required, public notification of
meetings, hearings, and pending actions under this title and titles 12 and 13
of this code shall be made by:
      1.   Publication at least ten (10) days before the date of a public
meeting, hearing, or pending action in the official newspaper if one has been
designated or a newspaper of general circulation in the city;
      2.   Mailing at least ten (10) days before the date of a public meeting,
hearing, or pending action to all property owners as shown on the records of
the county assessor and to all street addresses of properties within five
hundred feet (500'), not including street rights of way, of the boundaries of
the property which is the subject of the meeting or pending action. Addressed
labels and prestamped envelopes shall be provided by the applicant; and
      3.   Posting at least ten (10) days before the meeting, hearing, or
pending action at city hall; on the City's website; other public posting
places; and at least one notice on the subject property.
   B.   Content Of Notice: The public notice shall include a general
description of the proposed project, action to be taken, a nonlegal description
of the property or a vicinity map or sketch, the time, date and place of the
public hearing, and details for where further information may be obtained.
   C.   Continuations: If for any reason, a meeting or hearing on a pending
action cannot be completed on the date set in the public notice, the meeting or
hearing may be continued to a date certain and no further notice under this
section is required.
   D.   Shoreline Master Program Permits: Notice for SMP permits shall be given
as provided by title 11, chapter 6 of this code in accordance with Revised Code
Of Washington 90.58. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 887, 9-
8-2010; Ord. 2021-1079, 6-30-2021; Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-7-4: APPEAL HEARING:
In addition to the posting and publication requirements of section
15-7-3 of this chapter, notice of appeal hearings shall be as follows:
   A.   Administrative Approvals: For appeals of administrative approvals,
notice shall be mailed to adjacent property owners.
   B.   Planning Commission Appeals: For appeals of planning commission
recommendations, notice shall be mailed to parties of record from the planning
commission hearing. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-7-5: DECISION:
A written notice for all final decisions shall be sent to the applicant and all
parties of record. For development applications requiring planning commission
review and city council approval, the notice shall be the signed ordinance or
resolution. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 8
CONCURRENCY AND ADEQUACY
SECTION:
15-8-1: Intent
15-8-2: Authority
15-8-3: Exemptions
15-8-4: Concurrency Procedures
15-8-5: Check For Adequacy (Rep. by Ord. 887, 9-8-2010)
15-8-6: Approval Or Denial Of Permits
15-8-7: Concurrency Test Request Without Application
15-8-1: INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public facilities and services
owned, operated, or provided by the city and public facilities and services
owned, operated or provided by other governments, special districts and
applicable organizations within the city are provided simultaneous to or within
a reasonable time after development occurs consistent with the capital
facilities element of the comprehensive plan and Revised Code Of Washington
36.70A.070(6)(e). This chapter shall apply to all applications for development
or redevelopment permit approvals that will result in:
   A.   More than fifteen (15) new P.M. peak hour vehicle trips; and
   B.   Connection to city water and/or sanitary sewer systems. (Ord. 778, 10-
30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-8-2: AUTHORITY:
The administrator or his/her designee shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-8-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The test for concurrency shall not be required for exempted developments as
specified below:
   A.   No Impact: Development which creates no additional impacts on public
water, sanitary sewer, surface water management, streets, schools and parks are
exempt from the test for concurrency. Such development includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   Additions, accessory structures, or interior renovations to or
replacement of a residence which do not result in a change in use or increase
in the number of dwelling units or residential equivalents;
      2.   Additions to or replacement of a nonresidential structure which do
not result in a change in use, expansion in use, or otherwise increase demand
in public facilities as defined above;
      3.   Temporary uses as defined in title 13, chapter 4 of this code; and
      4.   Demolitions.
   B.   Permits And Actions: The following are exempt from the test for
concurrency:
      1.   Boundary line adjustments;
      2.   Temporary use permits;
      3.   Variances and shoreline variances;
      4.   Approvals pursuant to site development regulations;
      5.   Administrative interpretations;
      6.   Sign permits;
      7.   Street vacations;
      8.   Demolition permits;
      9.   Street use or right of way permits;
      10.   Clearing, grading, excavation permits;
      11.   Mechanical, electrical and plumbing permits;
      12.   Fire code permits;
      13.   Architectural design review approvals; and
      14.   Other permits as determined by the city that will not result in
impacts on public services or utilities.
   C.   SEPA: Applications exempt from the test for concurrency are not
necessarily exempt from SEPA.
   D.   Exemptions: The portion of any development used for any of the
following purposes is exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Public transportation facilities;
      2.   Public parks and recreational facilities; and
      3.   Public libraries. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-8-4: CONCURRENCY PROCEDURES:
   A.   Concurrency Review Procedures: Concurrency of necessary public
facilities shall be determined during the processing of all nonexempt permit
applications through a review process conducted by the city in consultation
with the individual service providers prior to the issuance of any permit.
   B.   Concurrency Review; Roles:
      1.   The administrator shall provide the overall coordination of the test
for concurrency by:
         a.   Notifying the service providers of all applications requiring a
test for concurrency.
      2.   Service providers as defined in section
15-8-1 of this chapter shall:
         a.   Be responsible for providing the city with current information
describing system capacities, available services, and any factors affecting the
review and approval of applications;
         b.   Reserve the capacity needed for each application; and
         c.   Charge applicable fees to recover the costs of concurrency
testing and monitoring their concurrency systems.
   C.   Capacity: For sanitary sewer and domestic water supply, only available
capacity shall be used in conducting the test for concurrency. For streets,
available and planned capacity may be used in conducting the test for
concurrency. The adopted level of service standards outlined in the
comprehensive plan shall be the basis for determining whether adequate capacity
will be available.
   D.   Concurrency Determination: The test for concurrency is passed when the
capacity of public facilities and services is equal to or greater than the
capacity required to maintain the level of service standards established by the
city. Approval of permit applications shall constitute certificates of
concurrency. (Ord. 887, 9-8-2010)
15-8-5: CHECK FOR ADEQUACY:
(Rep. by Ord. 887, 9-8-2010)
15-8-6: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMITS:
   A.   Approvals: Permits which would not result in a reduction of an adopted
level of service standard for a public facility or service may be approved as
long as all other provisions of this code are met.
   B.   Denials: Permits which would result in a reduction of an adopted level
of service standard for a public facility or service are subject to denial.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-8-7: CONCURRENCY TEST REQUEST WITHOUT APPLICATION:
A test for concurrency may be requested without an accompanying permit
application. Any available capacity found at the time of the test cannot be
reserved and no certificate of capacity will be issued. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003,
eff. 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 9
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
SECTION:
15-9-1: Administrative Approvals Without Notice
15-9-2: Planning Commission Review And Recommendation
15-9-3: City Council Action
15-9-4: Procedures For Open Record Public Hearings
15-9-5: Procedures For Closed Record Appeals
15-9-6: Reconsideration
15-9-7: Remand
15-9-8: Final Decision
15-9-9: Joint Public Hearings
15-9-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS WITHOUT NOTICE:
   A.   Specified: The administrator may approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the following:
      1.   Type 1 and 2 permits as described in section
15-4-1 of this title.
      2.   Extension of time for approval.
      3.   Minor amendments or modifications to approved developments or
permits. Minor amendments are those which may affect the precise dimensions or
location of buildings, accessory structures and driveways, but do not affect:
a) overall project character; b) increase the number of lots, dwelling units,
or density; or c) decrease the quality or amount of open space.
Administrator's decisions under this section shall be final on the date issued
unless appealed. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-9-2: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION:
Planning commission decision and action authority is defined in chapter 4 of
this title.
   A.   Staff Report: The administrator shall prepare a staff report on the
proposed development or action summarizing the comments and recommendations of
city departments, affected agencies and special districts, and evaluating the
development's consistency with the comprehensive plan, development code, and
other adopted plans and regulations. The staff report shall include findings,
conclusions and proposed recommendations for disposition of the development
application. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
   B.   Hearing: The planning commission shall conduct an open public hearing
on development proposals requiring type 3a approvals except for architectural
design reviews. The purpose of public hearings is for taking testimony, hearing
evidence, considering the facts germane to the proposal, and evaluating the
proposal for consistency with the city's comprehensive plan, development code,
appropriate decision criteria and other adopted plans and regulations. Notice
of the planning commission hearing shall be in accordance with chapter 7 of
this title. (Ord. 887, 9-8-2010)
   C.   Required Findings: The planning commission shall not approve or
recommend approval of a proposed development unless it first makes the findings
and conclusions consistent with the criteria set forth in titles 11, 12 and 13
of this code for the specific permit involved.
   D.   Recommendation: Upon completion of its review of a development
proposal, the planning commission shall prepare and adopt a resolution setting
forth the planning commission's findings, conclusions and recommendations and
promptly forward it to the city council for consideration. The recommendation
may be for approval, approval with conditions, or denial based on the findings
and conclusions of subsection C of this section. Findings and conclusions
pertaining to architectural design review shall become part of the decision
record for planning commission approval, approval with conditions, or denial.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-9-3: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   Actions: Upon receiving a recommendation from the planning commission
or notice of any other matter requiring the city council's attention, the city
council shall perform the following actions as appropriate:
      1.   Make a decision on a planning commission recommendation.
      2.   At the city council's discretion, hold a closed record hearing and
make a decision on the following matters:
         a.   Appeal of administrative interpretations.
         b.   Appeal of administrative approvals.
         c.   Appeal of determinations of significance.
         d.   Appeal of a planning commission recommendation.
         e.   Other matters not prohibited by law.
   B.   Decisions: The city council shall make its decision by motion,
resolution, or ordinance as appropriate.
      1.   A city council decision on a planning commission recommendation
shall include one of the following actions:
         a.   Approve as recommended.
         b.   Approve with additional conditions.
         c.   Modify, with or without the applicant's concurrence, provided
that the modifications do not:
            (1)   Enlarge the area or scope of the project.
            (2)   Increase the density or proposed building size.
            (3)   Significantly increase adverse environmental impacts as
determined by the responsible official.
            (4)   Deny (reapplication or resubmittal is permitted).
            (5)   Deny with prejudice (reapplication or resubmittal is not
allowed for 1 year).
            (6)   Remand for further proceedings and/or evidentiary hearing in
accordance with section
15-9-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-9-4: PROCEDURES FOR OPEN RECORD PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Open record public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the hearing
body's rules of procedure and shall serve to create or supplement an
evidentiary record upon which the body will base its decision. The chair shall
open the public hearing and, in general, observe the following sequence of
events:
   A.   Staff Presentation: Staff presentation, including submittal of any
administrative reports. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the
staff.
   B.   Applicant Presentation: Applicant presentation, including submittal of
any materials. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the applicant.
   C.   Public Testimony Or Comments: Testimony or comments by the public
germane to the matter. Questions directed to the staff or the applicant shall
be posed by the chair at its discretion.
   D.   Rebuttal, Response Or Clarifying Statements: Rebuttal, response or
clarifying statements by the staff and the applicant.
   E.   Deliberation: The hearing body shall close the evidentiary portion of
the public hearing and shall deliberate on the matter before it. (Ord. 778, 10-
30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-9-5: PROCEDURES FOR CLOSED RECORD APPEALS:
Closed record appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the hearing body's
rules of procedure and shall serve to provide argument and guidance for the
hearing body's decision. Closed record appeals shall be conducted generally as
provided for public hearings. Except as provided in section
15-9-7 of this chapter, no new evidence or testimony shall be given or
received. The parties to the appeal may submit timely written statements or
arguments. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-9-6: RECONSIDERATION:
A party to a public hearing or closed record appeal may seek reconsideration
only of a final decision by filing a written request for reconsideration with
the administrator within five (5) days of the oral announcement of the final
decision. The request shall comply with subsection
15-10-4B of this title. The city council or hearing body shall consider the
request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, without public comment or
argument by the party filing the request. If the request is denied, the
previous action shall become final. If the request is granted, the city council
or hearing body may immediately revise and reissue its decision or may call for
argument in accordance with the procedures for closed record appeals.
Reconsideration should be granted only when an obvious legal error has occurred
or a material factual issue has been overlooked that would change the previous
decision. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-9-7: REMAND:
In the event the city council determines that the public hearing record or
record on appeal is insufficient or otherwise flawed, the city council may, if
the applicant waives the prohibition of one open public record hearing, remand
the matter back to the hearing body to correct the deficiencies. The city
council shall specify the items or issues to be considered and the time frame
for completing the additional work. The city council may hold a public hearing
on a closed record appeal only for the limited purposes identified in Revised
Code Of Washington 34.05.562(1). (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-9-8: FINAL DECISION:
   A.   Time: The final decision on a project permit application shall be
issued within the following timeframes based on the permit application type
assigned in OMC Table 15-4-1:
      1.   For Type 1, Type 2, and Type 2a permit application types, the final
decision shall be issued within sixty five (65) days from the date of the
determination of completeness.
      2.   For Type 3, Type 3a, Type 4, and Type 5 permit application types,
the final    decision shall be issued within one hundred seventy (170) days
from the date of the determination of completeness.
   B.   Time Calculation and Exclusions: The number of days that an application
is in review with the city shall be calculated from the day completeness is
determined to the date a final decision is issued. The number of days required
under paragraph A above shall be calculated by counting every calendar day and
excluding the following time periods:
      1.   Any period between the day that the city has notified the applicant,
in writing, that additional information is required to further process the
project permit application and the day when responsive information is
resubmitted by the applicant.
      2.   Any period after an applicant informs the city, in writing, that
they would like to temporarily suspend review of the project permit application
until the time that the applicant notifies the city, in writing, that they
would like to resume the application.
      3.   Any period after an administrative appeal is filed until the
administrative appeal is resolved and any additional time period provided by
the administrative appeal has expired.
      4.   All time required for the preparation and review of an environmental
impact statement.
      5.   Projects involving the siting of an essential public facility.
      6.   Subdivisions.
      7.   All time required for the administrative appeal of a SEPA
determination of significance.
      8.   All time required to determine landmark designations.
      9.   All time required to complete street vacations.
      10.   All time required to approve street use permits.
      11.   All time required to approve architectural design review.
      12.   All scheduled extensions resulting from a request by the applicant
for a joint public hearing as defined under subsection
15-9-9 B of this chapter.
      13.   The time periods for the city to process a permit shall start over
if an applicant proposes a change in use that adds or removes commercial or
residential elements from the original application that would make the
application fail to meet the determination of procedural completeness for the
new use.
      14.   If, at any time, an applicant informs the city, in writing, that
the applicant would like to temporarily suspend the review of the project for
more than sixty (60) days, or if an applicant is not responsive for more than
sixty (60) consecutive days after the city has notified the applicant, in
writing, that additional information is required to further process the
application, an additional thirty (30) days may be added to the time periods
for the city to issue a final decision for the project permit application. Any
written notice from the city to the applicant that additional information is
required to further process the application must include a notice that
nonresponsiveness for sixty (60) consecutive days may result in thirty (30)
days being added to the time for review.
      15.   Annual amendments to the comprehensive plan are not subject to the
requirements of this section.
      16.   All time following any notice of public hearing for the subject
application. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
15-9-9: JOINT PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Administrator's Decision To Hold A Joint Hearing: The administrator may
combine any public hearing on a development proposal with any hearing that may
be held by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency as long as:
1) the hearing is held within the city limits; and 2) the requirements of
subsection C of this section are met.
   B.   Applicant's Request For Joint Hearing: The applicant may request that
the public hearing on a development proposal be combined as long as the joint
hearing can be held within the time periods set forth in this title. In the
alternative, the applicant may agree to a particular schedule if that
additional time is needed in order to complete the hearings.
   C.   Prerequisites To Joint Public Hearings: A joint public hearing may be
held with another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency and the city
as long as:
      1.   The other agency is not expressly prohibited by statute from doing
so;
      2.   Sufficient notice of the hearing is given to each of the agencies'
adopted notice requirements as set forth in statute, ordinance, or rule; and
      3.   The agency has received the necessary information about the proposed
project from the applicant in enough time to hold its hearing at the same time
as the local government hearing. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 10
APPEALS
SECTION:
15-10-1: Appeal Of Administrative Interpretations And Approvals
15-10-2: Appeal Of Planning Commission Recommendations
15-10-3: Appeal Of Hearing Examiner Decisions
15-10-4: Filing Of Appeals
15-10-5: Standing
15-10-6: Judicial Appeal
15-10-1: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS AND APPROVALS:
Type 2 administrative approvals may be appealed, by applicants or parties of
record, to the hearing examiner. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-10-2: APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommendations of the planning commission may be appealed, by applicants or
parties of record who participated in the planning commission hearing, to the
city council. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
15-10-3: APPEAL OF HEARING EXAMINER DECISIONS:
Decisions of the hearing examiner may be appealed to Pierce County superior
court as a land use petition, by parties of record with standing to file. The
appeal must be filed within twenty one (21) days after issuance of the
decision, as provided for or as amended in Chapter 36.70C RCW. (Ord. 778, 10-
30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-10-4: FILING OF APPEALS:
   A.   Filing: Every appeal to the city council or hearing examiner shall be
filed with the administrator within ten (10) days after the date of the
recommendation or decision of the matter being appealed.
   B.   Contents: The notice of appeal shall contain a concise statement
identifying:
      1.   The decision being appealed.
      2.   The name and address of the appellant and his or her interest(s) in
the matter.
      3.   The specific reasons why the appellant believes the decision to be
wrong. The appellant shall bear the burden of proving the decision was wrong.
      4.   The desired outcome or requested changes to the decision.
      5.   The appeals fee. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-10-5: STANDING:
Appeals to decisions made by the administrator, hearing examiner, planning
commission, and city council as set forth in this title can only be made by
parties of record, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Applicants and property owners to which a land use decision is
directed;
   B.   Another person aggrieved or adversely affected by the land use
decision, or who would be aggrieved or adversely affected by a reversal or
modification of the land use decision. A person is aggrieved or adversely
affected within the meaning of this section only when all of the following
conditions are present:
      1.   The land use decision has prejudiced or is likely to prejudice that
person;
      2.   That person's asserted interests are among those that the local
jurisdiction was required to consider when it made the land use decision;
      3.   A judgment in favor of that person would substantially eliminate or
redress the prejudice to that person caused or likely to be caused by the land
use decision; and
      4.   The petitioner has exhausted his or her administrative remedies to
the extent required by law. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-10-6: JUDICIAL APPEAL:
   A.   Authority; Time Limit: Appeals from the final decision of the city
council, hearing examiner, or other city board or body involving this title or
titles 12 and 13 of this code and for which all other appeals specifically
authorized have been timely exhausted, shall be made to Pierce County superior
court within twenty one (21) days of the date the decision or action became
final, unless another time period is established by state law or local
ordinance.
   B.   Notice: Notice of the appeal and any other pleadings required to be
filed with the court shall be served on the city clerk, administrator, and city
attorney within the applicable time period. This requirement is jurisdictional.
   C.   Costs: The cost of transcribing and preparing all records ordered
certified by the court or desired by the appellant for such appeal shall be
borne by the appellant. The appellant shall post an advance fee deposit with
the city clerk prior to the preparation of any records. The fee deposit amount
shall be specified by the city clerk. Any overage will be promptly returned to
the appellant. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
CHAPTER 11
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
15-11-1: Enforcing Official; Authority
15-11-2: General Penalty
15-11-3: Violations Subject To Enforcement
15-11-4: Civil Regulatory Order
15-11-5: Review Of Approved Permits
15-11-1: ENFORCING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY:
The administrator shall be the code enforcement officer responsible for
enforcing this title and titles 12 and 13 of this code and may adopt
administrative rules to meet that responsibility. The administrator may
designate or appoint other department heads, the building inspector, fire
chief, chief of police or other employees or agents of the city, as
appropriate, as code enforcement officers authorized to enforce this title and
titles 12 and 13 of this code. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
15-11-2: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Compliance Mandatory: Compliance with the requirements of this title
and titles 12 and 13 of this code, any provision of a rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, and any civil regulatory order, project permit or
approval granted or issued under authority of this title, title 12 or 13 of
this code, shall be mandatory.
   B.   Violation; Civil Violation; Civil Infraction: Any act or omission by a
person responsible for compliance with any of the provisions of this title,
title 12 or 13 of this code, any provision of a rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, a civil regulatory order issued pursuant to this title, title
12 or 13 of this code, or any provision or condition of a project permit or
approval issued or granted pursuant to this title, title 12 or 13 of this code
shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil
infraction or civil violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code. Any act or omission by a person
responsible for compliance that constitutes a failure to obtain a project
permit or approval required pursuant to this title, title 12 or 13 of this code
shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as a civil
infraction or civil violation pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code.
   C.   Violation; Misdemeanor: It shall be unlawful to willfully fail to
comply with any provision of this title, title 12 or 13 of this code, willfully
fail to comply with any provision of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, willfully fail to comply with a civil regulatory order issued pursuant
to this title, title 12 or 13 of this code, willfully fail to obtain a project
permit or approval required by this title, title 12 or 13 of this code, or
willfully fail to comply with a provision of a project permit or approval
issued under authority of this title, title 12 or 13 of this code. Such willful
failure shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   D.   Remedies Not Exclusive: The enforcement actions authorized under this
chapter shall be supplemental to those general penalties and remedies and
enforcement actions that may be available at law or in equity. (Ord. 912, 9-14-
2011; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-11-3: VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO ENFORCEMENT:
Violations of the development code are subject to enforcement pursuant to the
provisions of title 1, chapter 13, "Code Enforcement", of this code. (Ord. 912,
9-14-2011)
15-11-4: CIVIL REGULATORY ORDER:
   A.   Authority: A civil regulatory order may be issued by the administrator
and served upon a person responsible for compliance with the development code
in accordance with title 1, chapter 13, "Code Enforcement", of this code.
   B.   Remedial Action: The administrator may require any lawful action
reasonably calculated to avoid, abate or mitigate the violation, including, but
not limited to, replacement, repair, supplementation, revegetation,
rehabilitation, removal, or restoration. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011)
15-11-5: REVIEW OF APPROVED PERMITS:
   A.   Review: Any activity subject to an approval or project permit granted
or issued under the authority of the development code may be reviewed for
compliance with the requirements of the development code, or the project permit
or approval, or to determine if the action is creating a nuisance or hazard,
has been abandoned, or the approval or project permit was obtained by fraud or
deception.
   B.   Initiation Of Review: The review of activity described in subsection A
of this section may be initiated by the administrator, other designated code
enforcement officer, or mayor, or by petition to the administrator by three (3)
owners of property located in whole or in part within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the city, or three (3) residents of separate dwelling units
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, stating their knowledge and
belief as to the noncompliance, nuisance or hazard of the activity.
   C.   Administrator's Investigation: Upon receipt of information indicating
the need for review, the administrator shall notify the person responsible for
compliance, investigate the matter and, if there is found to be reasonable
cause to take enforcement action, take one or more of the following actions:
      1.   Take enforcement action pursuant to title 1, chapters 13, "Code
Enforcement", and 4, "Penalties", of this code; and/or
      2.   Refer the matter to the city attorney or city prosecutor for review
and possible enforcement action. (Ord. 912, 9-14-2011; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-
11-2024)
CHAPTER 12
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
15-12-1: Purpose
15-12-2: Minor Amendment Standards
15-12-3: Major Amendments
15-12-4: Development Regulations And Other Official Controls
15-12-5: Comprehensive Plan
15-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to define types of amendments to the development
regulations, comprehensive plan, and other official controls and to identify
procedures for those actions. Amendments to the comprehensive plan and
development regulations are legislative functions separate from any permit
process otherwise set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003)
15-12-2: MINOR AMENDMENT STANDARDS:
The following provisions include methods for approving minor amendments to
approved permits:
   A.   Requests for minor amendments shall be in writing from the property
owner or the owner's authorized agent.
   B.   Minor amendment applications may be circulated to any city department
or agency with jurisdiction at the discretion of the administrator.
   C.   Minor amendments may be approved or modified with conditions of
approval by the administrator, provided all of the following requirements are
met:
      1.   Any proposal that results in a change of use must be permitted
outright in the current zone classification.
      2.   A change to a condition of approval does not modify the intent of
the original condition.
      3.   The perimeter boundaries of the original site shall not be extended
by more than five percent (5%) of the original lot area.
      4.   The proposal does not add more than ten percent (10%) gross square
footage of structures on the site.
      5.   The proposal does not increase the overall impervious surface on the
site by more than ten percent (10%).
      6.   Any additions or expansions approved through minor amendments that
cumulatively exceed the requirements of this section shall be reviewed as a
major amendment.
   D.   Minor amendment decisions shall be in writing and attached to the
official file.
   E.   Copies of the decision shall be mailed to all parties of record. (Ord.
778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-12-3: MAJOR AMENDMENTS:
All major amendments resulting from proposed changes to a permitted project
shall require resubmittal and be subject to review and approval procedures
according to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
15-12-4: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND OTHER OFFICIAL CONTROLS:
This section is intended to provide the method for adopting amendments to the
text and official map of the city's development regulations and other official
controls. Requests to change a regulatory zone affecting a parcel of land, or
portion of a lot, are processed under section
15-12-5 of this chapter.
   A.   Initiation Of Amendment: An amendment to the zoning title or other
official controls may be initiated by:
      1.   The city council requesting the planning commission to set the
matter for hearing and recommendations.
      2.   The planning commission with the concurrence of the administrator.
      3.   One or more property owners directly affected by a proposal through
a petition to the city.
      4.   Citizen advisory committees or organizations through a petition to
the city.
   B.   Application Required: Application for a change to the official map or
regulatory changes specific to a parcel of land or portion of a lot shall be
made in writing to the administrator. Applications shall include:
      1.   Property owners' and agents' names, addresses, and other contact
information;
      2.   Parcel identification number and address of the parcel or parcels;
      3.   Reason for the requested change; and
      4.   Other relevant information regarding the proposal.
   C.   Fees: As may be established by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Staff Report: The administrator shall prepare a written report on each
amendment pending before the planning commission. The report shall be
transmitted to the planning commission and to the applicant before the public
hearing. Each report shall contain:
      1.   Any factual findings pertaining to the amendment.
      2.   Any comments from city departments or other agencies with
jurisdiction.
      3.   The environmental assessment, SEPA determination and/or final
environmental impact statement.
      4.   The staff's recommendation.
   E.   Public Hearing By Planning Commission: The city shall give notice and
the planning commission shall hold the a public hearing prior to the
recommendation for adoption or amendment of any official control to the city
council. See section
15-9-4 of this title for hearing procedures and rules.
   F.   Adoption By City Council: Amendments to the development regulations or
other official controls shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance after
a public hearing on the planning commission's recommendation. (Ord. 778, 10-30-
2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-12-5: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
This section is intended to provide the method for adopting amendments to the
text and official map of the city's comprehensive plan. Comprehensive plan
amendments may include, but are not limited to, policy changes; land use
designation changes; level of service standard changes; addition of new
analyses; addition of new elements; or other changes that are mandated by state
law or determined to be in the interest of the city. Chapter 13 of this title
describes the adopted comprehensive plan.
   A.   Initiation Of Amendment: An amendment to the comprehensive plan may be
initiated by:
      1.   The city council requesting the planning commission to set the
matter for hearing and recommendations.
      2.   The planning commission.
      3.   One or more property owners or residents by petition to the city.
      4.   Citizen advisory committees or organizations through a petition to
the city.
   B.   Docketing Process: The comprehensive plan shall be amended no more
frequently than annually, except that subarea plans may be adopted as
amendments at any time and emergency comprehensive plan amendments may occur
after appropriate public participation whenever an emergency exists or to
resolve an appeal of a comprehensive plan filed with the growth management
hearing board or with the court. Amendment proposals shall be processed as
follows:
      1.   The city shall advertise the comprehensive plan amendment docketing
process, inviting the public to propose amendments. Docketing proposals shall
be in the form of a letter stating the proposed changes. The notice shall
specify the deadline for submitting proposals and shall state that the city
council shall decide which proposed amendments will be carried forward during
the current cycle.
      2.   At the close of the proposal period, the submittals shall be
reviewed by staff and sent to the city council. This list will include
proposals submitted by city departments, boards and commissions, and private
parties.
      3.   The city council shall adopt a resolution directing the
administrator to proceed with the selected amendments for the current cycle.
Proposed amendments that are eliminated from further consideration may be
resubmitted in the next cycle.
   C.   Fees: As may be established by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Staff Report: The administrator or his or her designee shall prepare a
written report on each amendment pending before the planning commission. The
report shall be transmitted to the planning commission and to the applicant
before the public hearing. Each report shall contain:
      1.   Any factual findings pertaining to the amendment.
      2.   Any comments from city departments or other agencies with
jurisdiction.
      3.   The environmental assessment, SEPA determination and/or final
environmental impact statement.
      4.   The staff's recommendation.
   E.   Public Hearing By Planning Commission: The planning commission shall
hold a public hearing prior to the recommendation for adoption or amendment of
any comprehensive plan amendment to the city council. See chapter 9 of this
title for hearing procedures and rules.
   F.   Adoption By City Council: Amendments to the comprehensive plan shall be
adopted by the city council by ordinance after a public hearing on the planning
commission's recommendation.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2019-1055, 11-25-2019; Ord.
2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 13
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
15-13-1: Comprehensive Plan Adopted
15-13-1: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
   A.   Official Document: The Orting comprehensive plan as amended, including
land use designation maps, is approved in its entirety as the official land use
classification and development guidance document for the city.
   B.   Copy Available For Inspection: The adopted Orting comprehensive plan as
amended, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public
inspection upon its effective date.
   C.   Filed With State: The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the
comprehensive plan as adopted to the state department of commerce within ten
(10) days of the effective date of its adoption, and to such other offices and
agencies as may be required by law.
   D.   Compliance With Plan, Revisions: The planning commission shall be
responsible for recommending amendments to the city development regulations to
be consistent with the Orting comprehensive plan.
   E.   City Planning Boundary: The planning area designated in the 1996 Orting
comprehensive plan as approved shall serve as the city's planning boundary
until such time as it is amended by the city council. (Ord. 958, 7-9-2014; amd.
Ord. 2024-1136, 12-11-2024)
CHAPTER 14
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 1
SECTION:
15-14-1: Authority
15-14-2: General Requirements
15-14-2-1: Purpose Of Section
15-14-2 And Adoption By Reference
15-14-2-2: SEPA Policies
15-14-2-3: Additional Definitions
15-14-2-4: Designation Of Responsible Official
15-14-2-5: Lead Agency Determination And Responsibilities
15-14-2-6: Additional Timing Considerations
15-14-3: Categorical Exemptions And Threshold Determinations
15-14-3-1: Purpose Of Section
15-14-3 And Adoption By Reference
15-14-3-2: Flexible Threshold For Categorical Exemptions
15-14-3-3: Emergencies
15-14-3-4: Use Of Exemptions
15-14-3-5: Environmental Checklist
15-14-3-6: Mitigated DNS
15-14-3-7: Optional DNS Process
15-14-4: Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
15-14-4-1: Purpose Of Section
15-14-4 And Adoption By Reference
15-14-4-2: Preparation Of EIS
15-14-4-3: Additional Elements
15-14-5: Commenting
15-14-5-1: Purpose
15-14-5-2: Adoption By Reference
15-14-5-3: Public Notice
15-14-5-4: Official To Perform Consulted Agency Responsibilities
15-14-6: Using Existing Environmental Documents
15-14-6-1: Purpose
15-14-6-2: Adoption By Reference
15-14-7: SEPA And Agency Decisions
15-14-7-1: Purpose
15-14-7-2: Adoption By Reference
15-14-7-3: Substantive Authority
15-14-7-4: Notice; Statute Of Limitations
15-14-7-5: SEPA Appeals
15-14-8: Definitions
15-14-8-1: Purpose
15-14-8-2: Adoption By Reference
15-14-9: Agency Compliance
15-14-9-1: Purpose
15-14-9-2: Adoption By Reference
15-14-9-3: Fees
15-14-10: Forms
15-14-10-1: Purpose
15-14-10-2: Adoption By Reference
15-14-11: Severability
 
Notes
1 1. WAC 173-806 et seq.
15-14-1: AUTHORITY:
   The city adopts this chapter under the state environmental policy act
(SEPA), Revised Code of Washington 43.21C.120, and the SEPA rules, WAC 197-11-
904. This chapter contains the city's SEPA procedures and policies. The SEPA
rules, WAC chapter 197-11, must be used in conjunction with this chapter. In
addition, Chapter 43.21C RCW should be consulted for complete information
regarding SEPA.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
15-14-2-1: PURPOSE OF SECTION 15-14-2 AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The purpose of this section
15-14-2 is to establish a clearly understood and effective set of policies and
procedures for implementing the state environmental policy act as set forth in
Revised Code of Washington 43.21C. The sections of the SEPA rules hereinafter
set forth by number are adopted by reference as if fully set forth. Copies of
the statute and the rules (WAC chapter 197-11) shall be kept available for
public inspection at city hall. This section
15-14-2 contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The
city adopts the following sections of chapter 197-11 WAC as now existing or
hereinafter amended by reference:
197-11-030 Policy.
197-11-040 Definitions.
197-11-050 Lead agency.
197-11-055 Timing of the SEPA process.
197-11-060 Content of environmental review.
197-11-070 Limitations on actions during SEPA process.
197-11-080 Incomplete or unavailable information.
197-11-090 Supporting documents.
197-11-100 Information required of applicants.
197-11-158 GMA project review-Reliance on exiting plans, laws and regulations.
197-11-164 Planned actions-Definition and criteria.
197-11-168 Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions-procedures for
           adoption.
197-11-172 Planned actions-project review.
197-11-210 SEPA/GMA integration.
197-11-220 SEPA/GMA definitions.
197-11-228 Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures.
197-11-230 Timing of an integrated GMA/SEPA process.
197-11-232 SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning,
           environmental analysis, and expanded scoping.
197-11-235 SEPA/GMA integration Documents.
197-11-238 SEPA/GMA integration Monitoring.
197-11-250 SEPA/Model Toxics Control Act integration.
197-11-253 SEPA lead agency for MTCA actions.
197-11-256 Preliminary evaluation.
197-11-259 Determination of nonsignificance for MTCA remedial action.
197-11-262 Determination of significance and EIS for MTCA remedial action.
197-11-265 Early scoping for MTCA remedial action.
197-11-268 MTCA interim actions.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-2-2: SEPA POLICIES:
The city designates the following general policies as the basis for the city's
exercise of authority pursuant to this chapter:
   A.   The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other
essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans,
functions, programs and resources.
   B.   The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable
right to a healthful environment, and that each person has a responsibility to
contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.
   C.   The city incorporates by reference all policies in the cited city
codes, ordinances, resolutions and plans, and all amendments to them in effect
prior to the date of a technically complete application of any building permit
or preliminary plat, or prior to issuance of a DNS or DEIS for any other
action. These documents include, but are not limited to, the following: Orting
comprehensive plan and incorporated elements, development code, critical area
regulations, shoreline master program, uniform building code, uniform fire
code, uniform plumbing code, uniform mechanical code, uniform code for
abatement of dangerous buildings, floodplain management code, six (6) year
transportation improvement program, storm water comprehensive plan, water and
sewer utility plans and regulations, park and recreation plan, Washington state
ventilation and indoor air quality code, Washington state energy code, uniform
housing code.
   D.   Through the project review process:
      1.   If the applicable regulations require studies that adequately
analyze all of the project's specific probable adverse environmental impacts,
additional studies under this chapter will not be necessary on those impacts;
      2.   If the applicable regulations require measures that adequately
address such environmental impacts, additional measures would likewise not be
required under this chapter; and
      3.   If the applicable regulations do not adequately analyze or address a
proposal's specific probable adverse environmental impacts, this chapter
provides the authority and procedures for additional review. (Ord. 778, 10-30-
2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-2-3: ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS:
In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-
11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:
CLOSED RECORD APPROVAL HEARING: An administrative hearing to approve or deny a
project permit that is on the record to the city council following an open
record predecision hearing (as defined by WAC 197-11-775 and this section
15-14-2) before the planning commission or hearing examiner.
EARLY NOTICE: The city's response to an applicant stating whether it considers
issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant's proposal
(mitigated determination of nonsignificance (DNS) procedures).
OPEN RECORD HEARING: An open record hearing (as defined by WAC 197-11-775)
which is held before the planning commission or hearing examiner prior to the
closed record approval hearing before the city council.
ORDINANCE: The ordinance, resolution or other procedure used by the city to
adopt regulatory requirements.
SEPA RULES: Chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by the department of ecology.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-2-4: DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL:
   A.   For those proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the
responsible official shall be the administrator or his/her authorized designee.
   B.   For all proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the
responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping
and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and
perform any other functions assigned to the lead agency or responsible official
by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference in section
15-14-2-1.
   C.   The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules (chapter
197-11 WAC) and make them available in accordance with chapter 42.56 Revised
Code of Washington.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-2-5: LEAD AGENCY DETERMINATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The city shall be the lead agency for any nonexempt action under WAC
197-11-050, 197-11-253, and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead
agency has been previously determined or the city is aware that another agency
is in the process of determining the lead agency.
   B.   When the city is the lead agency for a proposal, the administrator
shall determine the responsible official designee who shall supervise
compliance with the threshold determination requirements, and if an
environmental impact statement (EIS) is necessary, shall supervise preparation
of the EIS.
   C.   When the city is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments of
the city shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the determination of
nonsignificance (DNS) or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions
on the proposal. No city department shall prepare or require preparation of a
DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required
under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the city may conduct supplemental
environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.
   D.   If the city receives a lead agency determination made by another agency
that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-253 or 197-11-922
through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be
made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within
fifteen (15) days of receipt of the determination, or the city must petition
the department of ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946
within the fifteen (15) day time period.
   E.   When the city is lead agency for a model toxic control act (MTCA)
remedial action, the department of ecology shall be provided an opportunity
under WAC 197-11-253(5) to review the environmental documents prior to public
notice being provided. If the SEPA and MTCA documents are issued together with
one public comment period under WAC 197-11-253(6), the city shall decide
jointly with ecology who receives the comment letters and how copies of the
comment letters will be distributed to the other agency.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-2-6: ADDITIONAL TIMING CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or final EIS for the proposal shall
accompany the city's staff recommendation to the appropriate advisory body, if
any.
   B.   If the city's only action on a proposal is a decision on a building
permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and
specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the city conduct
environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and
specifications. Sufficient information shall be required from the applicant to
enable the responsible official to adequately fulfill his responsibility under
SEPA and this chapter consistent with the provisions of WAC 197-11-100 and 197-
11-335, which sections are adopted by reference in this chapter. (Ord. 778, 10-
30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-3: CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS AND THRESHOLD DETERMINATIONS:
15-14-3-1: PURPOSE OF SECTION 15-14-3 AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
This section
15-14-3 contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a probable
significant, adverse environmental impact requiring an environmental impact
statement (EIS) to be prepared. This section
15-14-3 also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not
requiring an EIS. The city adopts the following sections of chapter 197-11 WAC
by reference, as supplemented in this section
15-14-3:
197-11-300 Purpose of this part.
197-11-305 Categorical exemptions.
197-11-310 Threshold determination required.
197-11-315 Environmental checklist.
197-11-330 Threshold determination process.
197-11-335 Additional information.
197-11-340 Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).
197-11-350 Mitigated DNS.
197-11-355 Optional DNS process.
197-11-360 Determination of significance (DS) initiation of scoping.
197-11-390 Effect of threshold determination.
197-11-800 Categorical exemptions.
197-11-880 Emergencies.
197-11-890 Petitioning DOE to change exemptions.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-3-2: FLEXIBLE THRESHOLDS FOR CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The city establishes the following exempt levels for minor new
construction under WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) based on local conditions:
      1.   For residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(i): Up to
nine (9) dwelling units, cumulative.
      2.   For agricultural structures in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(ii): Up to ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, cumulative.
      3.   For office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage
buildings in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iii): Up to twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet and up to forty (40) parking spaces, cumulative.
      4.   For parking lots in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iv): Up to forty (40)
parking spaces, cumulative.
      5.   For landfills and excavations in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(v): Up to five
hundred (500) cumulative cubic yards.
   B.   Whenever the city establishes new exempt levels under this section, it
shall send them to the department of ecology, headquarters office, Olympia, WA
98504, under WAC 197-11-800(1)(c).
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-3-3: EMERGENCIES:
   Actions which must be undertaken immediately, or within a time frame too
short to allow full compliance with this chapter, to avoid an immediate threat
to public health and safety, to prevent an immediate danger to public or
private property, or to prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental
degradation, shall be exempt from the procedural requirements of this chapter
(WAC 197-11-800). The responsible official shall determine on a case by case
basis emergency actions which satisfy the general requirements of this section
15-14-3.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-3-4: USE OF EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Each department within the city that receives an application for a
license, or, in the case of governmental proposals, the department initiating
the proposal, shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is
exempt. The department's determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final
and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the
procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The City shall
not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal. In
addition, the city is not required to document that a proposal is categorically
exempt. The city may note on an application that a proposal is categorically
exempt or place such a determination in the agency's files.
   B.   In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the responsible
official shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify
the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes
exempt and nonexempt actions, the city shall determine the lead agency even if
the license application that triggers the city's consideration is exempt.
   C.   If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions the city may
authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements
of this chapter, except that:
      1.   The city shall not give authorization for:
         a.   Any nonexempt action;
         b.   Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or
         c.   Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;
      2.   The city may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead
to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve
no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and
      3.   The city may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to
substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures
would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-3-5: ENVIRONMENTAL CHECKLIST:
   A.   A completed environmental checklist in the form provided in WAC 197-11-
960, shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license
certificate, or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter;
except, a checklist is not needed if the city and applicant agree an EIS is
required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been
initiated by another agency. The city shall use the environmental checklist to
determine the lead agency and, if the city is the lead agency, for determining
the responsible official and for making the threshold determination.
   B.   For private proposals, the city will require the applicant to complete
the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For city
proposals, the department initiating the proposal shall complete the
environmental checklist for that proposal.
   C.   The city may require that it, and not the private applicant, will
complete all or part of the environmental checklist for a private proposal, at
the applicant's costs under the current fee schedule, if either of the
following occurs:
      1.   The city has technical information on a question or questions that
is unavailable to the private applicant; or
      2.   The applicant has provided inaccurate information on previous
proposals or on proposals currently under consideration.
   D.   For projects submitted as planned actions under WAC 197-11-164, the
city shall use its existing environmental checklist form or may modify the
environmental checklist form as provided in WAC 197-11-315. The modified
environmental checklist form may be prepared and adopted along with or as part
of a planned action ordinance; or developed after the ordinance is adopted. In
either case, a proposed modified environmental checklist form must be sent to
the department of ecology to allow at least a thirty (30) day review prior to
use.
   E.   During the review of the environmental checklist, the City may make
such changes or additions to the environmental checklist as are necessary to
make it an accurate statement. Alternatively, the City may return the checklist
to the applicant for revisions and/or additional information.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-3-6: MITIGATED DNS:
   A.   As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible
official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the
responsible official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made
by the applicant.
   B.   An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is
likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:
      1.   Follow submission of a permit application and environmental
checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is lead agency; and
      2.   Precede the city's actual threshold determination for the proposal.
   C.   The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice
within fifteen (15) calendar days unless otherwise agreed to. The response
shall:
      1.   Be written; and
      2.   State whether the city currently considers issuance of a DS likely
and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/are
leading the city to consider a DS; and
      3.   State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to
mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or
permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.
   D.   As much as possible, the city should assist the applicant with
identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation
measures.
   E.   When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a
revised or amended environmental checklist, the city shall base its threshold
determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the
determination within fifteen (15) days of receiving the changed or clarified
proposal:
      1.   If the city indicated specific mitigation measures in its response
to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the
proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the city shall issue
and circulate a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2);
      2.   If the city indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate
specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the city shall
make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate;
      3.   The applicant's proposed mitigation measures (clarifications,
changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example,
proposals to "control noise" or "prevent storm water runoff" are inadequate,
whereas proposals to "muffle machinery to X decibel" or "construct 200-foot
stormwater retention pond at Y location" are adequate; and
      4.   Mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may be
incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other
documents.
   F.   Any mitigated DNS issued under WAC 197-11-340(2) shall require a
fourteen (14) day comment period and public notice, or WAC 197-11-355, which
may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period on the
notice of application.
   G.   Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be deemed
conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same
manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner
specifically prescribed by the city.
   H.   If the City's tentative decision on the permit or approval does not
include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the
proposal, the City should evaluate the threshold determination to assure
consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).
   I.   The city's written response under subsection C of this section shall
not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary
discussion of clarifications of changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written
request for early notice, shall not bind the city to consider the
clarifications or changes in its threshold determination.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-3-7: OPTIONAL DNS PROCESS:
   A.   If the responsible official has a reasonable basis for determining that
significant adverse environmental impacts are unlikely, or that mitigation
measures have been identified that will reduce impacts to a nonsignificant
level, the responsible official may elect to use the single integrated comment
period set forth in this section. If this process is used, a second comment
period will typically not be required when the DNS is issued.
   B.   If the optional process set forth in this section is used, the
responsible official shall:
      1.   State on the first page of the notice of application that it expects
to issue a DNS for the proposal, and that:
         a.   The optional DNS process is being used;
         b.   This may be the only opportunity to comment on the environmental
impacts of the proposal;
         c.   The proposal may include mitigation measures under applicable
codes, and the project review process may incorporate or require mitigation
measures regardless of whether an EIS is prepared; and
         d.   A copy of the subsequent threshold determination for the specific
proposal may be obtained upon request (in addition, the city may maintain a
general mailing list for threshold determination distribution);
      2.   List in the notice of application the conditions being considered to
mitigate environmental impacts, if a mitigated DNS is expected;
      3.   Comply with the requirements for a notice of application and public
notice in Orting Municipal Code chapter 15-7; and
      4.   Send the notice of application and environmental checklist to:
         a.   Agencies with jurisdiction, the Department of Ecology, affected
tribes, and each local agency or political subdivision whose public services
would be changed as a result of implementation of the proposal; and
         b.   Anyone requesting a copy of the environmental checklist for the
specific proposal (in addition, the city may maintain a general mailing list
for checklist distribution).
   C.   If the responsible official indicates on the notice of application that
a DNS is likely, an agency with jurisdiction may assume lead agency status
during the comment period on the notice of application in accordance with WAC
197-11-948.
   D.   The responsible official shall consider timely comments on the notice
of application and either:
      1.   Issue a DNS or mitigated DNS with no comment period using the
procedures in subsection E of this section;
      2.   Issue a DNS or mitigated DNS with a comment period using the
procedures in subsection E of this section, if the responsible official
determines a comment period is necessary;
      3.   Issue a DS; or
      4.   Require additional information or studies prior to making a
threshold determination.
   E.   If a DNS or mitigated DNS is issued under subsection (D)(1) or (D)(2)
of this section, the responsible official shall send a copy of the DNS or
mitigated DNS to the Department of Ecology, agencies with jurisdiction, those
who commented, and anyone requesting a copy. A copy of the environmental
checklist need not be recirculated.
(Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-4: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS):
15-14-4-1: PURPOSE OF SECTION 15-14-4 AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
This section
15-14-4 contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The
city adopts the following sections of chapter 197-11 WAC by reference as
supplemented by this section
15-14-4:
197-11-400 Purpose of EIS.
197-11-402 General requirements.
197-11-405 EIS types.
197-11-406 EIS timing.
197-11-408 Scoping.
197-11-410 Expanded scoping (optional).
197-11-420 EIS preparation.
197-11-425 Style and size.
197-11-430 Format.
197-11-435 Cover letter or memo.
197-11-440 EIS contents.
197-11-442 Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals.
197-11-443 EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS.
197-11-444 Elements of the environment.
197-11-448 Relationship of EIS to other considerations.
197-11-450 Cost-benefit analysis.
197-11-455 Issuance of DEIS.
197-11-460 Issuance of FEIS.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-4-2: PREPARATION OF EIS:
   A.   Preparation of draft and final EISs (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final
supplemental EISs (SEIS) is the responsibility of the responsible official.
Before the city issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that
it complies with this chapter and chapter 197-11 WAC.
   B.   The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by city
staff, the applicant, or by a consultant selected by the city or the applicant,
at the discretion of the responsible official. If the responsible official
requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the city
will prepare the EIS, the responsible official shall notify the applicant
immediately after completion of the threshold determination. The responsible
official shall also notify the applicant of the city's procedure for EIS
preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.
   C.   The city may require an applicant to provide information the city does
not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not
required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that
is being requested from another agency. (This does not apply to information the
city may request under another ordinance or statute.)
   D.   Fees shall be paid in accordance with section
15-14-9-3.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-4-3: ADDITIONAL ELEMENTS:
The following additional elements are part of the environment for the purpose
of EIS content, but do not add to the criteria for threshold determinations or
perform any other function or purpose under this chapter:
   A.   Economy;
   B.   Cost benefit analysis;
   C.   Social policy analysis. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-5: COMMENTING:
15-14-5-1: PURPOSE:
This section
15-14-5 contains rules for consulting, commenting, and responding on all
environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and
hearings.
15-14-5-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The city adopts the following sections of WAC 197-11 by reference:
197-11-500 Purpose of this part.
197-11-502 Inviting comment.
197-11-504 Availability and cost of environmental documents.
197-11-508 SEPA register.
197-11-510 Public notice.
197-11-535 Public hearings and meetings.
197-11-545 Effect of no comment.
197-11-550 Specificity of comments.
197-11-560 FEIS response to comments.
197-11-570 Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-5-3: PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   Whenever possible, the city shall integrate the public notice required
under this section with existing notice procedures for the city's nonexempt
permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.
   B.   Whenever the city issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2) or a DS under
WAC 197-11-360, the city shall give public notice as follows:
      1.   If an environmental document is issued concurrently with the notice
of application, the public notice requirements for the notice of application in
Revised Code of Washington 36.70B.110(4) will suffice to meet the SEPA public
notice requirements in WAC 197-11-510(1).
      2.   If no public notice is otherwise required for the permit or
approval, the city shall give notice of the DNS or DS by:
         a.   Posting the property, and posting in the city hall; and
         b.   Publishing notice in the city's newspaper of record.
      3.   Whenever the city issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the city
shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS as required in WAC
197-11-408 and in the public notice.
      4.   Any notice must be sent to the Department of Ecology for inclusion
on the department's SEPA register website.
      5.   If public notice is required for a nonexempt license, the notice
shall state whether a DS or DNS has been issued and when comments are due.
   C.   If a DNS is issued using the optional DNS process, the public notice
requirements for a notice of application in Revised Code of Washington
36.70B.110(4) as supplemented by the requirements in WAC 197-11-355 will
suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements in WAC 197-11-510(1)(b).
   D.   Whenever the city issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455 or a SEIS under
WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents shall be given
by:
      1.   Indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice
required for a nonexempt license; and
      2.   Posting the property, for site specific proposals; or posting in
city hall, for nonsite specific proposals; and
      3.   Publishing notice in the city's newspaper of record.
   E.   Public notice for projects that qualify as planned actions shall be
tied to the underlying permit as specified in WAC 197-11-172(3).
   F.   The city may require an applicant to complete the public notice
requirements for the applicant's proposal at his or her expense.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-5-4: OFFICIAL TO PERFORM CONSULTED AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The responsible official shall be responsible for preparation of
written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a
threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.
   B.   The responsible official shall be responsible for the city's compliance
with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the city is a consulted agency and is authorized
to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation
requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate
departments of the city. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-6: USING EXISTING ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS:
15-14-6-1: PURPOSE:
This section
15-14-6 contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental
documents prepared under SEPA or national environmental policy act (NEPA) for
the city's own environmental compliance. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-
2003)
15-14-6-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The city adopts the following sections of WAC 197-11 by reference:
197-11-164 Planned actions--Definition and criteria.
197-11-168 Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions--Procedures
           for adoption.
197-11-172 Planned actions--Project review.
197-11-600 When to use existing environmental documents.
197-11-610 Use of NEPA documents.
197-11-620 Supplemental environmental impact statement--Procedures.
197-11-625 Addenda--Procedures.
197-11-630 Adoption--Procedures.
197-11-635 Incorporation by reference--Procedures.
197-11-640 Combining documents.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-7: SEPA AND AGENCY DECISIONS:
15-14-7-1: PURPOSE:
This section
15-14-7 contains rules and policies for SEPA's substantive authority, such as
decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This section
15-14-7 also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies
or the courts. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-7-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The city adopts the following sections of WAC 197-11 by reference:
 
197-11-650 Purpose of this part.
197-11-655 Implementation.
197-11-660 Substantive authority and mitigation.
197-11-680 Appeals.
197-11-721 Closed record appeal.
197-11-722 Consolidated appeal.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-7-3: SUBSTANTIVE AUTHORITY:
   A.   The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to
those in the existing authorization of the city of Orting.
   B.   The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal
so long as:
      1.   Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable adverse
environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared with
regard to the license or permit and pursuant to this chapter; and
      2.   Such conditions are in writing; and
      3.   The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable
and capable of being accomplished; and
      4.   The city has considered whether other local, state, or federal
mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the
identified impacts; and
      5.   Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection D of
this section and cited in the license or other decision document.
   C.   The city may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of
SEPA so long as:
      1.   A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in
probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in a
FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and
      2.   A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures
capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified
impact; and
      3.   The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection
D of this section and identified in writing in the decision document.
   D.   The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other
essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans,
functions, programs, and resources to the end that the state and its citizens
may:
      1.   Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the
environment for succeeding generations;
      2.   Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive, and
aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;
      3.   Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment
without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and
unintended consequences;
      4.   Preserve important historic, cultural, and natural aspects of our
national heritage;
      5.   Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity
and variety of individual choice;
      6.   Achieve balance between population and resource use which will
permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities; and
      7.   Enhance the quality of a renewable resource and approach the maximum
attainable recycling of depletable resources.
   E.   The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable
right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to
contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.
   F.   The city designates and adopts by reference all policies in the cited
city codes, ordinances, resolutions and plans, and all amendments to them in
effect prior to the date of a technically complete application of any building
permit or preliminary plat, or prior to issuance of a DNS or DEIS for any other
action.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-7-4: NOTICE; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The city, applicant for, or proponent of an action may publish a notice
of action pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 43.21C.080 for any action.
   B.   The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in
WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published pursuant to Revised Code of
Washington 43.21C.080. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-7-5: SEPA APPEALS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to combine environmental
considerations with public decisions, and for this reason, any appeal brought
under this chapter shall be linked to a specific governmental action. Appeals
under this chapter are not intended to create a cause of action unrelated to a
specific governmental action.
   B.   Procedures: The appellate procedures provided for by Revised Code of
Washington 43.21C.060, which provides for an appeal to a local legislative body
of any decision by a nonelected official conditioning or denying a proposal
under authority of SEPA, are formally eliminated. The administrative appeal
procedures provided by this section
15-14-7 shall be construed consistently with Revised Code of Washington
43.21.075, chapter 36.70B, and WAC 197-11-680.
   C.   Limited Actions: Appeals under the provisions of this section 15-4-
7 shall be limited solely to those actions and/or determinations listed below.
No administrative appeals shall be allowed for other actions and/or
determinations taken or made pursuant to this chapter (such as lead agency
determination, scoping, draft EIS adequacy, etc.).
      1.   "Procedural appeals" which shall consist of an appeal of the
responsible official's compliance with the provisions of SEPA, the SEPA rules,
and this chapter with respect to the following:
         a.   Determination of nonsignificance;
         b.   Determination of significance;
         c.   Adoption or issuance of a final environmental impact statement.
      2.   "Substantive appeals" which shall consist of an appeal of an action
or omission with respect to the conditioning or denying of a proposal under the
substantive authority set forth in section
15-14-7-3 of this chapter.
   D.   Consolidation: Except as provided in subsection E of this section, an
appeal under this section shall consolidate any SEPA appeal with a hearing or
appeal on the underlying governmental action in a single simultaneous hearing
before the hearing examiner or body. The hearing or appeal shall be one at
which the hearing examiner or body will consider either the agency's decision
or a recommendation on the proposed underlying governmental action. If no
hearing or appeal on the underlying governmental action is otherwise provided,
then no SEPA appeal is allowed under this section, except as allowed under
subsection E of this section.
   E.   Exceptions To Consolidation: The following appeals of SEPA procedural
or substantive determinations need not be consolidated with a hearing or appeal
on the underlying governmental action:
      1.   An appeal of a determination of significance;
      2.   An appeal of a procedural determination made by the city when the
city is a project proponent, or is funding a project, and chooses to conduct
its review under this chapter, including any appeals of its procedural
determinations, prior to submitting an application for a project permit;
      3.   An appeal of a procedural determination made by the city on a
nonproject action.
   F.   Written Notice: All procedural and substantive SEPA appeals provided
under this section shall be initiated by filing a written notice of SEPA
administrative appeal with the responsible official, accompanied with the
applicable appeal fee. No additional appellate fee shall be charged in
conjunction with a hearing on the underlying permit or approval.
      1.   The notice of appeal required by this section shall include, at a
minimum:
         a.   The name and address of the party or agency filing the appeal;
         b.   An identification of the specific proposal and specific SEPA
actions, omissions, conditions or determinations for which appeal is sought;
         c.   A statement of the particular grounds or reasons for the appeal.
      2.   The responsible official shall arrange to conduct the SEPA appeal in
conjunction with a hearing or appeal on the underlying permit or approval,
where required to consolidate the SEPA appeal with a hearing on the underlying
governmental action. Where consolidation is not required, the responsible
official shall schedule the hearing to be conducted within ninety (90) days of
the date of filing the notice of appeal, and payment of fee.
   G.   SEPA Procedural Appeals: SEPA procedural appeals shall be initiated and
conducted in the manner set forth below:
      1.   An appeal to the issuance of a determination of nonsignificance
(DNS), mitigated determination of nonsignificance (MDNS), may be filed by any
agency or aggrieved person as follows:
         a.   For proposals which may be approved by an administrative official
without public hearing, an appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days
following the last day of the comment period. Such SEPA appeal shall be heard
in conjunction with the appeal of the underlying permit or approval, where such
appeal is allowed. Provided that, if no administrative appeal of the underlying
permit or approval is otherwise provided for, and consolidation is not required
by subsection D of this section, an appeal of the DNS/FEIS shall be heard and
decided in an open record hearing by the hearings examiner. The decision of the
hearing examiner on the SEPA procedural appeal shall be final and not subject
to further administrative appeal.
         b.   For proposals which may only be approved by open record hearing
or open record predecision hearing (recommendation) before the hearing examiner
or planning commission, an appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days
following the last day of the comment period, or where no comment period is
required, then within ten (10) days following the date of issuance or adoption
of the DNS/FEIS, and shall be heard and decided in open record hearing by the
hearing examiner or planning commission in conjunction with the decision or
recommendation on the underlying proposal. The decision of the hearing examiner
or planning commission on the SEPA procedural appeal shall be final and not
subject to further administrative appeal.
      2.   An appeal to a determination of significance (DS) may be filed by
the applicant within ten (10) days of the issuance of the DS/scoping notice.
The appeal shall be heard in open record hearing and decided by a hearing
examiner, whose decision shall be final and not subject to further
administrative appeal.
      3.   An appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of issuance of the
final environmental impact statement (FEIS).
      4.   The SEPA procedural determination of the responsible official shall
be entitled to substantial weight, and the appellant shall bear the burden to
establish a violation of SEPA, the SEPA rules, or the provisions of this
chapter.
      5.   A SEPA procedural determination shall be deemed to be conclusively
in compliance with SEPA, the SEPA rules, and the provisions of this chapter,
unless a SEPA procedural appeal is filed in accordance with this section
15-14-7.
   H.   SEPA Substantive Appeals: SEPA substantive appeals shall be initiated
and conducted in the manner set forth below:
      1.   For proposals subject to final administrative action, approval, or
recommendation by a nonelected administrative official or tribunal for which no
administrative appeal is otherwise provided, and for which consolidation is not
required by subsection D of this section, any agency or aggrieved person may
file a substantive SEPA appeal within ten (10) days of the issuance of the
administrative decision approving, conditioning, or denying the proposal on the
basis of substantive SEPA authority. Such substantive SEPA appeal shall be
heard and decided by the hearing examiner in an open record hearing, unless the
proposal is a project permit which has been subject to a previous open record
hearing, in which case the SEPA appeal hearing shall be a closed record
hearing. The substantive SEPA appeal shall be heard in conjunction with any
procedural SEPA appeal. The decision of the hearing examiner on the SEPA
substantive appeal shall be final and not be subject to further administrative
appeal.
      2.   For all proposals subject to final administrative action, approval,
or recommendation, by a nonelected administrative official, for which an
administrative appeal or further approval hearing is otherwise provided or
required, any agency or aggrieved person may file a substantive SEPA appeal
within ten (10) days of the issuance of the administrative decision approving,
conditioning, or denying the proposal on the basis of substantive SEPA
authority. Provided that, if the proposal is a project permit, a substantive
SEPA appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after issuance of the notice of
decision. Any substantive SEPA appeal shall be conducted in the same manner and
with the same process as otherwise provided for the appeal or approval hearing
of the underlying administrative action.
      3.   The SEPA substantive determination to condition or deny a proposal
shall be deemed to be conclusively in compliance with SEPA, the SEPA rules, and
the provisions of this chapter, unless a SEPA substantive appeal is filed in
accordance with this section
15-14-7.
   I.   How To Appeal: The appeal must be in the form of a written notice of
appeal, and must contain a brief and concise statement of the matter being
appealed, the specific components or aspects that are being appealed, the
appellant's basic rationale or contentions on appeal, and a statement
demonstrating standing to appeal. The appeal may also contain whatever
supplemental information the appellant wishes to include. The appeal shall also
contain the following:
      1.   The name and mailing address of the appellant and the name and
address of his/her representative, if any;
      2.   The appellant's legal residence or principal place of business;
      3.   A copy of the decision which is appealed;
      4.   The grounds upon which the appellant relies;
      5.   A concise statement of the factual and legal reasons for the appeal;
      6.   The specific nature and intent of the relief sought;
      7.   A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the
contents to be true, followed by his/her signature and the signature of his/her
representative, if any. If the appealing party is unavailable to sign the
appeal, it may be signed by his/her representative.
   J.   Fees: The person filing the appeal shall include with the letter of
appeal the fee as established by ordinance.
   K.   Procedures For Appeal Hearing:
      1.   Notice Of The Appeal Hearing.
         a.   Content: The responsible official shall prepare a notice of the
appeal containing the following:
            (1)   The file number and a brief written description of the matter
being appealed.
            (2)   A statement of the scope of the appeal including a summary of
the specific factual findings and conclusions disputed in the letter of appeal.
            (3)   The time and place of the public hearing on the appeal.
            (4)   A statement of who may participate in the appeal.
            (5)   A statement of how to participate in the appeal.
         b.   Distribution: At least fifteen (15) calendar days before the
hearing on the appeal, the responsible official shall send a copy of this
notice to each person who received a copy of the threshold determination and
any person who submitted written comments on, or an appeal of, the threshold
determination.
         c.   Notice Of Appeal: The notice of appeal may be combined with the
hearing notice for the underlying project permit, if applicable.
   L.   Participation In The Appeal: Only those persons with legal standing are
entitled to appeal the threshold determination and may participate in the
appeal. Participation includes the following:
      1.   By submitting written testimony to the responsible official the time
line established.
      2.   By appearing in person, or through a representative, at the hearing
and submitting oral or written testimony directly to the hearing body. The
hearing body may reasonably limit the extent of the oral testimony to
facilitate the orderly and timely conduct of the hearing.
   M.   Staff Report On The Appeal:
      1.   Content: The responsible official shall prepare a staff report
containing the following:
         a.   The SEPA threshold determination.
         b.   All written comments submitted to the responsible official.
         c.   The letter of appeal.
         d.   All written comments on the appeal received by the responsible
official from persons entitled to participate in the appeal and within the
scope of the appeal.
         e.   An analysis of the specific factual findings and conclusions
disputed in the letter of appeal.
      2.   Combining Of Reports: This report may be combined with the staff
report on the underlying project permit, if applicable.
      3.   Distribution: Distribution will take place at least seven (7)
calendar days before the hearing, the responsible official shall distribute
copies of the staff report as follows:
         a.   A copy will be sent to the hearing body hearing the appeal as
specified.
         b.   A copy will be sent to the applicant.
         c.   A copy will be sent to the person who filed the appeal.
   N.   Continuation Of The Hearing: The hearing body may continue the hearing
if, for any reason, it is unable to hear all of the public comments on the
appeal or if it determines that it needs more information within the scope of
the appeal. If, during the hearing, the hearing body announces the time and
place of the next hearing on the matter, no further notice of that hearing need
be given, beyond that required by the open public meeting act.
   O.   Decision On The Appeal:
      1.   General: The hearing body shall consider all information and
material within the scope of the appeal submitted by persons entitled to
participate in the appeal. The hearing body shall either affirm or change the
findings and conclusions of the responsible official that were appealed. Based
on the hearing body's findings and conclusions, it shall either:
         a.   Affirm the decision being appealed; or
         b.   Reverse the decision being appealed; or
         c.   Modify the decision being appealed.
      2.   Issuance Of Written Decision: Within ten (10) working days after the
public hearing, the hearing body shall issue a written decision on the appeal.
Within four (4) calendar days after the decision is issued, the hearing body
shall distribute the decision as follows:
         a.   A copy will be mailed to the applicant.
         b.   A copy will be mailed to the person who filed the appeal.
         c.   A copy will be mailed to all other persons of record or agencies
who participated in the appeal.
   P.   Additional Appeal Procedures:
      1.   The matters to be considered and decided upon in the appeal are
limited to the matters raised in the notice of appeal.
      2.   The decision of the responsible official shall be accorded
substantial weight.
      3.   All testimony will be taken under oath.
      4.   The decision of the hearing body hearing the appeal shall be the
final decision on any appeal of a threshold determination including a mitigated
determination of nonsignificance.
   Q.   Dismissal Of Appeal: The hearing examiner may summarily dismiss an
appeal without hearing when such an appeal is determined by the hearing
examiner to be without merit on its face, frivolous, or brought merely to
secure a delay, or that the appellant lacks legal standing to appeal.
   R.   Effect Of Appeal: The filing of an appeal of a threshold determination
or adequacy of a final environmental impact statement (FEIS) shall stay the
effect of such determination or adequacy of the FEIS and no major action in
regard to a proposal may be taken during the pendency of an appeal and until
the appeal is finally disposed of by the hearing examiner or other hearing
body. A decision to reverse the determination of the responsible official and
uphold the appeal shall further stay any decision, proceedings, or actions in
regard to approval.
   S.   Withdrawal Of Appeal: An appeal may be withdrawn, only by the
appellant, by written request filed with the responsible official who shall
inform the hearing examiner or other hearing body of the withdrawal request. If
the withdrawal is requested before the response of the responsible official, or
before serving notice of the appeal, such request shall be permitted and the
appeal shall be dismissed without prejudice by the hearing examiner or other
hearing body, and the filing fee shall be refunded.
   T.   Standard Of Review: The hearing examiner or other hearing body may
affirm the decision of the responsible official or the adequacy of the
environmental impact statement, or remand the case for further information; or
the hearing examiner or other hearing body may reverse the decision if the
administrative findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions are:
      1.   In violation of constitutional provisions as applied; or
      2.   The decision is outside the statutory authority or jurisdiction of
the city; or
      3.   The responsible official has engaged in unlawful procedure or
decision making process, or has failed to follow a prescribed procedure; or
      4.   In regard to challenges to the appropriateness of the issuance of a
DNS clearly erroneous in view of the public policy of the act (SEPA); or
      5.   In regard to challenges to the adequacy of an EIS shown to be
inadequate employing the "rule of reason".
   U.   Evidence; Burden Of Proof: In each particular proceeding, the appellant
shall have the burden of proof, and the determination of the responsible
official shall be presumed prima facie correct and shall be afforded
substantial weight. Appeals shall be limited to the records of the responsible
official.
   V.   Judicial Appeal:
      1.   Any available administrative appeal provided under this section must
be utilized by an agency or aggrieved person prior to initiating judicial
review of any SEPA action, omission, or determination made or taken under this
chapter.
      2.   A judicial appeal of any SEPA action, omission, or determination
made or taken under this chapter must be filed within the time limitations
established by any statute or ordinance for appeal of the underlying
governmental action.
      3.   The city shall give official notice of the date and place for
commencing a judicial appeal, in accordance with WAC 197-11-680(5), where there
is a statute or ordinance establishing a time limit for commencing judicial
appeal. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-8: DEFINITIONS:
15-14-8-1: PURPOSE:
This section
15-14-8 contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. (Ord. 778,
10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-8-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The city adopts the following sections of chapter 197-11 of the Washington
administrative code by reference:
197-11-700 Definitions.
197-11-702 Act.
197-11-704 Action.
197-11-706 Addendum.
197-11-708 Adoption.
197-11-710 Affected tribe.
197-11-712 Affecting.
197-11-714 Agency.
197-11-716 Applicant.
197-11-718 Built environment.
197-11-720 Categorical exemption.
197-11-724 Consulted agency.
197-11-726 Cost-benefit analysis.
197-11-728 City.
197-11-730 Decision maker.
197-11-732 Department.
197-11-734 Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).
197-11-736 Determination of significance (DS).
197-11-738 EIS.
197-11-740 Environment.
197-11-742 Environmental checklist.
197-11-744 Environmental document.
197-11-746 Environmental review.
197-11-750 Expanded scoping.
197-11-752 Impacts.
197-11-754 Incorporation by reference.
197-11-756 Lands covered by water.
197-11-758 Lead agency.
197-11-760 License.
197-11-762 Local agency.
197-11-764 Major action.
197-11-766 Mitigated DNS.
197-11-768 Mitigation.
197-11-770 Natural environment.
197-11-772 NEPA.
197-11-774 Nonproject.
197-11-775 Open record hearing
197-11-776 Phased review.
197-11-778 Preparation.
197-11-780 Private project.
197-11-782 Probable.
197-11-784 Proposal.
197-11-786 Reasonable alternative.
197-11-788 Responsible Official.
197-11-790 SEPA.
197-11-792 Scope.
197-11-793 Scoping.
197-11-794 Significant.
197-11-796 State agency.
197-11-797 Threshold determination.
197-11-799 Underlying governmental action.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-9: AGENCY COMPLIANCE:
15-14-9-1: PURPOSE:
This section
15-14-9 contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for
charging fees under the SEPA process, designating categorical exemptions that
do not apply within critical areas, listing agencies with environmental
expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current
agency activities. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-9-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The city adopts the following sections of WAC 197-11 by reference:
197-11-900 Purpose of this part.
197-11-902 Agency SEPA policies.
197-11-908 Critical Areas
197-11-916 Application to ongoing actions.
197-11-920 Agencies with environmental expertise.
197-11-922 Lead agency rules.
197-11-924 Determining the lead agency.
197-11-926 Lead agency for governmental proposals.
197-11-928 Lead agency for public and private proposals.
197-11-930 Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction.
197-11-932 Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than
           one agency, when one of the agencies is a City.
197-11-934 Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local
           agency, not a City, and one or more state agencies.
197-11-936 Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than
           one state agency.
197-11-938 Lead agencies for specific proposals.
197-11-940 Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.
197-11-942 Agreements on lead agency status.
197-11-944 Agreements on division of lead agency duties.
197-11-946 DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.
197-11-948 Assumption of lead agency status.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-9-3: FEES:
For the purpose of reimbursing the city for necessary costs and expenses
relating to its compliance with the SEPA rules and this chapter, the following
schedule of fees is established (in addition to the fees in the city's master
fee schedule):
   A.   Threshold Determination: For every environmental checklist the city
will review when it is lead agency, the city shall collect a fee as required by
the city fee schedule from the proponent of the proposal prior to undertaking
the threshold determination. In addition, for a threshold determination which
requires information in addition to that contained in or accompanying the
environmental checklist, the city shall collect a fee from the proponent in an
amount equal to the actual costs and expenses incurred by the city in
conducting any studies or investigations necessary to provide such information.
The time periods provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination
shall not begin to run until payment of the fees required by this subsection.
   B.   Environmental Impact Statement:
      1.   For all projects requiring an EIS for which the city is the lead
agency and for which the responsible official determines that the EIS shall be
prepared by the employees of the city, or that the city will contract directly
with a consultant or consultants for the preparation of an EIS, the city shall
collect from the proponent a fee in an amount equal to the actual costs and
expenses incurred by the city in preparing the EIS. Such fee shall also apply
when the city determines that the applicant may prepare the EIS, and the
responsible official determines that substantial revisions or reassessing of
impacts must be performed by employees of the city or city consultants to
ensure compliance with the provisions of the SEPA guidelines and this chapter.
      2.   If the responsible official determines that an EIS is required, and
that the EIS shall be prepared by employees of the city or by a consultant or
consultants retained by the city, or that the applicant-prepared EIS shall be
substantially rewritten by employees of the city, the applicant shall be
advised by the responsible official of the estimated costs and expenses of
preparing or rewriting the EIS prior to actual preparation or rewriting, and
the applicant shall post a bond or otherwise insure payment of such costs and
expenses. A consultant or consultants may be recommended by the applicant. The
final decision to hire a consultant or consultants shall be made by the city
council.
      3.   All fees owed to the city under this section shall be paid in full
by the applicant prior to final action by the city on the project. Any fee owed
to the city under this subsection B shall be paid by the applicant prior to the
initiation of actual preparation of an EIS (if required) or actual rewriting of
an applicant-prepared EIS by the city or its consultant(s). For all EISs
involving multiple applicants, the cost of preparation shall be divided among
the applicants according to the nature, amount, and type of work to be
performed. The city shall ask the EIS consultant to estimate the costs related
to the portion of the EIS associated with each application. The city shall make
the final decision on the costs to be billed to each applicant, regardless of
whether the EIS is prepared by a consultant or the city. If an applicant
disputes the amount of the fee, the fee may be paid under protest and without
prejudice to the applicant's right to file a claim and bring an action to
recover the fee.
      4.   If a proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required, the
responsible official shall refund any fees collected under this subsection B
which remain after incurred costs are paid.
   C.   Cost Of Notice: The city may collect from the applicant the cost of
meeting the public notice requirements of this chapter relating to the
applicant's proposal.
   D.   Performance Fee: The city shall not collect a fee for performing its
duties as a consulted agency.
   E.   Copies: The city may charge any person for copies of any document
prepared under this chapter, and for mailing the document, in a manner provided
by chapter 42.17 Revised Code of Washington.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-1126, 4-10-2024)
15-14-10: FORMS:
15-14-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section
15-14-10 is to provide for uniform submittal of information on standardized
forms and applications. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-10-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The city adopts the following forms and sections of the Washington
administrative code by reference:
 
197-11-960 Environmental checklist.
197-11-965 Adoption notice.
197-11-970 Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).
197-11-980 Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS).
197-11-985 Notice of assumption of lead agency status.
197-11-990 Notice of action.
 
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-14-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application
of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord.
778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 15
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
15-15-1: Authority And General Provisions
15-15-2: General Provisions
15-15-3: Enforceability
15-15-4: Approval Procedure
15-15-5: Form Of Agreement, Council Approval, Recording
15-15-1: AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to the provisions of title 9, chapter 4 of this code the following
provisions may be used to set forth binding agreements between the city and
project proponents to bind them to specific project requirements:
   A.   The city may consider, and enter into, a development agreement related
to a project permit application with a person having ownership or control of
real property within the city limits. The city may consider a development
agreement for real property outside of the city limits but within the urban
growth area (UGA) as part of a proposed annexation or a service agreement.
   B.   A development agreement shall be consistent with the applicable
policies and goals of the Orting comprehensive plan and applicable development
regulations. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-15-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   As applicable, the development agreement shall specify the following:
      1.   Project components which define and detail the permitted uses,
residential densities, nonresidential densities and intensities or building
sizes;
      2.   The amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in
accordance with any applicable provisions of state law, any reimbursement
provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspection
fees, or dedications;
      3.   Mitigation measures, development conditions and other requirements
of chapter 43.21C Revised Code of Washington;
      4.   Design standards such as architectural treatment, maximum heights,
setbacks, landscaping, drainage, water quality requirements, LID BMPs, and
other development features;
      5.   Provisions for affordable housing, if applicable;
      6.   Parks and common open space dedication and/or preservation;
      7.   Phasing;
      8.   A build out or vesting period for applicable standards; and
      9.   Any other appropriate development requirement or procedure which is
based upon a city policy, rule, regulation or standard.
   B.   As provided in Revised Code of Washington 36.70B.170, the development
agreement shall reserve authority to impose new or different regulations to the
extent required by a serious threat to public health and safety.
(Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2019-1057, 1-8-2020)
15-15-3: ENFORCEABILITY:
Unless amended or terminated, a development agreement is enforceable during its
term by a party to the agreement. A development agreement and the development
standards in the agreement govern during the term of the agreement, or for all
or that part of the build out period specified in the agreement. The agreement
may not be subject to an amendment to a zoning ordinance or development
standard or a new zoning ordinance or development standard or regulation
adopted after the effective date of the agreement. The permit approval issued
by the city after the execution of the agreement must be consistent with the
development agreement. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-15-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A development agreement is a type 5 project permit application and shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures established in this title. A
development agreement shall be approved by resolution or ordinance of the city
council after a public hearing, based on the planning commission's
recommendation. (Ord. 778, 10-30-2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
15-15-5: FORM OF AGREEMENT, COUNCIL APPROVAL, RECORDING:
   A.   Form: All development agreements shall be in a form provided by the
city attorney's office. The city attorney shall approve all development
agreements for form prior to consideration by the planning commission.
   B.   Term: Development agreements may be approved for a maximum period of
five (5) years.
   C.   Recording: A development agreement shall be recorded against the real
property records of the Pierce County assessor's office. During the term of the
development agreement, the agreement is binding on the parties and their
successors, including any area that is annexed to the city. (Ord. 778, 10-30-
2003, eff. 11-11-2003)
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE
Ordinances 1 through 629 show the disposition of same in the 1973 Orting
Municipal Code. Ordinances starting with number 633 show the disposition in the
1996 recodification.
Ordinance Number
1   Officers (Rep. by Ord. 399)
2   Police force (Rep. by Ord. 399)
3   (Rep. by Ord. 244)
4   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
5   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
6   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
7   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
8   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
9   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
10   Offensive substances (Rep. by Ord. 399)
11   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
12   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
13   Point of survey, benchmark (14.28)
14   Grade establishment (Special)
15   Monument protection (Rep. by Ord. 399)
16   Plat filing (Rep. by Ord. 399)
17   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
18   Committing magistrate duties (Rep. by Ord. 399)
19   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
20   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
21   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
22   Town newspapers (9.66)
23   Board of Trustees (Rep. by Ord. 399)
24   Territory of Washington defined (Rep. by Ord. 399)
25   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
26   House of ill fame (Rep. by Ord. 399)
27   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
28   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
29   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
30   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
31   Public work bid advertisement (Rep. by Ord. 399)
32   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
33   (Not Passed)
34   (Rep. by Ord. 231)
35   Franchise granting (Rep. by Ord. 399)
36   Franchise (Franchise Table)
37   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
38   Train speed limit (Rep. by Ord. 399)
39   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
40   Tax (Special)
41   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
42   (Rep. by Ord. 173)
43   Fire Department apparatus (Rep. by Ord. 399)
44   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
45   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
46   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
47   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
48   Negotiable bonds (Special)
49   Bond issuance election (Special)
50   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
51   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
52   General Municipal bond sale (Special)
53   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
54   Town property care (2.12)
55   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
56   Tax (Special)
57   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
58   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
59   Improvements assessment (Special)
60   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
61   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
62   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
63   Improvements assessment (Special)
64   (Rep. by Ord. 78)
65   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
66   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
67   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
68   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
69   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
70   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
71   (Rep. by Ords. 79, 399)
72   Street vacation (Special)
73   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
74   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
75   (Rep. by Ord. 77)
76   (Rep. by Ord. 231)
77   Bicycle license, repeals Ord. 75 (Rep. by Ord. 272)
78   Repeals Ord. 64 (Repealer)
79   (Repealer)
80   Amends Ord. 77 § 1, 12, Bicycle Licenses (Rep. by Ord. 272)
81   Police justice (Rep. by Ord. 399)
82   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
83   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
84   Franchise (Franchise Table)
85   (Not codified)
86   Street vacation (Special)
87   Street vacation (Special)
88   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
89   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
90   Creameries (Rep. by Ord. 399)
91   Contract (Special)
92   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
93   Funding bond issuance (Special)
94   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
95   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
96   Contract (Special)
97   Pool and billiards (Rep. by Ord. 356)
98   Pool and billiards (Rep. by Ord. 356)
99   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
100   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
101   Dry kilns (Rep. by Ord. 399)
102   Amends Ord. 77 §§ 6, 8, Bicycle Licenses (Rep. by Ord. 272)
103   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
104   Franchise (Franchise Table)
105   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
106   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
107   Street vacation (Special)
108   Franchise (Franchise Table)
109   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
110   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
111   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
112   Working prisoners (Not codified)
113   (Rep. by Ords. 224, 399)
114   Amends Ord. 98 § 1, Pool and Billiard Halls (Rep. by Ord. 356)
115   Sidewalk and curb construction (Rep. by Ord. 399)
116   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
117   Nuisances (Rep. by Ord. 399)
118   (Rep. by Ord. 226)
119   Explosives (Rep. by Ord. 399)
120   Street vacation (Special)
121   Water pipes and mains (Rep. by Ord. 399)
122   Alley vacation (Special)
123   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
124   Alley vacation (Special)
125   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
126   Amends Ord. 115, Sidewalk Construction (Rep. by Ord. 399)
127   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
128   Officers (Rep. by Ord. 399)
129   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
130   Health Department (Rep. by Ords. 392, 399)
131   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
132   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
133   Vehicle loads (Rep. by Ord. 399)
134   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
135   (Rep. by Ord. 225)
136   (Rep. by Ord. 154)
137   Billboards (14.36)
138   (Rep. by Ord. 154)
139   Roller skates and wagons (Rep. by Ord. 399)
140   Local improvement assessment (Rep. by Ord. 399)
141   (Rep. by Ord. 225)
142   (Rep. by Ord. 154)
143   Expectoration (9.28)
144   Street and alley maintenance (Rep. by Ord. 399)
145   Local Improvement District 1 (Special)
146   (Rep. by Ord. 225)
147   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
148   Alley vacation (Special)
149   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
150   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
151   Street vacation (Special)
152   Alley vacation (Special)
153   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
154   Business licenses, repeals Ords. 136, 138, 142 (5.02)
155   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
156   Franchise (Franchise Table)
157   Lot, block vacation (Special)
158   Local Improvement District 2 (Special)
159   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
160   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
161   Franchise (Franchise Table)
162   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
163   Water, light system acquisition (Special)
164   Town Council meetings (Rep. by Ord. 399)
165   Water Department (Rep. by Ord. 327)
166   Officer salaries, bonds (Rep. by Ord. 399)
167   Street numbering (14.32)
168   (Rep. by Ord. 399)
169   Blocks railway crossing (Rep. by Ord. 399)
170   (Not Passed)
171   Library book use (Rep. by Ord. 399)
172   Business licenses, repeals Ord. 154 § 8 (Rep. by Ord. 224)
173   Fire Department, repeals Ord. 42 (2.20)
174   (Rep. by Ord. 193)
175   (Rep. by Ord. 227)
176   Amends Ord. 128 § 2, officers (Rep. by Ord. 399)
177   (Rep. by Ord. 224)
178   (Not Passed)
179   Arterial street (Arterial Street Table)
180   (Not Codified)
181   Lot, block vacation (Special)
182   Amends Ord. 165 § 31, Water Department (Rep. by Ord. 327)
183   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 229)
184   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 229)
185   Amends Ord. 155 § 1, Motion Pictures (Rep. by Ord. 399)
186   Library book organization (Rep. by Ord. 399)
187   Amends Ord. 115 § 18, Sidewalk Width (Rep. by Ord. 399)
188   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 229)
189   (Not Passed)
190   Fire limits (Rep. by Ord. 321)
191   Motion picture theater license (5.28)
192   Commercial truck or bus license (Rep. by Ord. 224)
193   Board of Park Commissioners, Fund created, repeals Ord. 174 (Rep. by Ord.
399)
194   Amends Ord. 183 § 1, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 229)
195   (Not Passed)
196   Street vacation (Special)
197   Sidewalk widths (Rep. by Ord. 399)
198   Amends Ord. 165 § 1, Water Department (Rep. by Ord. 327)
199   Water Collector, office manager, repeals Ord. 180 § 1 (Not Codified)
200   Amends Ord. 165 § 1, Water Department (Rep. by Ord. 327)
201   Parking strip widths (12.12)
202   Livestock (Rep. by Ord. 399)
203   Dog licensing (Rep. by Ord. 271)
204   Amends Ord. 109 § 1, Liquor (Rep. by Ord. 224)
205   Beer licensing (Rep. by Ord. 224)
206   Amends Ord. 166 § 3, Officers (Rep. by Ord. 399)
207   Amends Ord. 154 § 14, dance licenses (5.02)
208   Amends Ord. 166 § 2, Town Attorney salary (Rep. by Ord. 399)
209   Amends Ord. 190 § 6, Fire Limits (Rep. by Ord. 231)
210   Liquor sale zone (Rep. by Ord. 399)
211   Amusement machine license (Rep. by Ord. 356)
212   Outdoor advertising license (Rep. by Ord. 228)
213   Amends Ord. 207 § 1, dance licenses (5.02)
214   Adds to Ord. 173, Fire Department (2.08)
215   Franchise (Franchise Table)
216   Disorderly persons (Rep. by Ord. 399)
217   Street vacation (Special)
218   Town Marshal, water collection salary (Rep. by Ord. 327)
219   Water system improvement bond (Special)
220   Cemetery establishment (2.28)
221   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water System Rates (Rep. by Ord. 229)
222   Sewerage Disposal Plant Construction Fund (Special)
223   Sewerage Disposal Plant Construction Fund (Special)
224   Repeals Ords. 3, 7, 32, 37, 44, 45, 66, 69, 95, 100, 109, 113, 125, 172,
177, 192 and 205 (Repealer)
225   Livestock restrictions, repeals Ords. 135, 141, 146 (7.12)
226   Motor Vehicle Act, repeals Ord. 212 (9.68)
227   Fireworks, repeals Ord. 175 (Rep. by Ord. 489)
228   Handbills, repeals Ord. 212 (9.68)
229   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water Rates; repeals Ords. 183, 184, 188, 194, 221
(Rep. by Ord. 327)
230   Amends Ord. 166 § 1, Officers; repeals Ord. 166 § 2 (Rep. by Ord. 399)
231   Building zones, repeals Ords. 34, 76, 190 14.04)
232   Sewerage System Construction Fund (Special)
233   Sewerage system rates, charges (13.52–13.64) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
234   Municipal Defense Commission (Rep. by Ord. 399)
235   Amends Ord. 154 § 9, Amusement Business License; repeals Ords. 136, 138,
142 (5.02)
236   Water System Improvement Fund (Special)
237   Water Revenue Bond, Warrant Sinking Fund (Expired)
238   Street vacation (Special)
239   Amends Ord. 211 § 2, Amusement Machine License (Rep. by Ords. 258, 356)
240   Card table license (Rep. by Ord. 270)
241   Admission tax, advertising regulation (3.04)
242   Traffic, repeals Ord. 226 (Rep. by Ord. 320)
243   Liquor regulation (Rep. by Ord. 395)
244   Treasurer and Clerk combined (2.08)
245   Garbage collection (Rep. by Ord. 276)
246   Land conveyance (Special)
247   Amends Ord. 154 § 11, circus, carnival license (5.02)
248   Taxicab licenses (5.24)
249   Amends Ord. 240 § 2, card table fees (Rep. by Ord. 264)
250   Food service regulations (8.04)
251   Water revenue bond refunds (Special)
252   Street vacation (Special)
253   Citizen election caucus (Rep. by Ord. 399)
254   Building Code (Not Codified)
255   Amends Ord. 165 § 8, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 327)
256   Amends Ord. 233 § 5, Sewage System Rates (13.64) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
257   Plumbing regulations (Rep. by Ord. 399)
258   Amusement machines license, repeals Ord. 239 (Rep. by Ord. 356)
259   Cemetery water system transfer (Special)
260   Street vacation (Special)
261   Employee Pension Fund (2.32)
262   Elections (Rep. by Ord. 399)
263   Fire Prevention Code adopted (Rep. by Ord. 399)
264   Card table license, repeals Ord. 249 (Not Codified)
265   Waterworks, sewerage system improvement bond (Special)
266   Water, sewer revenue refunding, improvement bond, 1953 (Special)
267   Water bond (Special)
268   Franchise (Franchise Table)
269   Water funds (Special)
270   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water Rates; repeals Ord. 240 (Rep. by Ord. 327)
271   Dog licensing, repeals Ord. 203 (Not Codified)
272   bicycle regulations, repeals Ords. 77, 80, 102 (Rep. by Ord. 399)
273   Local improvements (Rep. by Ord. 399)
274   Franchise grant to Orting Telephone Exchange (Rep. by Ord. 517)
275   Building Code adoption (Rep. by Ord. 347)
276   Garbage collection, repeals Ord. 245 (8.08)
277   Amends Ord. 165 § 28, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 327)
278   Fire Department funds (Special)
279   Curfew (9.74)
280   Peddler license, repeals Ord. 154 §§ 5, 6 (5.20)
281   Amends Ord. 276 § 12, Garbage Collection (Rep. by Ord. 370)
282   Platting (Rep. by Ord. 457)
283   Mobile home regulation (14.40)
284   Zoning (Rep. by Ord. 301)
285   Amends Ord. 264 § 2, card table license (Not codified)
286   Equipment Replacement Fund (3.16)
287   Permanent Building Fund (3.16)
288   Permanent Street Improvement Fund (3.16)
289   Land annexation (Special)
290   Zoning extension (Rep. by Ord. 301)
291   Plumbing Code (Rep. by Ord. 399)
292   Sidewalk construction, repeals Ord. 115 (Rep. by Ord. 321)
293   Police Department vehicle purchases (Special)
294   Amends Od. 242 § 33(a), Traffic Code (Rep. by Ord. 320)
295   Street Department grader purchase (Special)
296   Sewer easement acceptance (Special)
297   Cemetery maintenance (2.28)
298   Amends Ord. 292 § 3, sidewalk construction (Rep. by Ord. 321)
299   Amends Ord. 277 § 1, Water Rates (Rep. by Ord. 327)
300   Water system improvement (Special)
301   Zoning, repeals Ord. 284 (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24,
17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56)
302   Auctioneer License (5.12)
303   Arterial street (Arterial Street Table)
304   Engineering Services Fund (Special)
305   Municipal court (2.24)
306   Litter prohibited (9.64)
307   Street improvements (3.20)
308   Amends Ord. 301, Zoning districts (17.32)
309   Cumulative Reserve Fund for fire equipment (3.16)
310   Secondary arterial (Arterial Street Table)
311   Fire Hall Facility Improvement Fund (Special)
312   Amends Ord. 216, disorderly persons (Rep. by Ord. 383)
313   Amends Ord. 202, Livestock Keeping (7.08)
314   Adds § 3C(a) to Ord. 301, Zoning Variance Permits (17.52)
315   Town services extension (Rep. by Ord. 327)
316   Sanitary, storm sewer, dumping prohibited (13.68) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
317   Amends Ord. 281 § 1, Garbage Collection (Rep. by Ord. 370)
318   Amends Ord. 233 § 2, Sewerage System Rates, Charges (13.56) (Rep. by Ord.
624)
319   Police Department vehicle purchase (Special)
320   Traffic Code, repeals Ord. 242 (Title 10)
321   Sidewalk, curb construction, repeals Ord. 292 (Rep. by Ord. 358)
322   Adds (p), (q), (r) to Ord. 312; amends Ord. 312 § 1(g), disorderly
persons (Rep. by Ord. 396)
323   Amends Ord. 320 § 83, penalty for traffic violation (Rep. by Ord. 396)
324   Amends Ord. 312 § 2, disorderly persons (Rep. by Ord. 383)
325   Secondary arterial street (Arterial Street Table)
326   Employee salary increase (Special)
327   Water system, repeals Ords. 165, 200, 218, 255, 270, 277, 299, 315
(13.04–13.32)
328   Franchise (Franchise Table)
329   Check fraud (Rep. by Ord. 383)
330   Gas piping permits (14.12)
331   Elections (2.16)
332   Police Department vehicle purchase (Special)
333   Amends Ord. 272 § 7, bicycle license (Rep. by Ord. 399)
334   Utility Business License (3.08)
335   Police Reserve Operating Fund (Special)
336   Police Reserve Operating Fund (Special)
337   Fire Department vehicle purchase (Special)
338   Amends Ord. 321, sidewalk repair (Rep. by Ord. 358)
339   Employee compensatory time off (2.32)
340   Employee's retirement system (2.32)
341   Police Reserve Operating Fund (Special)
342   Amends Ord. 271, dog regulation (Not Codified)
343   Amends Ord. 320 Art. IV, Speed Limits (10.20)
344   Street vacation (Special)
345   Street Department truck purchase (Special)
346   Street excavation (12.16)
347   Building Code adoption, repeals Ord. 275 (14.04)
348   Alley vacation (Special)
349   Franchise (Franchise Table)
350   Amends Ord. 301 Art. III, vehicle defined (17.08)
351   Alley vacation (Special)
352   Amends Ord. 327 § 5.02, Water Rates (13.20)
353   Dangerous buildings (14.16)
354   Budget adoption (Special)
355   Side-sewer connection, repeals Ords. 321, 338 (12.04)
356   Amusement machine license, repeals Ords. 97, 98, 211, 239, 258 (5.08)
357   Amends Ord. 237 § 5.02, Water Rates (13.20)
358   Sidewalk construction, repeals Ords. 321, 338 (12.04)
359   Sales And Use Tax (3.12)
360   Amends Ord. 306 § 3, Litter (9.64)
361   Plumbing Code (14.08)
362   Budget adoption (Special)
363   Ice box, refrigerator regulations (9.22)
364   Amends Ord. 317 § 1, garbage collection charges (Rep. by Ord. 370)
365   Dangerous buildings (14.16)
366   Sewerage system improvements (Special)
367   Sewerage system improvements (Special)
368   Legal curbs, streets defined (12.08)
369   Payroll Fund (3.24)
370   Amends Ord. 276 § 12, garbage collection charges; repeals Ords. 281, 317,
364 (Rep. by Ord. 437)
371   Property condemnation (Special)
372   Dangerous Drugs (9.24)
373   Council meetings (2.04) (Rep. by Ord. 575)
374   Fire Prevention Code (14.24)
375   Amends Ord. 318 § 2, sewer service rates (13.56) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
376   Budget adoption (Special)
377   Bingo (Not Passed)
378   Utility Local Improvement District No. 1 (Special)
379   Amends Ord. 375 § 2, sewer service rates (13.56) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
380   Waterworks Improvement Fund (Special)
381   Amends Ord. 376, sewer improvements (Special)
382   Amends Ord. 378 § 3, Utility Local Improvement District No. 1 (Special)
383   Criminal Code, repeals Ords. 312, 322, 324, 329 (Title 9)
384   Amends Ord. 329 § 95, Rules Of The Road (Rep. by Ord. 534)
385   Fuel oil tax; repeals Ord. 334 § 3(d) (3.08)
386   Weeds and rubbish near streets and sidewalks (12.20)
387   Amends Ord. 271 §§ 2, 6, dogs (Not Codified)
388   Expenditure of funds (Special)
389   Budget adoption (Special)
390   Amends Ord. 327 §§ 3.03, 3.06, 3.07, water installation and connection
(13.12)
391   General provisions and definitions (1.04)
392   Repeals Ord. 130, Health Department (Repealer)
393   Adds § 1a to Ord. 241, elementary and secondary school exemptions (3.04)
394   Amends Ord. 320 § 53, bicycle license fee; repeals Ord. 320 § 10 (10.48)
395   Alcoholic beverage sale; repeals Ord. 243 (5.04)
396   General Penalty; repeals Ords. 22 § 2; 54 § 4; 137 § 5; 143 § 2; 144 § 2;
154 §§ 15, 17; 191 § 2; 201 § 3; 225 § 3; 226 § 16; 227 § 2; 228 § 3; 233 §§ 4,
10; 240 § 5; 241 § 7; 243 § 24; 250 § 12; 271 § 7; 279 § 5; 280 § 12; 282 § 36;
283 § 8; 297 § 17; 301 Art. VIII § 5, Art. IX; 302 § 9; 306 § 4; 313 § 5; 316 §
2; 320 § 83; 327 §§ 3, 15, 8.04; 330 § \§ 4, 18; 334 § 9; 346 § 26; 356 § 6;
358 § 10; 363 § 2; 365 § 4; 368 § 9; 372 § 3; 374 § 10 (1.12)
397   Right Of Entry; repeals Ords. 327 § 3.15; 330 § 4; 301 Art. VIII § 5
(1.08)
398   Town officers designated, bonds (2.08)
399   Repeals Ords. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 35, 38, 41, 43, 46, 47, 50, 51, 53, 55,
57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 65, 67, 68, 70, 71, 73, 74, 81, 82, 83, 88, 89, 90, 92, 94,
99, 101, 103, 105, 106, 110, 111, 112, 115, 116, 117, 119, 121, 123, 126, 127,
128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 1134, 139, 140, 144, 147, 149, 150, 153, 155,
159, 160, 162, 164, 166, 168, 169, 171, 176, 185, 186, 187, 193, 197, 202, 206,
208, 210, 216, 230, 234, 253, 257, 262, 263, 272, 273, 291, 333 (Repealer)
400   Dog Licensing And Regulations (7.04)
401   Card Room Licensing (Rep. by Ord. 440)
402   Amends Ord. 400 § 6, Dog License Fees (Rep. by Ord. 442)
403   Amends Ord. 358 § 5, Sidewalk Construction (12.04)
404   Authorizes employment of summer help (Special)
405   Amends Ord. 301 Art. IV, Zoning (17.16)
406   Street name change (Special)
407   Expenditure of funds (Special)
408   Horses on public streets (10.56)
409   Expenditure of funds (Special)
410   Adopts Orting Municipal Code (1.01)
411   Budget for 1974 (Special)
412   Claims Fund (3.28)
413   Horses (7.08)
414   Amends Ord. 411, 1974 budget (Special)
415   Bingo, raffles and amusement games (Rep. by Ord. 429)
416   Adds § 3.32.010, Federal Shared Revenue Fund (Rep. by Ord. 564)
417   Emergency expenditure (Special)
418   Amends §§ 13.12.010 and 13.12.030, water service (13.12)
419   Ad valorem tax levy for 1975 (Special)
420   Budget for 1975 (Special)
421   Amends §§ 17.12.050, 17.32.020 and 17.36.010, Zoning (17.12, 17.32,
17.36)
422   Amends § 13.12.070, water service (13.12)
423   Amends Ord. 411, 1974 budget (Special)
424   City Council meetings (2.04)
425   Repeals §§ 9.40.010 and 9.42.010, Intoxication (Repealer)
426   Adopts Zoning Map; repeals § 17.16.020 (17.16)
427   Adopts uniform codes; repeals §§ 14.04.010,14.08.010–14.08.070,
14.12.010, 14.12.030– 14.12.060, 14.12.080, 14.12.090, 14.12.110–14.12.210,
14.24.010, 14.24.030–14.24.100 (14.04, 14.08, 14.12, 14.24)
428   Repeals §§ 14.12.020 and 14.12.070, Mechanical and Gas Code (Repealer)
429   Gambling activities tax; repeals Ch. 5.32 and § 9.36.010 (5.32, 9.36)
430   Amends 8.08.140, garbage rates (Rep. by Ord. 437)
431   Amends § 14.16.040, Uniform Building Code (14.16)
432   Amends § 12.04.190, sidewalk grade (12.04)
433   Equipment purchase (Special)
434   1976 tax levy (Special)
435   1976 budget (Special)
436   Amends Ord. 420, 1975 budget (Special)
437   Repeals and replaces §§ 8.08.130 and 8.08.140, garbage collection rates
(8.08)
438   Adds §§ 2.32.130 and 2.32.140, residency of City employees (2.32)
439   Short subdivision (16.40)
440   Repeals §§ 1–5 of Ord. 401, §§ 5.16.010–5.16.050 (Repealer)
441   Replaces Zoning Map adopted by Ord. 426, Zoning (17.16)
442   Amends §§ 7.04.060, 7.04.210; adds §§ 7.12.040, 7.12.050; repeals Ord.
402, Animals (7.04, 7.12)
443   Adds §§ 10.40.110 through 10.40.140, driving rules (10.40)
444   Fixes ad valorem tax (Special)
445   Amends Ord. 444, ad valorem tax (Special)
446   Budget for 1977 (Special)
447   Amends Ord. 435, 1976 budget (Special)
448   State Environmental Policy Act (Rep. by Ord. 528)
449   Business Tax (3.36)
450   Annexation (Special)
451   Ad valorem tax for 1978 (Special)
452   1978 budget (Special)
453   Amends Ord. 446, 1977 budget (Special)
454   Establishes Unemployment Compensation Fund (Special)
455   Establishes Civil Service Commission (2.34)
456   Adds Ch. 14.44; amends §§ 14.04.010, 14.08.010–14.08.020,
14.12.010–14.12.020, 14.12.100, 14.24.010, uniform codes (14.04, 14.08, 14.12,
14.24, 14.44)
457   Subdivisions; repeals Ord. 282 (16.04–16.44)
458   Amends §§ 8.08.140, 13.12.080, 13.20.020 and 13.20.030, water and refuse
collection rates (8.08, 13.12, 13.20)
459   Mobile home park regulations (14.42)
460   Establishes Urban Arterial Fund and Anti-Recession Fund (Rep. by Ord.
515)
461   Amends § 14.40.050 and 14.40.070, mobile homes and trailer parks (14.40)
462   (Special)
463   (Special)
464   (Special)
465   General obligation bonds (Special)
466   Adds § 13.56.040, fire protection (13.56) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
467   Adopts classification of noncharter code City (1.02)
468   Adds §§ 9.32.010–9.32.080, Nuisances (9.32)
469   Election for general obligation bonds (Special)
470   Repeals and replaces § 17.16.020, Zoning (17.16)
471   Adds § (F) to § 17.40.070; repeals and replaces § 17.12.090, Zoning
(17.12, 17.40)
472   General obligation bonds (Special)
473   Amends § 9 of Ord. 468, Nuisances (Not Codified)
474   Multi-Purpose Center Fund (Special)
475   Ad valorem tax for 1980 (Special)
476   Amends Ord. 464, 1979 fiscal budget (Special)
477   City budget for 1980 (Special)
478   Rezone (Special)
479   Ad valorem tax (Special)
480   Special election (Special)
481   1981 budget (Special)
482   Amends 1980 budget (Special)
483   Foreclosure of certain liens (Special)
484   Amends § 14.04.010, Uniform Building Code (14.04)
485   Eliminates certain funds (Special)
486   Adds §§ 14.46.010 through 14.46.040, Landfill permits (14.46)
487   Adds §§ 9.14.010 through 9.14.060, Drug Paraphernalia (9.14)
488   Amends § 5.32.020, Gambling Activities Tax (5.32)
489   Adds §§ 9.26.010 through 9.26.040, Fireworks; repeals §§ 1 and 2 of Ord.
227 (9.26)
490   Amends § 17.40.070A, Zoning (17.40)
491   Amends §§ 13.12.010, 13.12.030, 13.12.100, 13.16.070 and 13.16.080, water
service (13.12, 13.16)
492   Designates official newspaper (1.16)
493   Amends § 3.08.030B, business and occupation tax (3.08)
494   Tax levy (Special)
495   Budget (Special)
496A   Adds §§ 17.52.011, 17.52.012, 17.52.013 and 17.52.014; amends §§
17.52.030, 17.52.050, 17.52.060 and 17.52.070; repeals and replaces 17.52.010,
Zoning (17.52)
497   Amends § 16.40.030, subdivisions (16.40)
498   Designates official newspaper (1.16)
499   Additional sales or use tax (3.14)
500   Adds § 17.32.090, Off-Street Parking (17.32)
501   Amends § 2.08.020, Bonding of Officers (2.08)
502   Establishes Ch. 2.10, Board of Trustees; amends §§ 2.20.010, 2.20.020 and
2.20.100, Fire Department (2.10, 2.20)
503   Ad valorem tax (Special)
504   Ad valorem tax (Special)
505   Amends 1983 budget (Special)
506   Adopts 1983 budget (Special)
507   Amends § 6 of Ord. 499, sales or use tax (3.14)
508   Amends § 13.56.060, sewer rates (13.56) (Rep. by Ord. 624)
509   Amends § 3.08.030, business and occupation tax (3.08)
510   Adds language to § 14.40.010 and amends § 14.40.050, factory-built
housing (14.40)
511   Street vacation (Special)
512   Tax levy (Special)
513   Amends 1983 budget (Special)
514   Adopts 1984 budget (Special)
515   Repeals Ord. 460 (Repealer)
516   Franchise (Franchise Table)
517   Grants franchise to Orting Telephone Exchange; repeals Ord. 274
(Franchise Table)
518   Amends § 14.04.010, Building Code adoption (14.04)
519   Amends § 14.12.010, Mechanical Code adoption (14.12)
520   Amends § 14.08.010, Plumbing Code adoption (14.08)
521   Amends § 14.24.010, Fire Code adoption (14.24)
522   Amends § 14.42.040, mobile home parks (14.42)
523   Adds Ch. 14.48, Standard Specifications (14.48)
524   Amends § 2.24.010, Municipal Court (2.24)
525   Urban Arterial Fund (Special)
526   Amends § 16.16.090, Preliminary Plat (16.16)
527   Amends § 16.48.110, Subdivisions (16.48)
528   State Environmental Policy Act; repeals §§ 2 and 3 of Ord. 448 (8.12)
529   Adds Ch. 8.14, Shoreline Management Plan (8.14)
530   Drainage plans (13.72)
531   Tax levy (Special)
532   Amends 1984 budget (Special)
533   Adopts 1985 budget (Special)
534   Repeals Ord. 384 § 1 and Ord. 320 § 95, Washington Model Traffic
Ordinance adopted (10.04)
540   Adds Ch. 8.20, Flood Plain Management Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 574)
541   Adds a new § 14.42.055, Mobile Home Placement Fee (14.42)
543   Amends Ord. 327 § 5.01 and § 13.20.010 of the City Code, Water Payment
Late Charges (13.20)
544   Adds a new § 13.16.110, Fire Flow Minimums For Building Construction Or
Water Hookup (13.16)
545   Establishes Risk Management Fund (Special)
547   Amends Ord. 442 § 2 and 7.12.050 of the City Code, Cat Impoundment,
Notice, Disposition And Fee (7.12)
548   Amends Ord. 400 § 21, Ord. 442 § 4 and § 7.04.210 of the City Code, Dogs
Impoundment, Notice, Disposition And Fee (7.04)
553   Amends Ord. 429, paragraph 2, and Ord. 448 and § 5.32.020 of the City
Code, Gambling Activities, Tax Rates (5.32)
556   Amends Ord. 456, §§ 1, 2, and 4, and Ord. 427 §§ 3, 5, and 9, and §§
14.04.010, 14.08.010, 14,12,010 and 14.24.010 and adds a new § 14.52.010 of the
City Code, uniform codes (14.04, 14.08, 14.12, 14.24, 14.52)
557   Adds Ch. 2.36, Emergency Services Department (2.36)
559   Repealing Ord. 555 (an annexation ordinance) (Special)
563   Annexing certain property (Special)
564   Repealing Ord. 416 § 1 and § 3.32.010 of the City Code, Revenue Sharing
Fund (3.32)
565   Adds Ch. 3.40, Excise Tax On Sale Of Real Property (3.40)
566   Repealing Ord. 468, Nuisances (8.16)
   Adds a new Ch. 8.16, Nuisances (8.16)
567   Adds Ch. 10.60, Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles (10.60)
568   Amends Ord. 400 § 12 and § 7.04.120 of the City Code, Barking
Dogs–Nuisances (7.04)
569   Adds Ch. 8.24, Rodent Prevention (8.24)
570   Amends Ord. 276 § 8 and § 8.08.080 of the City Code, Outdoor Dumping And
Burning (8.08)
571   Amends Ord. 327 § 5.01 and § 13.20.010 of the City Code, Payment
When–Delinquent–Action (13.20)
574   Repealing Ord. 540, Flood Plain Management Regulations (8.20)
   Adds Ch. 8.20, Flood Planning Management And Flood Damage Prevention (8.20)
575   Amends Ord. 373, § 1 and § 2.04.010 of the City Code, time (2.04)
576   Amends Ord. 320 § 28 and § 10.32.020 of the City Code, One-Way Streets
And Alleys (10.32)
577   Amends Ord. 571, § 13.20.010 of the City Code, Payment
When–Delinquent–Action (13.20)
579   Amends Ord. 518 § 1 and Ord. 556 § 1, and § 14.04.101 of the City Code;
amends Ord. 519 § 1 and Ord. 556 § 5, and § 14.12.010 of the City Code; amends
Ord. 427 § 5, Ord. 456 § 7, Ord. 521 § 1 and Ord. 556 § 7, and § 14.24.010 of
the City Code; amends Ord. 427 § 3, Ord. 456 § 2, Ord. 520 § 1 and Ord. 556 §
3, and § 14.08.010 of the City Code; amends Ord. 456 § 8, and § 14.44.010 of
the City Code regarding Building Codes (14.04, 14.08, 14.12, 14.24, 14.44,
14.52)
580   Amends Ord. 365 § 2, § 14.16.010 through 14.16.050, Unfit Dwellings
(14.16)
581   Adds § 10.08.050 adopting Street Classification Standards (10.08)
582   Amends Ord. 320 § 22, setting speed limit on alleys and amends Orting
Municipal Code § 10.20.020 (10.20)
585   Adds a new Ch. 8.28, City Parks (8.28)
586   Repeals Ord. 449 § 3, establishing annual business license fee and
repealing and replacing section 3 Ord. 449 (3.36)
587   Amends Ord. 220 § 4, amends Cemetery Fund (2.28)
588   Adds new Ch. 16.52, Model Conservation Standards For Electrically Heated
and/or Conditioned Buildings (16.52)
589   Adds § 2.08.090, establishing salary for mayor and councilpersons (2.08)
591   Adds §§ 9.24.050, 9.24.060, 9.24.070 and 9.24.080, prohibiting loitering
for the purpose of engaging in drug related activity (9.24)
592   Repeals and replaces § 13.64.020, sewer construction and connection costs
(13.64)
593   Adopts hazardous waste management plan (planned to be added as new ch.
8.28, but ordinance wasn't sent for codification until 4/91 - see Ord. 609)
595   Repeals and replaces § 13.12.030, water construction and connection
costs, and § 13.64.020, sewer construction and connection costs (Rep. by Ord.
624)
596   Adds §§ 3.08.110, 3.08.120, 3.08.130, 3.08.140 and 3.08.150, natural or
manufactured gas use tax (3.08)
597   Adds new ch. 12.16, excavations (12.16)
598   Adds new subsection 8.16.030HH, offensive noise disturbances (8.16)
599   Adds new ch. 8.32, maximum permissible environmental noise (8.32)
600   Amends the Orting criminal code and adopting state law by reference by
repealing §§ 9.04.010 through 9.04.030, 9.08.010, 9.10.010, 9.12.010, 9.14.010,
9.18.010, 9.20.010, 9.22.010, 9.24.010 through 9.24.040, 9.25.010 through
9.25.040, 9.30.010, 9.34.010, 9.46.010, 9.54.010, 9.56.010, 9.58.010, 9.60.010,
9.80.010, 9.80.020, 9.84.010, 9.86.010, 9.88.010 and 9.90.010; adding new §§
7.04.015, 7.04.125, 7.04.126, 7.04.195, and new chs. 9.03, 9.06, 9.07, 9.11,
9.15, 9.21, 9.23, 9.27, 9.35, 9.45, 9.49, 9.51, 9.53, 9.57, 9.71, 9.75, 9.83
and 9.93 (7.04, 9.03, 9.04, 9.06 through 9.08, 9.10 through 9.12, 9.14, 9.15,
9.18, 9.20 through 9.25, 9.27, 9.30, 9.34, 9.35, 9.45, 9.46, 9.49, 9.51, 9.53,
9.54, 9.56 through 9.58, 9.60, 9.71, 9.75, 9.80, 9.83, 9.84, 9.86, 9.88, 9.90
and 9.93)
601   Adds new ch. 13.74, agreements with owners of real estate for water or
sewer facilities (13.74)
602   Adds new ch. 13.76, development agreements for water, sewer and street
facilities (13.76)
603   Adds new § 10.04.020, adopting Washington mandatory liability insurance
statute (10.04)
607   Adds new ch. 13.26, cross connection control (13.26)
609   Adds new ch. 8.36, hazardous waste management plan (8.36)
612   Amends § 16.48.020, short subdivisions (16.48)
613   Amends § 14.44.010, energy code (14.44)
614   Adopts historic building code (14.56)
615   Adopts ventilation and indoor air quality code (14.60)
620   Amends Ords. 593 and 609 to delete references to particular sections of
the Orting municipal code and ratifying the balance of said ordinances
(Special)
621   Adds new ch. 15.04, environmentally critical areas (Rep. by Ord. 778)
622   Amends §§ 8.08.010 through 8.08.070, §§ 8.08.090 through 8.08.150 (8.08)
624   Repeals and replaces ch. 13.52, 13.56, 13.60, 13.64 and 13.68, sewers
(13.52, 13.56, 13.60, 13.64 and 13.68)
627   Creates emergency medical services fund (Special)
629   Amends § 14.04.010, building code adopted; amends §§ 14.08.010,
14.08.020, plumbing code adopted; amends §§ 14.12.010, 14.12.020, mechanical
code adopted; amends § 14.24.010, fire code adopted (14.04, 14.08, 14.12,
14.24)
ORDINANCES ADOPTED AFTER 1996 RECODIFICATION
Ordinance Number
633   General penalty (Rep. by Ord. 914)
634   Park fund created (§ 3-7-4)
635   Official newspaper (§ 1-5-1)
639   Exterior design; architectural theme (Rep. by Ord. 886)
640   Domestic violence statute adopted (§ 6-1A-8E)
641   Planning commission (Ch. 2-1)
642   Zoning, residential structures (not included in OMC, see 1996 zoning
ordinance)
643   Fireworks permit, application and fee (Rep. by Ord. 909)
644   Model traffic ordinance of Washington adopted (Rep. by Ord. 958)
645   Drunk driving act adopted (not included in OMC, covered by MTO)
646   Nonresidential energy code (Rep. by Ord. 862)
647   Shoreline master program (Rep. by Ord. 874)
653   Zoning, home occupations (not included in OMC, see 1996 zoning ordinance)
654   State environmental policy act (SEPA) (Rep. by Ord. 778)
655   Bequest of estate (Special)
656   Building codes adopted (Rep. by Ord. 711)
657   Zoning, establish fees by reference (not included in OMC, see 1996 zoning
ordinance)
658   Billboards, repeals ch. 14.36 of 1973 OMC
659   Zoning, minimum lot dimensions; repealer (not included in OMC, see 1996
zoning ordinance)
660   Rezone property (Special)
661   Animals, keeping (livestock) (Rep. by Ord. 2016-989)
662   Abolish sewer LID fund #403 (Special)
666   Zoning, service stations (not included in OMC, see 1996 zoning ordinance)
668   Rezone property (Special)
671   Comprehensive plan adopted (§ 1-11-1)
674   Automatic sprinkler systems (Rep. by Ord. 791)
675   Cemetery lots, resale to city (Rep. by Ord. 958)
676   Animals, keeping (horses) (Rep. by Ord. 2016-989)
677   Solid waste fund (Special)
678   Development code (Rep. by Ords. 778 and 792)
680   Code adoption ordinance
681   Gift acceptance (Special)
682   Budget amendment (Special)
683   Park reserve fund abolished (Rep. § 3-7-4)
684   Budget adopted (Special)
685   Mayor salary (Rep. by Ord. 766)
686   Park commission (Rep. by Ord. 2016-1001)
687   Fireworks discharge (§ 5-7-1)
688   Planning commission (Rep. by Ord. 779)
689   State statutes adopted (§§ 6-1A-3F, 6-1A-5E,F, 6-1A-8F)
690   1997 amendments to the Orting comprehensive plan (Rep. by Ord. 715)
691   Impact fee calculations (Rep. by Ord. 761)
692   Lifting temporary restrictions on new sewer connections (Special)
694   Persons subject to gambling activities tax; rates (Rep. by Ord. 958)
695   Stormwater management (Rep. by Ord. 911)
696   Stormwater facilities maintenance (Rep. by Ord. 911)
697   Stormwater management utility (Article 9-5C)
698   Stormwater fund (Special)
699   Stormwater construction fund (Special)
700   Bicycle helmet use and regulation (Ch. 7-4)
701   Capital equipment reserve fund (Special)
702   1998 ad valorem taxes levied (Special)
703   1997 fiscal budget amendment (Special)
704   1998 budget adopted (Special)
705   Weight of construction and commercial trucks regulated (Ch. 7-5)
706   Hearing examiner established (Rep. by Ord. 912)
707   Land use hearing examiner established (Ch. 2-6, §§ 15-3-4, 15-3-5, 15-3-
6)
708   Applications; forms; fees (Rep. by Ord. 733)
711   Adopting uniform codes (Rep. by Ord. 862)
712   Silly string and stink bombs prohibited (§ 6-1B-16)
713   Sign regulations (Rep. by Ord. 886)
714   Mobile home parks; manufactured home parks (Ch. 10-15, § 13-5-9)
715   1998 amendments to city comprehensive plan (Rep. by Ord. 726)
716   Building foundation elevations (§ 10-1-2)
717   Rate stabilization reserve fund (Rep. by Ord. 796)
718   1998 budget amendment (Special)
719   1999 budget adopted (Special)
720   Impact fee calculation table (Rep. by Ord. 761)
722   Violation; penalty (§§ 5-1-8, 6-3A-6, 6-3A-9, 8-6-11C)
723   Final plat (§§ 12-6-3, 12-6-9)
724   Amendment to TCI franchise (Special)
725   Shoreline master program adopted (Rep. by Ord. 874)
726   1999 amendments to city comprehensive plan (Rep. by Ord. 744)
727   Established transportation impact fee (Rep. by Ord. 808)
728   Sign variances; fees (Rep. by Ord. 886)
729   Business license fee (§ 3-2-3)
730   Established capital projects fund #102 (Special)
731   Established park improvement fund #105 (Special)
732   Abolished the building fund #301 (Special)
733   Amends architectural theme for commercial buildings (Rep. by Ord. 886),
repeals Ord. 678, MUTC architectural design review (13-3F)
734   Amends signs (Rep. by Ord. 886)
735   Amends definitions (§ 13-2-26)
736   1999 budget amendment (Special)
737   2000 budget adopted (Special)
738   Amends business license fees (Rep. by Ord. 939)
739   Vacating street right of way (Special)
740   Gift acceptance (Special)
741   Amends building, plumbing and mechanical codes (Rep. by Ord. 862)
742   Police civil service commission (Rep. by Ord. 811)
743   Utility land acquisition fund #412 (Special)
744   2000 amendments to city comprehensive plan (Rep. by Ord. 774)
745   Reenacting certain taxes and fees (Special)
746   2000 budget amendment (Special)
747   2001 budget adopted (Special)
748   Moratorium on water service applications (Special)
749   Amends appointment of fire chief, other officers (§ 1-9-3)
750   Amends agreement provisions for water, sewer and street facilities (§ 9-
4-3)
751   Extension on moratorium on water service applications (Special)
752   Court sessions; location (§ 1-10-3)
753   Emergency conditions (§ 9-1C-3)
754   Comprehensive plan (Rep. by Ord. 778)
755   Backflow prevention devices, inspections and fee (Rep. by Ord. 756)
756   Backflow prevention devices, inspections and fee (Rep. by Ord. 2016-980)
757   Gift acceptance (Special)
758   Police civil service commission (Rep. by Ord. 811)
761   Impact fee calculations (Rep. by Ord. 778)
762   Police department revolving drug fund #120 (Special)
763   2003 budget adopted (Special)
764   Public safety building fund #301 (Special)
765   Gift acceptance (Special)
766   Monthly salary for the mayor and council members (Rep. by Ord. 947)
767   2003 budget amendment (Special)
768   Expand jurisdiction of the civil service commission over full time
firefighters (Rep. by Ord. 811)
769   Submission to voters for general obligation bonds (Special)
770   Off street parking (§ 13-3E-10)
771   Council meetings (Rep. by Ord. 805)
772   Gift acceptance (Special)
773   Off street parking (§ 13-3D-10)
774   2002 amendments to city comprehensive plan (Rep. by Ord. 778)
775   Police and fire civil service system (Rep. by Ord. 811)
776   Acquisition and financing contract for fire engine (Special)
777   Annexation (Special)
778   Development code administration (Title 15, Rep. Ch. 5-5)
779   Planning commission created (Rep. by Ord. 783)
780   Gift acceptance (Special)
781   2004 budget adopted (Special)
783   Amends the creation of the planning commission (§ 2-1-1)
   Amends the creation of the park commission (Rep. by Ord. 820)
785   Amends telephone tax (§ 3-1-3B)
786   Amends cemetery board of managers (§ 2-4-2)
787   Amends water service procedures (§§ 9-1B-7, 9-1C-4C, 9-1D-1C)
788   Amends campgrounds and picnic areas (§ 8-6-5)
789   Amends section regarding application for installation of service line (§
9-1B-1)
791   Amends adopted codes (§§ 10-1-1 through 10-1-6, 10-2-1, 10-2-4, 10-3-1,
10-3-2, 10-4-1, 10-4-4, 10-4-5, 10-5-1, 10-6-1, 10-6-2, 10-7-1, 10-7-2, 10-7-3,
10-7-4B,E,L, 10-9-1; Rep. Ch. 10-11)
792   Subdivision, development and zoning regulations (Titles 12 and 13)
793   Amends animal nuisances (§ 6-3A-9; Rep. § 5-1-3B11)
794   Motorized foot scooter regulations (Ch. 7-6)
796   Elimination of rate stabilization reserve fund #408R (Special)
797   Amends sidewalk construction (§ 8-2-2)
798   2004 amendments to comprehensive plan (Special)
802   Amends transportation impact fees (Rep. by Ord. 808)
803   Amends building valuation data (Rep. by Ord. 862)
805   Council meetings (Rep. by Ord. 809)
806   Amends environmentally critical area regulations (§§ 11-1-2, 11-2-1, 11-
2-4A, 11-3-3, 11-3-5C, 11-4-1A5, B2, D, 11-4-2, 11-4-6B)
807   Amends comprehensive plan (Special)
808   Traffic impact fees (Rep. Ch. 10-17, amends §§ 15-2-5, 15-6-2C, Rep. §
15-6-7C, adds Art. 15-6A)
809   Council meetings (§ 1-6-1)
810   Amends council member salaries (Rep. by Ord. 947)
811   Police and fire civil service commission (Rep. by Ord. 2015-976)
812   Pipestem (flag) lots (§§ 12-2-13, 12-8-1A, 13-3-3B, 13-5-1C,E4,F)
813   Amends the comprehensive plan (Special)
814   Creation of debt fund 201 (Special)
815   Improvements and maintenance by abutting property owners (Rep. by Ord.
2016-995)
816   Amends storage of automobile hulk on private property (Rep. by Ord. 2017-
1004)
817   Gift acceptance (Special)
818   Amends the 2005 fiscal budget (Special)
819   Adopts the 2006 budget (Special)
820   Amends the creation of the park commission (Rep. by Ord. 2016-1001)
821   Amends flood planning management and flood damage prevention (Rep. by
Ord. 913)
822   An ordinance establishing rental and deposit rates for the city's
multipurpose center and repealing resolution 2004-08 (Special) (Rep. by Ord.
852)
823   Gift acceptance (Special)
824   Farmers' market vendor fees (Special) (Rep. by Ord. 827)
825   Amends sewers and drainage fees and charges (§§ 9-2B-1, 9-2B-2, 9-2B-3)
826   Moratorium on development applications for certain tax parcels (Special)
827   Repeal of ordinance 824
828   Additional one-fourth percent (0.25%) excise tax on real estate sales (§§
3-6-1, 3-6-2)
829   Water and stormwater services, rates, charges, and fees (§§ 9-1B-1, 9-1B-
3, 9-1D-1, 9-1D-2, 9-2E-8, 9-5C-3, 9-5C-6, 9-5C-8, 9-5C-9, 9-5C-10)
830   Establishes development regulations related to cottage housing (§§ 12-2-
3, 12-10-3, 13-2-4, 13-3-2A,C1,D1, 13-3-3B, 13-5-1C,G, 13-5-3I, 13-5-4B, 13-5-
7B1a, 13-6-5, 13-6-6, 13-10-1, 15-2-3, 15-4-1)
831   Findings of fact for moratorium on development applications (Special)
832   Adopts the 2007-2012 transportation improvement program (Special)
833   Restrictions on discharge of fireworks (§ 5-7-1)
834   Establishes rental and deposit rates for the Orting Multi-Purpose Center
and repeals ordinance 822 (Special)
835   Amends date and number of council meetings (Rep. by Ord. 846)
836   Amends flood planning management and flood damage prevention (Rep. by
Ord. 913)
838   Adopts amendments to the comprehensive plan (Special)
839   Adds the MUTCN zone; updates the official zoning map; and amends
development standards (§§ 13-3-2, 13-3-3B, 13-3-4, 13-5-1C)
840   Amends the number of council members (Rep. by Ord. 958)
841   Amends the 2006 fiscal budget (Special)
842   Adopts the 2007 budget (Special)
843   Amends water, sewer and stormwater general facility charges (§§ 9-1B-3A,
9-2B-2, 9-5C-9)
844   Traffic impact fees (Special)
845   Amends school impact fees for 2007 (§ 15-6-7A6)
846   Amends city council meeting time (Rep. by Ord. 849)
847   Amends 2003 international residential code (Rep. by Ord. 862)
848   Repeals stormwater fee schedule (Rep. § 9-2E-8). Amends service charge
rates for stormwater management, including an annual increase through 2011 (§
9-5C-6)
849   Amends city council meeting dates (§ 1-6-1)
850   Amends dogs, cats, domestic animals (Rep. by Ord. 2016-986)
851   Adopts 2008-2013 six-year transportation improvement program (Special)
852   Amends city park use fee (Rep. by Ord. 877); establishes multipurpose
center fees and administrative provisions, and repeals ordinance 822 (Special)
853   Amends water service lines and meters (§§ 9-1B-1, 9-1B-2, 9-1B-3B, 9-1B-
4, 9-1B-10B)
854   Amends park hours (Rep. by Ord. 953)
855   Adopts amendments to comprehensive plan (Special)
856   Amends official zoning map (Special)
857   Amends electricity, telephones, gas or cable tax rates (Rep. by Ord. 917)
858   Amends domestic water and sanitary sewer water use rate schedules (Rep.
by Ord. 918B)
859   Amends 2007 fiscal budget (Special)
860   Adopts 2008 budget (Special)
861   Amends deductions (§ 3-1-4)
862   Repeals building code; plumbing code; mechanical code and fuel gas code;
energy code; ventilation and indoor air quality code; and fire prevention code
(Rep. Chs. 10-1 – 10-6). Adds state building code; state building code
amendments; state residential and nonresidential energy codes; ventilation and
indoor air quality code (Chs. 10-1 – 10-5)
863   Amends nonpayment of sewage charges (Rep. by Ord. 904)
864   Authorizes acquisition of four (4) police vehicles and execution of
financing contract (Special)
865   Adds parking regulations (§ 7-5-13). Amends construction and commercial
trucks (§ 7-5-2)
866   Adopts 2009-2014 six-year transportation improvement program (Special)
867   Adopts a legal representation plan (Special)
868   Amends ordinance 852 (Special)
869   Amends offenses against public decency, indecent language or conduct (§§
6-1A-7, 6-1B-4)
870   Adopts amendments to comprehensive plan (Special)
871   Amends 2008 fiscal budget (Special)
872   Adopts 2009 budget (Special)
873   Adds cargo container regulations (§§ 13-4-2H, I, 13-5-9J). Amends cargo
containers (§§ 13-2-4, 13-3-3, 13-3-6B)
874   Repeals shoreline master program (Rep. Ch. 5-4). Adds shoreline master
program (Rep. by Ord. 938)
875   Amends dogs, cats, domestic animals (Rep. by Ord. 2016-986)
876   Adds inattentive driving (Ch. 7-7)
877   Adds use fees; amends campground and picnic area use fees (Rep. by Ord.
919)
878   Adds golf carts (Rep. by Ord. 903)
879   Adds parking restricted upon designated residential streets (Ch. 7-9)
880   Amends 2009 budget (Special)
881   Adopts 2010 budget (Special)
882   Annexation (Special)
883   Water and sewer revenue refunding bonds, 2010 (Special)
884   Amends 2010 budget (Special)
885   Adds traffic school (Ch. 7-10)
886   Repeals architectural theme for commercial buildings; signs (Rep. Chs.
10-12, 10-15). Adds sign regulations (Ch. 13-7; Repealed by Ord. 2019-1041).
Amends architectural design review (§§ 13-2-2, 13-5-1C, 13-10-1, 15-2-2, 15-3-
3, 15-4-1, 15-7-1D)
887   Repeals check for adequacy (Rep. § 15-8-5). Amends development code
administration (§§ 15-5-1B, 15-5-2B, 15-7-3A, 15-8-4, 15-9-2B)
888   Amends application submittal (§ 12-10-3)
889   Repeals manufactured home parks (Rep. § 13-5-8). Adds commercial
vehicles, recreational vehicles, and boats; manufactured home parks (§§ 13-5-
3K, 13-6-4N). Amends development regulations (§§ 13-2-4, 13-2-5, 13-2-7, 13-2-
14, 13-2-17, 13-2-20, 13-2-23, 13-3-2, 13-3-3B, 13-4-2, 13-5-2E2, 13-6-2C, 13-
6-3E, 13-6-4A, M, 13-6-6B)
890   Interfund loan and amendment to 2010 budget (Special)
891   Amends 2010 budget (Special)
892   Amends miscellaneous crimes (§ 6-1A-13)
893   Amends comprehensive plan (Special)
894   Amends 2010 budget (Special)
895   Establishes capital equipment fund #510 (Special)
896   Eliminates capital equipment fund (Special)
897   Eliminates water construction fund (Special)
898   Eliminates wastewater construction fund (Special)
899   Eliminates sewer bond and interest fund (Special)
900   Eliminates stormwater construction fund (Special)
901   Eliminates EMS fund (Special)
902   Adopts 2011 budget (Special)
903   Repeals golf carts (Rep. Ch. 7-8). Adds golf cart zone (Ch. 7-8)
904   Adds disconnection charges (§ 9-1B-3C). Amends disconnection of water and
sewer service (§§ 9-1B-7, 9-1C-4, 9-2B-3, 9-2B-6, 9-2C-2)
905   Amends Revised Code Of Washington construction (§ 6-1A-2)
906   Adds seasonal parking permits (Ch. 7-11)
907   Amends general facilities charges (§§ 9-1B-3A, D – F, 9-2B-2, 9-5C-8)
908   Adds lodging tax advisory committee (Ch. 3-9)
909   Amends fireworks permit; application and fee (§ 5-7-2)
910   Moratorium on medical cannabis (Not included in OMC)
911   Repeals stormwater management; stormwater facilities maintenance (Rep.
Articles 9-5A, 9-5B). Adds stormwater management; stormwater facilities
maintenance (Articles 9-5A, 9-5B). Amends definitions (§ 9-5C-1)
912   Repeals hearing examiner; enforcement (Rep. Chs. 1-12, 15-11). Adds
hearing examiner; enforcement; code enforcement (Chs. 1-12, 1-13, 15-11).
Amends violations; penalty; property maintenance code (§§ 5-1-8, 5-2-9, 5-3-6,
5-7-3, 5-8-2, 8-2-9, 8-3-6, 8-4-3, 8-5-27, 10-7-1, 10-7-2, 10-7-5, 11-5-1, 14-
1-6D)
913   Repeals flood planning management and flood damage prevention (Rep. Ch.
14-1). Adds flood planning management and flood damage prevention (Ch. 14-1)
914   Amends general penalty (Rep. by Ord. 2016-988)
915B   Repeals garbage and refuse (Rep. Ch. 5-2). Adds garbage and refuse (Ch.
5-2)
916   Acquisition of land (Special)
917   Adds fire suppression service classification and rates. Amends
electricity, telephones, gas or cable tax rates (Rep. by Ord. 956)
918B   Amends utility rates and charges (§§ 9-1B-3A4, 9-1D-2, 9-2B-1, 9-2B-2D,
9-5C-6, 9-5C-9C)
919   Repeals use fee (Rep. Ch. 3-8). Adds use fee (Ch. 3-8). Amends use fee (§
8-6-5C)
920   Adds transportation benefit district (Rep. by Ord. 2015-972)
921   Adopts 2012 budget (Special)
922   Amends 2011 fiscal budget (Special)
923   Eliminates anti-recession fund (Special)
924   Eliminates equipment reserve fund (Special)
925   Amends 2011 fiscal budget (Special)
927   Moratorium extension on medical cannabis (Not included in OMC)
928   Approving solid waste franchise (Special)
929   Adds lodging tax (Ch. 3-10)
930   Adds underage gatherings (Ch. 5-9)
931   Moratorium extension on medical cannabis (Not included in OMC)
932   Amends 2011 and 2012 budgets (Special)
933   Adds tax credit; amount due (§ 3-10-7). Amends tax imposed (§ 3-10-1)
934   Adopts 2013 budget (Special)
935   Amends 2012 budget (Special)
936A   Amends utility rates and charges (§§ 9-1D-2, 9-2B-1, 9-5C-6)
937   Void
938   Repeals shoreline master program (Rep. Ch. 11-6). Adds shoreline master
program (Rep. by Ord. 945)
939   Repeals business revenue tax (Rep. Ch. 3-2). Adds business license code
(Ch. 3-2). Repeals general licensing provisions; amusements; theaters;
peddlers; auctioneers; and taxicabs (Rep. Chs. 4-1, 4-3, 4-4, 4-6, 4-7, 4-8)
940   Amends 2013 budget (Special)
941   Adds medical cannabis (Ch. 13-8). Amends accessory use table (§ 13-3-
3B2). Repeals home occupations (§ 13-5-4). Adds home occupations (§ 13-5-4)
942   Amends 2013 budget (Special)
943   Amends development code to permit and regulate stationary vendor units on
private property in the MUTC zone (§§ 13-2-7, 13-2-10, 13-2-14, 13-2-20, 13-2-
23, 13-3-3B, 13-5-3I, 13-10-1)
944   Amends sewer fees and charges and sewer construction requirements (§§ 9-
2B-1, 9-2C-5)
945   Repeals shoreline master program (Rep. Ch. 11-6). Adds shoreline master
program (Ch. 11-6)
947   Amends salaries of elected officials (§ 1-6-3)
948   Amends basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard (Rep. by Ord.
2017-1006)
949   Adopts the 2014 budget (Special)
950   Amends 2013 fiscal budget (Special)
951   Adjusts water, sewer and stormwater utility rates (Special)
952   Amends prohibited activities in parks (§ 8-6-4)
953   Amends park regulations (§§ 8-6-1, 8-6-4H, 8-6-9, 8-6-11)
955   Amends prohibited activities in parks (§ 8-6-4F)
956   Repeals water distribution business tax (Rep. § 3-1-3E). Repeals fire
suppression service classification and rates (Rep. § 9-1D-3). Amends
definitions to delete water distribution business (§ 3-1-3F)
957   Amends dogs, cats, domestic animals (Rep. by Ord. 2016-986)
958   Amends various sections related to administration of the city and
creation of the office of city treasurer (§§ 1-7-1, 1-7-2, 1-7-3, 1-7-4, 1-7-5,
1-7-8, 2-3-1, 2-4-4, 2-4-6, 3-1-2, 3-1-5, 3-1-6, 3-1-9, 3-3-4, 3-3-5, 3-5A-5,
3-7-2, Ch. 4-5, §§ 5-1-4, 5-6-1, 5-8-1, 7-1-1, 7-3-1, 7-3-2, 8-2-3, 8-7-3, 9-
1E-2, 9-1E-5, 9-2A-1, 9-2E-9, 9-2E-13, 9-5A-11, 10-2-3, 10-8-1, 10-10-1, 11-4-
1E, 11-4-2G, 11-5-2, 12-6-1, 15-6A-2, 15-13-1)
959   Amends membership of the voluntary firefighter pension board (§ 2-3-1)
960   Adds donations to the city (§ 1-5-2)
961   Amends city officers enumerated (§ 1-7-1)
962   Extension of repayment of interfund loan (Special)
963   Adopts adjustments to utility rates (Special)
964   Amends 2014 budget (Special)
965   Adopts 2015 budget (Special)
966   Adds recovery of emergency response costs (Art. 6-1C)
2015-967   Grants rezoning; amends comprehensive plan (Special)
2015-968   Grants rezoning; amends zoning map (Special)
2015-969   Repeals cemetery board; regulations (Rep. Ch. 2-4). Adds cemetery
board; regulations (Ch. 2-4)
2015-970   Adds indemnification of employees and officers (Ch. 1-14)
2015-971   Repeals offensive noise disturbances and penalty (Rep. § 5-1-4, 5-1-
8D). Amends nuisance violation (§ 5-1-8A). Repeals noise control (Rep. Ch. 5-
8). Adds noise control (Ch. 5-8)
2015-972   Repeals transportation benefit district (Rep. Ch. 2-7)
2015-973   Adopts adjustments to utility rates (Special)
2015-974   Adopts 2016 budget (Special)
2015-975   Extension of repayment of interfund loan (Special)
2015-976   Repeals police and fire civil service commission (Rep. Ch. 2-2).
Adds police civil service commission (Ch. 2-2)
2015-977   Amends 2015 budget (Special)
2016-978   Acquisition of personal property (Special)
2016-979   Granting nonexclusive franchise to Puget Sound Energy, Inc.
(Special)
2016-980   Repeals cross connection control (Rep. Art. 9-1E). Adds cross
connection control (Art. 9-1E)
2016-981   Amends nuisance regulations relating to dogs and cats; violation;
penalty (Rep. by Ord. 2016-986)
2016-982   Amends deposits/waiver of use fee and deposit (§ 3-8-5)
2016-983   Granting nonexclusive franchise to Astound Broadband, LLC (Special)
2016-984   Amends water service application; deposit (§ 9-1B-7). Repeals rates
and billing procedure (Rep. Art. 9-1D). Adds rates and billing procedure (Art.
9-1D)
2016-985   Amends various sections relating to fish and wildlife habitats (§§
11-1-1, 11-1-2, 11-1-4, 11-2-2, 11-2-3, 11-3-2, 11-3-4, 11-4-1, 11-4-6).
Repeals contents of special study (Rep. § 11-2-4)
2016-986   Repeals dogs, cats, domestic animals (Rep. Art. 6-3A). Adds general
provisions; penalties, enforcement; licensing of dogs and cats; dangerous and
potentially dangerous animals; rabies control; dog control zones; baby chicks,
rabbits and ducklings; potentially dangerous wild animals; livestock districts
(Arts. 6-3A, 6-3C, 6-3D, 6-3E, 6-3F, 6-3G, 6-3H, 6-3I, 6-3J)
2016-987   Adds licensing for animal businesses; general provisions; business
license fees; kennel or cattery, grooming parlor, short term boarding facility,
or pet shop (Ch. 4-6, Arts. 4-6A, 4-6B, 4-6C)
2016-988   Repeals general penalty (Rep. Ch. 1-4). Adds penalties (Ch. 1-4).
Amends penalty amount (§ 7-7-1C)
2016-989   Repeals livestock (Rep. Art. 6-3B). Adds livestock; other animals
(Art. 6-3B)
2016-990   Amends noise control (§§ 5-8-5A, B, B1, 5-8-8, 5-8-10)
2016-991   Amends collection time (§ 15-6-10B)
2016-992   Amends animal control (§§ 6-3A-2, 6-3A-13, 6-3D-2)
2016-993   Amends kennel or cattery, grooming parlor, short term boarding
facility, or pet shop (§§ 4-6C-4, 4-6C-5, 4-6C-6, 4-6C-7, 4-6C-11)
2016-994   Amends introduction; intent (§ 6-3B-1)
2016-995   Amends various sections relating to planting strips (§§ 5-1-2, 8-4-
2). Adds abatement action (§ 8-4-4)
2016-996   Amends fats, oil and grease (§ 9-2D-5)
2016-997   Amends violation; penalty (§ 6-3B-10)
2016-998   Adopts adjustments to utility rates (Special)
2016-999   Adopts 2017 budget (Special)
2016-1001   Repeals Park Commission (Rep. Ch. 2-5). Adds Parks Advisory Board
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-1022)
2016-1002   Amends general facilities charges (§§ 9-1B-3A4, 9-2B-2D, 9-5C-9C)
2016-1003   Amends 2016 budget (Special)
2017-1004   Repeals abandoned or inoperable vehicles (Rep. Ch. 7-2). Adds
public nuisance vehicles (Ch. 7-2)
2017-1005   Amends civil infractions (§§ 1-4-2D, 1-4-2D1e)
2017-1006   Amends flood planning management and flood damage prevention (§§
14-1-2, 14-1-3, 14-1-4, 14-1-5, 14-1-6, 14-1-8, 14-1-9B5, 14-1-9H, 14-1-10)
2017-1007   Adds hunting, prohibited (§ 6-1B-18)
2017-1008    Adds discharge of firearms prohibited (§ 6-1B-17). Amends penalty
imposed (§ 8-6-11A)
2017-1009   Amends flood planning management and flood damage prevention (§§
14-1-5, 14-1-6, 14-1-10)
2017-1010   Amends flood planning management and flood damage prevention (§§
14-1-5, 14-1-6, 14-1-8)
2017-1011   Adds chronic nuisance properties (Ch. 5-10)
2017-1012   Amends cross connection control (§§ 9-1E-1A, 9-1E-2, 9-1E-3, 9-1E-
5, 9-1E-6)
2017-1013   Acquisition of personal property (Special)
2017-1014   Amends stormwater management (§§ 9-5A-4, 9-5A-9C, 9-5A-9D)
2017-1015   Amends 2017 budget (Special)
2017-1016   Adopts 2018 budget and job classification and pay range for
employees (Special)
2017-1017   Amends water use regulations (§§ 9-1B-7, 9-1D-1A, 9-1D-1C, 9-1D-2A,
9-1D-3). Adds rates and billing procedures (§§ 9-1D-5, 9-1D-6)
2017-1018   Amends Municipal Judge appointment (§ 1-10-2)
2017-1019   Amends Comprehensive Plan (Special)
2017-1020   Amends 2017 budget (Special)
2018-1021   Amends organization; officers (§ 2-2-3)
2018-1022   Repeals Parks Advisory Board (Rep. Ch. 2-5). Adds Parks Advisory
Board (Ch. 2-5)
2018-1023   Adds single room occupancy sleep units (§ 10-2-1F)
2018-1024   Amends single room occupancy sleeping unit definition and uses (§§
13-2-20, 13-3-3B2 table 1). Amends statement of purpose and intent of Public
Facilities Zone (§ 13-3-2H)
2018-1025   Amends time frame for submission of final plat (§ 12-6-3)
2018-1026   Amends zone classifications by deleting RS Residential Suburban
Zone from various sections (§§ 5-8-3A, 6-3B-2A, 13-3-2, 13-3-3B2 table 1, 13-5-
3K intro, K1c). Amends official zoning map (§ 13-3-4A)
2018-1027   Amends development standards by deleting Residential Suburban Zone
from various sections (§§ 13-5-1C table 1, 13-5-1E4, 13-5-3I table 1, 13-5-4A,
13-5-4B, 13-5-4C, 13-5-5C)
2018-1028   Amends planned unit developments final development plans and time
limitations (§ 13-6-4L)
2018-1029   Amends City Council meetings (§ 1-6-1)
2018-1030   Adopts 2018 budget (Special)
2018-1031   Adds telecommunications master use permits (Ch. 8-8)
2018-1032   Granting a nonexclusive master use permit to Seattle SMSA Limited
Partnership D/B/A Verizon Wireless (Special)
2018-1033   Amends zone classifications; adds Residential Urban Low zoning
designations to the City's comprehensive plan (§§ 13-3-2 intro, 13-3-2A, 13-3-
2B)
2018-1034   Adds Foreclosure Property Registration Program (Ch. 5-11)
2018-1035   Granting a nonexclusive master use permit to Seattle SMSA Limited
Partnership D/B/A Verizon Wireless (Special)
2018-1036   Amends Business License Code (§§ 3-2-4, 3-2-7)
2018-1037   Adopts 2019 budget (Special)
2018-1038   Amends the 2018 budget (Special)
2019-1039   Renews interim development regulations regarding the Residential
Urban Low Zone as authorized by the Growth Management Act for 6 months
(Special)
2019-1040   Amends Comprehensive Plan (Special)
2019-1041   Repeals and replaces sign regulations (Ch. 13-7)
2019-1042   Amends public nuisances declared (§ 5-1-3)
2019-1043   Amends loading and off-site parking regulations (§ 13-5-3)
2019-1044   Adds wireless communications services facilities (Ch. 13-9)
2019-1045   Repeals shoreline master program (Rep. Ch. 11-6). Adds shoreline
master program (Ch. 11-6)
2019-1046   Granting a master use permit to Verizon (Special)
2019-1047   Amends excavation permit (§ 8-5-3)
2019-1048   Adopts 2019 budget (Special)
2019-1049   Repealing and replacing Ord. 2019-1044 wireless communitcation
services facilities (Ch. 13-9)
2019-1050   Amends the 2019 budget (Special)
2019-1051   Amends zone classifications and uses (§§ 13-3-2, 13-3-3)
2019-1052   Adopts the 2020 budget (Special)
2019-1053   Amends sections to add regulations for recreational vehicles (Ch.
10-14, §§ 13-2-14, 13-2-19, 13-5-6, 13-6-4, 14-1-5)
2019-1055   Amends comprehensive plan amending procedure (§ 15-12-5)
2019-1057   Amends code relating to low impact development requirements (§§ 5-
1-2, 5-10-2, 6-1B-4 , 7-5-13, 7-6-2, 8-2-4, 8-5-15, 9-5A-4, 9-5A-7, 9-5A-9, 9-
5A-12, 9-5A-13, 9-5A-16, 10-16-2, 10-16-4, 11-1-2, 11-4-2, 12-2-10, 12-10-3,
13-2-4, 13-3-2, 13-5-2, 13-4-2D, 13-5-9, 13-10-1, 13-6-3, 13-6-4, 13-6-7, 14-1-
5, 14-1-9, 15-15-2)
2020-1058   Stating vehicle fee is $0 (Special)
2020-1059   Adds city hours of business (§ 1-5-3)
2020-1060   Amends Emergency Services Department (Ch. 1-8)
2020-1062   Vacating portion of a street (Special)
2020-1063   Lot coverage requirements (§§ 9-5A-4, 13-2-3, 13-2-4, 13-2-9, 13-2-
10, 13-5-1)
2020-1064   Temporary suspension of tax due to COVID-19 (Special)
2020-1065   Appointive officers (§§ 1-7-1, 1-7-2, 1-7-3)
2020-1066   Adopting the 2021 budget (Special)
2020-1070   Amending mayoral salary (1-6-3)
2021-1072      Relating to National Flood Insurance Program Community Rating
System (14-1-9)
2021-1075      Accepting material donation for the Gratzer Ball Field (Special)
2021-1076      Adopting new franchise agreement with Comcast Cable
Communications Management, LLC
2021-1073      Relating to housing and regulatory streamlining (12-2-13, 12-2-
20, 12-4-1, 12-4-2, 12-4-3, 12-4-6, 13-2-2, 13-2-5, 13-2-13, 13-2-20, 13-2-26,
13-3-2, 13-3-3, 13-5-1, 13-5-3, 13-5-6, 15-2-20, 15-4-1, 15-6-2, 15-6A-7;
Repeals 12-4-4)
2021-1074      Relating to home occupation and administrative decision noticing
requirements (13-5-4, 15-4-1, 15-7-2)
2021-1077      Relating to council meetings; location of meetings and virtual
meetings (1-6-1)
2021-1079      Relating to public noticing (15-7-1, 15-7-2, 15-7-3)
2021-1078      Relating to speed limit zone (7-1-1)
2021-1080      Relating to sale of merchandise and refreshments in the park (8-
6-3)
2021-1081      Relating to signs and architectural design review requirements
(13-10-1, 13-7-1, 13-7-2, 13-7-4, 13-7-6, 13-7-8)
2021-1082      Relating to uncovered porches and decks (13-5-1)
2021-1083      Relating to interim zoning controls pertaining to permanent
supportive housing and transitional housing for a period of six months in
response to E2SHB 1220 (13-2-6, 13-2-17, 13-2-21, 13-3-3)
2021-1085      Repealing sections 7-8-4 and 7-8-5 to remove registration
requirements (7-8-4, 7-8-5)
2021-1086      Relating to daycares (13-2-5, 13-2-7, 13-3-3, 13-5-3, 13-5- 5)
2021-1087      Relating to landscaping and street trees (13-5-2)
2021-1088      Relating to public ways and property (8-9-1, 8-9-2)
2021-1089      Adopting the 2022 budget (Special)
2021-1084      Relating to sidewalks (8-2-4, 8-2-5, 8-2-7)
2022-1092      Relating to the park impact fee (15-6-7)
2022-1093      Relating to interim zoning controls pertaining to permanent
supportive housing and transitional housing for a period of six months in
response to E2SHB 1220 (13-2-6, 13-2-17, 13-2-21, 13-3-3)
2022-1094      Amending the 2022 Budget (Special)
2022-1095      Relating to zoning controls pertaining to permanent supportive
housing, transitional housing, emergency housing and emergency shelters in
response to E2SHB 1220 (13-2-6, 13-2-17, 13-2-21, 13-3-3, 13-5-3)
2022-1096      Relating to stormwater maintenance and management (9-5A-9)
2022-1097      Relating to zoning controls pertaining to manufactured homes
(13-3-3)
2022-1098      Relating to stormwater maintenance and management (9-5A-4, 9-5A-
9, 9-5A-17, 9-5A-18, 9-5B-10 - 9-5B-12)
2022-1099      Adopting the 2023 budget (Special)
2022-1100      Amending the 2022 budget (Special)
2023-1101      Setting compensation for Municipal Court Judge (Special)
2023-1103      Amending sign regulations (13-7-2, 13-7-4, 13-7-7, 13-7-9)
2023-1104      Relating to Land Use And Zoning Amendments (Special)
2023-1105      Accepting a donation, refurbishment, and installation of a
historical train switch (Special)
2023-1106      Amending signs regulations (13-7-7, 13-7-9)
2023-1109      Amending emergency management regulations (1-8-1 - 1-8-8)
2023-1110      Commercial goods or services within public rights-of-way (8-9-2)
2023-1111      Re-establishing a parks advisory board (2-5-1 - 2-5-4)
2023-1113      Amending city hours of business (1-5-3)
2023-1116      Adopting 2023 budget (Special)
2023-117A      Adopting Complete Streets Program (8-10-1 - 8-10-6)
2023-1119      Adopting 2024 budget (Special)
2023-1120      Amending 2023 budget (Special)
2024-1121      Amending nuisance regulations (5-1-2, 5-1-3)
2024-1122      Amending special events regulations (3-8-6, 3-8-8)
2024-1124      Amending business license regulations (3-2-4 - 3-2-6, 3-2-12, 3-
2-25 - 3-2-27, 3-2-29)
2024-1125      Amending 2024 budget (Special)
2024-1126      Amending environmental regulations (15-14-1, 15-14-2, 15-14-2-3,
15-14-2-4, 15-14-2-5, 15-14-3-2, 15-14-3-3, 15-14-3-4, 15-14-3-5, 15-14-3-6,
15-14-3-7, 15-14-4-2, 15-14-5-3, 15-14-7-3, 15-14-9-2, 15-14-9-3)
2024-1127      Amending regulations on the inadvertent discovery of human
remains (10-16-5)
2024-1128      Amending State Building Code (10-1-3)
2024-1129      Amending side sewer ownership (9-2A-1, 9-2C-9)
2024-1133      Amending regulations for the parking and temporary occupation of
recreational vehicles (10-14-1 - 10-14-1, 13-2-19, 13-4-2, 13-5-3)
2024-1134      Adopting regulations regarding endangerment with a controlled
substance (6-1D-1 - 6-1D-5)
2024-1135      Adopting 2024 Comprehensive Plan (Special)
2024-1136      Amendments to development code as a result of the adoption of
the 2024 Comprehensive Plan (12-1-2, 12-1-4 - 12-1-7, 12-2-1 - 12-2-7, 12-2-10,
12-2-13 - 12-2-15, 12-2-17, 12-2-19, 12-2-22, 12-2-26, 12-3-1, 12-3-3, 12-4-1,
12-4-3, 12-4-4, 12-4-7, 12-4-8, 12-5-1, 12-5-2, 12-5-3.5 - 12-5-6, 12-6-1 - 12-
6-5, 12-6-7 - 12-6-9, 12-7-4, 12-8-1 - 12-8-3, 12-10-3 - 12-10-5, 12-10-8, 12-
10-9, 13-1-5, 13-2-2 - 13-2-9, 13-2-11 - 13-2-14, 13-2-16, 13-2-17, 13-2-19 -
13-2-24, 13-2-26, 13-3-2 - 13-3-4, 13-3-6, 13-4-2, 13-5-1 - 13-5-4, 13-5-6, 13-
6-4, 13-6-5, 15-1-1, 15-1-2, 15-2-2, 15-2-4 - 15-2-7, 15-2-9, 15-2-14, 15-2-17,
15-2-20, 15-3-1, 15-3-3 - 15-3-5, 15-4-1, 15-4-2, 15-5-1 - 15-5-4, 15-6-2 - 15-
6-4, 15-6-6, 15-6-7, 15-6-12 - 15-6-14, 15-6-17, 15-7-1 - 15-7-3, 15-9-4, 15-9-
8, 15-10-2 - 15-10-6, 15-11-1, 15-11-2, 15-11-5, 15-12-3, 15-12-5, 15-13-1)
2024-1137      Amending Off-Street Parking Requirements (13-5-3)
2024-1138      Authorizing use of traffic cameras (7-12-1 - 7-12-10)
2024-1139      Adopting 2025 budget (Special)
2024-1140      Amending 2025 budget (Special)
2025-1143      Amending critical areas and shoreline management (Title 11)
2025-1144      Amending administration (Title 1)
2025-1145      Amending architectural design review regulations (13-10-1)
2025-1146      Amending off-street parking (13-5-3)
