CITY OF CHARLOTTE, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-18 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 2025-07, passed 7-28-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Section
Chapter 1. Name and General Provisions
   
Sec. 1.1.   Name
   
Sec. 1.2.   Boundaries
   
Sec. 1.3.   Wards
   
Sec. 1.4.   Records to be public
   
Sec. 1.5.   Public records as evidence
   
Sec. 1.6.   Definitions and interpretations
   
Sec. 1.7.   Official performance
   
Sec. 1.8.   Penalties for violations of Charter
   
Sec. 1.9.   Chapter and section headings
   
Sec. 1.10.   Amendments
   
Sec. 1.11.   Severability of Charter provisions
Chapter 2. Municipal Powers and Liabilities
   
Sec. 2.1.   General powers
Chapter 3. Officers
   
Sec. 3.1.   City officers
   
Sec. 3.2.   Eligibility for elective city office
   
Sec. 3.3.   Persons ineligible for city office or employment
   
Sec. 3.4.   Notice of election or appointment
   
Sec. 3.5.   Compensation of officers
   
Sec. 3.6.   Oath of office
   
Sec. 3.7.   Surety bonds
   
Sec. 3.8.   Giving of surety by officers and employees forbidden
   
Sec. 3.9.   Vacancies in office
   
Sec. 3.10.   Resignations
   
Sec. 3.11.   Removal from offices
   
Sec. 3.12.   Recall
   
Sec. 3.13.   Filling vacancies
   
Sec. 3.14.   Delivery of office to successor
Chapter 4. The Council
   
Sec. 4.1.   The City Council
   
Sec. 4.2.   Election and qualifications of Councilmen
   
Sec. 4.3.   Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen
   
Sec. 4.4.   Functional duties of the Mayor
   
Sec. 4.5.   Organization of the Council
   
Sec. 4.6.   Mayor pro tempore
   
Sec. 4.7.   Meetings of the Council
   
Sec. 4.8.   Relationship of Council to administrative service
   
Sec. 4.9.   Health functions of the Council
Chapter 5. City Legislation
   
Sec. 5.1.   Former city legislation preserved
   
Sec. 5.2.   City code
   
Sec. 5.3.   Introduction, consideration, style, and recording of ordinances
   
Sec. 5.4.   Publication of ordinances
   
Sec. 5.5.   Effective date of ordinances
   
Sec. 5.6.   Penalties
   
Sec. 5.7.   Reserved
   
Sec. 5.8.   Initiative and referendum
   
Sec. 5.9.   Initiative or referendum petitions
   
Sec. 5.10.   Same – Council procedure
   
Sec. 5.11.   Same – submissions to electors
   
Sec. 5.12.   Same – status of ordinances adopted
   
Sec. 5.13.   Same – ordinance suspended
Chapter 6. The Administrative Service
   
Sec. 6.1.   The administrative officers
   
Sec. 6.2.   Administrative officers – appointment, terms, and compensation
   
Sec. 6.3.   City Manager
   
Sec. 6.4.   City Clerk
   
Sec. 6.5.   City Auditor
   
Sec. 6.6.   City Attorney
   
Sec. 6.7.   City Treasurer
   
Sec. 6.8.   Deputies of the Clerk, Treasurer
   
Sec. 6.9.   Assessor
   
Sec. 6.10.   Public works
   
Sec. 6.11.   Police Department
   
Sec. 6.12.   Fire Department
   
Sec. 6.13.   Parks and recreation
   
Sec. 6.14.   City planning
   
Sec. 6.15.   Citizen participation
   
Sec. 6.16.   Additional administrative powers and duties
   
Sec. 6.17.   Library
   
Sec. 6.18.   Employee welfare benefits
Chapter 7. General Finance
   
Sec. 7.1.   Fiscal year
   
Sec. 7.2.   Budget procedure
   
Sec. 7.3.   Public inspection of budget proposal
   
Sec. 7.4.   Adoption of budget
   
Sec. 7.5.   Budget control
   
Sec. 7.6.   Special accounts
   
Sec. 7.7.   Withdrawals of city moneys
   
Sec. 7.8.   Notice to city of claim for injuries
   
Sec. 7.9.   Depositories
   
Sec. 7.10.   Independent audit
   
Sec. 7.11.   Annual report
Chapter 8. Taxation
   
Sec. 8.1.   Power to tax – tax limit
   
Sec. 8.2.   Subjects of taxation – tax procedure
   
Sec. 8.3.   Exemptions
   
Sec. 8.4.   Tax day
   
Sec. 8.5.   Personal property – jeopardy assessment
   
Sec. 8.6.   Preparation of the assessment roll
   
Sec. 8.7.   Board of Review
   
Sec. 8.8.   Duties and functions of Board of Review
   
Sec. 8.9.   Meetings of Board of Review
   
Sec. 8.10.   Notice of meetings and hearings
   
Sec. 8.11.   Certification of roll
   
Sec. 8.12.   Validity of assessment roll
   
Sec. 8.13.   Clerk to certify levy
   
Sec. 8.14.   City tax roll
   
Sec. 8.15.   Taxes a debt and lien
   
Sec. 8.16.   Tax roll certified for collection
   
Sec. 8.17.   Tax payment date
   
Sec. 8.18.   Taxes due – notification thereof
   
Sec. 8.19.   Tax payment schedule
   
Sec. 8.20.   Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax
   
Sec. 8.21.   State, county, and school taxes
   
Sec. 8.22.   Protection of city lien
   
Sec. 8.23.   Collection of delinquent taxes
   
Sec. 8.24.   Disposition of real property held by city for taxes
Chapter 9. Special Assessments
   
Sec. 9.1.   General power relative to special assessments
   
Sec. 9.2.   Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance
   
Sec. 9.3.   Reconsideration of petitions
   
Sec. 9.4.   Condemnation costs
   
Sec. 9.5.   Limitation on suits and actions
   
Sec. 9.6.   Lien and collection of special assessments
   
Sec. 9.7.   Special assessment accounts
   
Sec. 9.8.   Certain postponements of payments
   
Sec. 9.9.   All real property liable for special assessments
   
Sec. 9.10.   Hazards and nuisances
Chapter 10. Borrowing Power
   
Sec. 10.1.   Municipal borrowing power
   
Sec. 10.2.   Limitations upon borrowing power
Chapter 11. Supervisors
   
Sec. 11.1.   Number of supervisors
   
Sec. 11.2.   Temporary absences or inability to serve
   
Sec. 11.3.   Duties of city supervisors
   
Sec. 11.4.   Compensation of supervisors
Chapter 12. Municipal Court
   
Sec. 12.1.   Municipal Court created
   
Sec. 12.2.   Associate Municipal Judge
   
Sec. 12.3.   Legal practice of judge
   
Sec. 12.4.   Compensation of Municipal Judge
   
Sec. 12.5.   Jurisdiction of Municipal Court
   
Sec. 12.6.   Court Clerk
   
Sec. 12.7.   Bonds of Municipal Judge
   
Sec. 12.8.   Constable – Court Officer
   
Sec. 12.9.   Violations Bureau
   
Sec. 12.10.   Warrants for arrest
Chapter 13. Elections
   
Sec. 13.1.   Regular city elections
   
Sec. 13.2.   Special elections
   
Sec. 13.3.   Qualifications of electors
   
Sec. 13.4.   Election procedure
   
Sec. 13.5.   Election Commission
   
Sec. 13.6.   Nominating petitions
   
Sec. 13.7.   Approval of petitions
   
Sec. 13.8.   Affidavit of qualification for office
   
Sec. 13.9.   Form of ballots
   
Sec. 13.10.   Delivery of registration books and supplies
   
Sec. 13.11.   Absentee ballots
   
Sec. 13.12.   Canvass of votes
   
Sec. 13.13.   Persons elected – tie vote
   
Sec. 13.14.   Recount
Chapter 14. Utility Franchiser and Municipal Ownership
   
Sec. 14.1.   Public utility franchises
   
Sec. 14.2.   Limitations on the granting of franchises
   
Sec. 14.3.   Procedure for granting franchises
   
Sec. 14.4.   Sale or assignment of franchises
   
Sec. 14.5.   Plans of facilities in streets and public places
   
Sec. 14.6.   General powers respecting municipal utilities and services
   
Sec. 14.7.   Administration and operation of municipal utilities
   
Sec. 14.8.   Utility charges – collections
   
Sec. 14.9.   Annual audit
   
Sec. 14.10.   Annual reports
   
Sec. 14.11.   Purchase of electricity, water, sewage disposal service.
   
Sec. 14.12.   Disposal of plants
Chapter 15. Contracts
   
Sec. 15.1.   Contracting authority of Council
   
Sec. 15.2.   Purchase and sale of personal property
   
Sec. 15.3.   Limitations on contractual power
   
Sec. 15.4.   Business dealings with city
Appendix
   
Sec. 1.   Purpose
   
Sec. 2.   Boundaries of the City of Charlotte
Schedule
   
Sec. 1.   Purpose and status of schedule chapter
   
Sec. 2.   Election to adopt Charter
   
Sec. 3.   Form of ballots
   
Sec. 4.   Effective date of Charter
   
Sec. 5.   [Continuation of Officers – Election]
   
Sec. 6.   Council meetings
   
Sec. 7.   Administrative officers
   
Sec. 8.   First Board of Review
   
Sec. 9.   City supervisors
   
Sec. 10.   Municipal Judge
   
Sec. 11.   Compensation of officers
   
Sec. 12.   Council action
   
Sec. 13.   New State Constitution
   
Sec. 14.   Vested rights and liabilities
   
Sec. 15.   Persons eligible for office or employment
Resolution of Adoption
Amendment to the Proposed Charter of the City of Charlotte
Editor's note:
   Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the City of Charlotte, Michigan,
adopted by the electors on April 2, 1962. Amendments are indicated by a history
note in parentheses following the amended section. Obvious misspellings have
been corrected without notation. Words added for clarity are enclosed in
brackets.
Statutory reference:
   Home rule cities generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.1 et seq.;
   Power to amend or adopt Charter, see Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22
CHAPTER 1. NAME AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.1. NAME.
   The city shall be a body corporate under the name "The City of Charlotte."
SECTION 1.2. BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The city shall embrace the territory constituting the City of
Charlotte on the effective date of this Charter, together with such annexation
thereto and less any detachment therefrom that may be made from time to time.
   (B)   Upon annexation or detachment of territory the boundaries shall be
deemed thereby to be changed without amendment of this section.
   (C)   The Clerk shall maintain and keep available in his office for public
inspection an official description of the current boundaries of the city.
Statutory reference:
   Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of
home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.6 et seq.
SECTION 1.3. WARDS.
   (A)   The City of Charlotte shall be divided into two wards, from each of
which a member of the City Council shall be nominated and elected.
    (B)   Each ward shall have the same boundaries as the current councilman
districts. Within 120 days of the effective date of this amendment, the City
Council shall revise the boundaries of the wards using the figures from the
2000 census.
   (C)   The City Council shall revise the boundaries of the wards within 120
days after the figures from the Federal decennial census become available. New
ward boundaries created within 120 days of a City general election shall become
effective after the general election.
   (D)   The City Council shall, to the greatest extent possible, establish
wards that are compact, contiguous and of equal population.
(Amended by electors 11-2-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Election precincts, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.654 et seq.;
   Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
(e)
SECTION 1.4. RECORDS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All records of the city shall be public, unless otherwise provided by law;
shall be kept in city offices, except when required for official reasons or for
purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere; and shall be available for inspection
at all reasonable times.
Statutory reference:
   Freedom of information act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.
SECTION 1.5. PUBLIC RECORDS AS EVIDENCE.
   All public records of the city, or copies thereof duly certified by the
custodian thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of their contents in all suits
at law or in equity and in other proceedings.
SECTION 1.6. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of
this Charter:
   (1)   The word "board'' includes the word "commission";
   (2)   The word "city" means the City of Charlotte;
   (3)   The word "Council" means the City Council of the City of Charlotte;
   (4)   The word "law" denotes applicable Federal law, the constitution and
statutes of Michigan, the applicable common law, and this Charter;
   (5)   The word "officer" includes the Mayor, the members of the Council, the
Municipal Judge or Judges, and, as hereinafter provided, the administrative
officers, and deputy administrative officers;
   (6)   The word "person" extends and may be applied to bodies politic and
corporate and to partnership and associations as well as to individuals;
   (7)   The words "printed" or "printing" include typewriting, printing,
engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, photostating, or any similar
method of reproducing written language which is understandable by average
literate persons conversant with the English language;
   (8)   The words "publish" or "published" include publication in the manner
provided by law, or, where there is no applicable law, in one or more
newspapers of the city qualified by law for the publication of legal notices,
or if such newspaper publication is not available, by posting in at least three
places in each election precinct;
   (9)   Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in
writing" include hand written script, printing, typewriting, teletype and
telegraphic communications, and other forms of written language which is
readable by average literate persons conversant with the English language;
   (10)   All words indicating the present tense are not limited to the time of
the adoption of this Charter, but extend to and include the time of the
happening of any event or requirement to which a Charter provision is applied;
   (11)   The singular includes the plural, the plural includes the singular,
and the masculine gender extends to and includes the feminine gender and the
neuter.
Editor's note:
   The Municipal Court was abolished by M.C.L.A.§ 600.9921
SECTION 1.7. OFFICIAL PERFORMANCE.
   Whenever this Charter requires the performance of an act by an officer, the
act may be performed by a deputy or by a subordinate, under the officer's
supervision and direction, unless otherwise provided by law.
SECTION 1.8. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CHARTER.
   Any person found guilty of an act constituting a violation of this Charter
may be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. No such fine shall exceed the sum
of five hundred dollars nor shall any such imprisonment exceed ninety days.
This section shall not operate to limit or prejudice the vacating of offices or
removal of officers or discharge of employees as provided in this Charter.
Statutory reference:
   Limitation on penalties, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(k)
SECTION 1.9. CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS.
   The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience
only and shall not be considered as part of the Charter.
SECTION 1.10. AMENDMENTS.
   This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law.
Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting
provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail
as to those provisions.
Statutory reference:
   Charter amendment procedure, see M.C.L.A. § 117.21 et seq.;
   Power to adopt and amend Charter, see Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22
SECTION 1.11. SEVERABILITY OF CHARTER PROVISIONS.
   If any provision, section, or clause of this Charter, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect any remaining portion or application of this Charter, which can be
given effect without the invalid portion or application, and, to this end, this
Charter is declared to be severable. This rule of severability shall apply
equally to ordinances of the city.
CHAPTER 2. MUNICIPAL POWERS AND LIABILITIES
SECTION 2.1. GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the city shall
possess and be vested with all the powers, privileges, and immunities,
expressed or implied, which cities are permitted by law to exercise or to
include in their Charters. The enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or
immunities in this section or elsewhere in this Charter shall not be held to be
exclusive.
   (B)   The city shall have power to manage and control its finances, rights,
interests, buildings, and property, to enter into contracts, to do any act to
advance its interests, and to protect the public peace, morals, health, safety,
and general welfare. In the exercise of such powers, the city may enact
ordinances, rules, and regulations, and take such other action as may be
required, not inconsistent with law. The power of the city shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   To declare as a hazard or nuisance any act or condition, upon
public or private property, or both, which is or may be dangerous to the
health, safety, morals, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city, including,
but not limited to, the accumulation of rubbish and the growing of noxious
weeds; to provide for the abatement thereof; and to provide that the costs of
such abatement shall be charged as a special assessment against the real
property on which the hazard or nuisance is located.
      (2)   To provide for the public welfare by:
         (a)   Regulating trades, occupations, and amusements within the city,
and prohibiting trades, occupations, and amusements which are detrimental to
the safety, health, morals, or welfare of its inhabitants;
         (b)   Regulating the preparation, storage, transportation, and sale of
foods, drugs, and beverages for human consumption;
         (c)   Collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish;
         (d)   Licensing and regulating the number of vehicles which carry
persons or property for hire; fixing the rates of fare and charges; and
determining the location of stands for such vehicles;
         (e)   Licensing and regulating billboards and advertising signs and
the locations thereof;
         (f)   Regulating the construction, erection, alteration, equipment,
repair, moving, removal, and demolition of buildings and structures and their
appurtenances and service equipment;
         (g)   Establishing zones within the city and regulating therein the
use and occupancy of lands and structures; the height, area, size, and location
of buildings; the required open spaces for light and ventilation of buildings;
and the density of population;
         (h)   Regulating, limiting and prohibiting the construction and use of
buildings and lands in order to promote the public safety and to prevent fires;
         (i)   Regulating and controlling the use of streams, waters and water
courses within the city.
      (3)   To establish and reasonably control streets, alleys, bridges, and
public places, and the space above and beneath them, and the use thereof by:
         (a)   Creating and vacating the same and acquiring and disposing of
land, or any interest in land, required therefor;
         (b)   Providing a plan of streets and alleys within the city and for a
distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits;
         (c)   Compelling all persons to care for the untraveled portions of
streets lying between the curbs and sidewalks, which abut upon premises owned,
controlled, or occupied by them, and to keep the same free from weeds and from
objects which are offensive or hazardous to public health and safety, and, upon
the failure to do so to cut and remove such weeds and remove such objects and
assess the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment;
         (d)   Controlling the location and arrangement, of driveways and other
means of access to streets from abutting properties and openings in streets in
connection with private uses of spaces under the surface of streets;
         (e)   Providing for the grade of streets and requiring public utility
users of the streets to conform thereto with respect to their tracks or
facilities located on, above, or under the streets; requiring railroads to keep
their tracks and the street surface between and for a distance of one and one-
half feet on each side of them in reasonable repair at all times;
         (f)   Regulating the speed of vehicles, trains, and locomotives upon
or across the streets within the provisions and limitations of law, and the
stopping and parking of the same upon the streets and at street crossings;
         (g)   Providing for and regulating the lighting of streets and alleys;
         (h)   Preventing and abating the encumbering of streets and alleys;
         (i)   Regulating the location of buildings and structures and of trees
and shrubbery at or near street corners and street intersections with alleys to
provide for the public safety and welfare in the use of streets and alleys;
         (j)   Providing for and regulating the numbering of buildings upon
property abutting the streets and alleys and compelling the owners and
occupants thereof to affix numbers thereto;
         (k)   Providing for the use, by other than the owners, of property
located on, above, or under the streets, alleys, and public places, in the
operation of a utility upon the payment of a reasonable compensation therefor
to the owner thereof;
         (l)   Regulating the placement and location of public utility poles
and conduits within street rights-of-way;
         (m)   Providing for the planting, removal, and general care and
protection of trees and shrubbery within the streets and public places of the
city and preventing the cutting of limbs and branches for the placing and
maintenance of utility wires without the consent of the Council.
      (4)   To undertake any public work or make any public improvement or any
repair or replacement thereof, either directly or by contract with private
persons; and to participate in any public work or public improvement under any
lawful plan by which the whole or partial support of such work or public
improvement is provided by another governmental unit or agency;
      (5)   To construct, provide, maintain, extend, operate, and improve:
         (a)   Within the city: a city hall; city office buildings; community
buildings, police stations; fire stations; civic auditoriums; public libraries;
and polling places; and
         (b)   Either within or without the corporate limits of the city or of
Eaton County: public parks; recreation grounds and stadiums; municipal camps;
public grounds; zoological gardens; museums; airports and landing fields;
facilities for the landing of helicopters; cemeteries; electric light and power
plants and systems; public heating plants and systems; sewage disposal plants
and systems; storm sewers; garbage disposal facilities; refuse and rubbish
disposal facilities; market houses and market places; facilities for the
storage and parking of vehicles; hospitals and any other structure or facility
which is devoted to or intended for public purposes within the scope of the
powers of the city;
      (6)   To acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, construction, lease, or
otherwise, real and personal property, and interests in property, either within
or without the corporate limits of the city or of Eaton County, for any public
use or purpose within the scope of its powers, including, but not by way of
limitation, the uses and purposes set forth in this section;
      (7)   To join with any other municipal corporation or with any other unit
or agency of government, or with any number or combination thereof, by
contract, or otherwise as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation,
or performance, jointly, or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property,
facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or
perform separately.
Statutory reference:
   Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal
powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the
administration of the municipal government, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4j(3);
   Permissible that Charter provide for acquisition of public buildings and
grounds, see M.C.L.A. 117.4e(2);
   Permissible that Charter provide for maintenance and disposition of city
property, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4e(2);
   Permissible that Charter provide for police powers, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
(j);
   Permissible that Charter provide for zoning, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(c);
   Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades and occupations,
see M.C.L.A. 117.4i(d);
   Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public ways, see M.C.L.A.
§ 1174h(1);
   Permissible that Charter provide for plan of streets and alleys, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.4h(3);
   Permissible that Charter provide for vehicleparking facilities, see M.C.L.A.
§ 117.4h(6)
CHAPTER 3. OFFICERS
SECTION 3.1. CITY OFFICERS.
   (A)   The elective officers of the city are the Mayor, the six Councilmen,
and the Municipal Judge.
   (B)   The appointive officers of the city are the City Manager, the Clerk,
the Treasurer, the Assessor, the City Attorney, the Police Chief, the Fire
Chief, the Health Officer, and members of city boards.
Editor's note:
   The Municipal Court was abolished by M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
SECTION 3.2. ELIGIBILITY FOR ELECTIVE CITY OFFICE.
   (A)   To be eligible for election to a city office, a person shall have been
continuously an elector of the city for a period of not less than six months
immediately preceding the date of his election. A ward Council member shall be
a resident of the ward from which elected or chosen.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any ward residency requirement, the provisions of the
amendment to this section shall not apply to those Council members who took
office prior to the adoption of this Charter amendment.
(Amended by electors, 11-8-1977; 11-2-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of officers, see M.C.L.A.
§ 117.3(d)
SECTION 3.3. PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR CITY OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT.
   A person who holds or has held elective office with the city shall not be
eligible for employment for which compensation is paid by the city, until two
years have elapsed following his resignation or the end of the term for which
he was elected or appointed or unless approved by a (2/3) vote of the then
members of City Council. The city shall not have power to give any official
position to one who is in default to the city, nor to a person who has been
convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude or of an act involving a
violation of an oath of office.
(Amended by electors 11-2-2004)
SECTION 3.4. NOTICE OF ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT.
   The Clerk shall mail to each person elected or appointed, a certificate of
election or appointment within five days after the date of election or
appointment.
SECTION 3.5. COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.
   Except for members of the Council, including the Mayor, the compensation of
all elective and appointive officers, shall be established by the Council.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, see M.C.L.A. §
117.3(d)
SECTION 3.6. OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the city, before entering upon his duties, shall take the
oath or affirmation required by the Constitution of the State of Michigan. The
Council may require designated employees to take such oath before entering upon
their employment. Oaths of office shall be filed with the Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   Oath of public officers, see Mich. Const. 1963, Art. XI, § 1
SECTION 3.7. SURETY BONDS.
   In order to protect the city and the public, the Council may require
appropriate surety bonds of officers and employees. No bond shall be renewed
upon its expiration. The premium of such bonds shall be paid by the city.
Blanket bonds covering two or more officers or employees, or both, may be
substituted for individual bonds. No bond shall be for a term exceeding three
years, except that of the Municipal Judge, which shall be for the term for
which he has been elected or appointed.
Editor's note:
   The Municipal Court was abolished by M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
SECTION 3.8. GIVING OF SURETY BY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES FORBIDDEN.
   No officer or employee shall give or furnish any bail bond, or recognizance,
nor shall he be the agent of any bondsman or insurer in connection with any
bond or insurance which may be required by law, ordinance, or by the Council.
SECTION 3.9. VACANCIES IN OFFICE.
   (A)    A city office shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any of the
following:
      (1)   The expiration of the term of office;
      (2)   The death of the incumbent;
      (3)   A resignation;
      (4)   A removal from office in any manner provided by law;
      (5)   Ceasing to possess at any time the qualifications or eligibility
for office required by this Charter for election or appointment to an office by
any person elected or appointed thereto;
      (6)   Conviction of a felony involving moral turpitude, or an offense
involving a violation of an oath of office;
      (7)   A judicial determination that the incumbent is of unsound mind;
      (8)   A decision of a competent tribunal declaring the election or
appointment of the incumbent void;
      (9)   Failure to take the oath or make the affirmation, or file the bond,
required for the office within ten days from the date of election or
appointment or within such other time, not exceeding thirty days thereafter, as
the Council may fix;
      (10)   In the case of the Mayor and Councilmen, absence from four
consecutive regular meetings of the Council, unless such absences, with reasons
therefor stated at the time and appearing in the journal of the meeting from
which the member was absent, be excused, or twenty-five percent of such
meetings in any calendar year, unless such absences are so excused;
      (11)   Absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of such
office for sixty consecutive days, unless such absence from the city or failure
to perform the duties of office shall be excused by the Council prior to the
expiration of such sixty day period.
SECTION 3.10. RESIGNATIONS.
   Resignations of officers shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk,
who shall promptly notify the appointing authority.
SECTION 3.11. REMOVAL FROM OFFICES.
   The Council may remove any administrative officer appointed by it.
SECTION 3.12. RECALL.
   An elective officer may be recalled and the vacancy thereby created filled
in the manner prescribed by law.
Statutory reference:
   Permissible that Charter provide for recall of its officers, see M.C.L.A. §
117.4i(g);
   Recall generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.951 et seq., See also Mich. Const.
1963, Art. 11, § 8
SECTION 3.13. FILLING VACANCIES.
   (A)   When a vacancy occurs in an elective office, except in the case of
recall, the Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment within thirty days
thereafter for a term ending on the Monday following the next regular city
election. When it is deemed advisable the Charlotte City Council may call a
special election to fill vacancies in elective offices. If a vacancy occurs too
late for the filing of nominating petitions for election to fill such vacancy
at the next regular city election such vacancy shall be filled by appointment
for the balance of the term thereof at the first regular meeting of the Council
following such city election.
   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in an appointive office, such vacancy shall be
filled within one hundred twenty (120) days thereafter in the manner provided
for making the original appointment. Such time may be extended, for not more
than an additional sixty days, by Council resolution setting forth the reasons
therefor.
(Amended by electors, 11-8-1977; 11-2-2004)
SECTION 3.14. DELIVERY OF OFFICE TO SUCCESSOR.
   Whenever an officer or employee leaves an office or employment for any
reason, he shall deliver forthwith to his successor in the office or employment
or to the Mayor, all property of the city, such as records, books, working
papers, engineering data and drawings, moneys, and effects, pertaining to the
functions of his office or employment, which are in his custody, possession, or
control.
CHAPTER 4. THE COUNCIL
SECTION 4.1. THE CITY COUNCIL.
   There shall be a City Council of seven members, consisting of the elected
Councilmen and the Mayor, who shall be deemed a member of the Council for all
purposes. The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of
the city and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in
this Charter or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed
by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws,
ordinances, and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof.
SECTION 4.2. ELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCILMEN.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own
members, including the Mayor, subject only to review by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
SECTION 4.3. COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCILMEN.
   (A)   Each member of the Council, including the Mayor, shall receive as his
compensation the sum of ten dollars per regular and special meeting actually
attended by him, but he shall not be compensated for more than thirty of such
meetings in any fiscal year of the city. The Mayor shall receive three hundred
dollars per year in addition to the compensation received by him for attendance
at Council meetings.
   (B)   Such compensation shall be prorated and paid monthly and, except as
otherwise provided in this Charter, shall constitute the only compensation
which may be paid the Mayor or Councilmen for the discharge of any official
duty or employment for or on behalf of the city during their tenure of office.
However, the Mayor and Councilmen may, upon order of the Council, be paid such
necessary bona fide expenses, incurred in or for any service on behalf of the
city, as are itemized by the person incurring such expenses and audited by the
Clerk.
Editor's note:
   Pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 117.5c, the city has created a local officers
compensation commission which supersedes the provisions of this section. See
Code of Ordinances, §§
2-111 et seq.
SECTION 4.4. FUNCTIONAL DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall, in addition to any powers and duties otherwise provided or
required of him by law, have powers and duties as follows:
   (1)   He shall be the ceremonial head and chief officer of the city;
   (2)   He shall be the presiding officer of the Council;
   (3)   He shall have all the powers and duties of a Councilman, including the
power and duty to vote, but shall not possess the veto power;
   (4)   He shall give the Council information concerning matters pertaining to
the legislative and policy functions of the Council and give his
recommendations thereon;
   (5)   He shall, in emergencies, have the powers conferred by law upon peace
officers and shall exercise such powers to correlate the work of the city's
officers and departments to prevent disorder, to preserve the public peace and
health, and to provide for the safety of persons and property;
   (6)   He shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments of
the city as the Council, this Charter, or any state or federal law may require;
and
   (7)   He shall make appointments of members of committees, and boards of the
city which are authorized by law or direction of the Council.
SECTION 4.5. ORGANIZATION OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council shall meet and organize on the first Monday following each
regular city election. At such meeting, or within one week thereafter, the
Council shall elect a Mayor Pro Tempore and do such other acts as may be
required for its organization and the conduct of its business.
SECTION 4.6. MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   The Mayor Pro Tempore shall have and exercise the powers and duties of the
Mayor when the Mayor is absent or unable to perform the duties of his office.
The Mayor Pro Tempore may resign from that office without resigning from the
Council. If both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore are absent the Council shall
appoint one of its members to act. The Mayor Pro Tempore does not succeed to
the office of Mayor when a vacancy occurs, but performs the duty of Mayor until
the Council fills the vacancy or calls a special election.
(Amended by electors, 11-8-1977)
SECTION 4.7. MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Council shall meet in the established Council Chamber, or in such
other place as may be established by ordinance, and shall hold at least two
regular meetings in each month. In emergency, the Council may meet at another
public place, with notice thereof posted at the established Council Chamber.
   (B)   Special meetings of the Council shall be held at the regular meeting
place of the Council. Special meetings shall be called by the City Clerk on the
written request of the Mayor, the City Manager, or of any two members of the
Council.
   (C)   At least six hours written notice shall be given designating the time
and purpose of a special meeting. Such notice shall be given personally by the
Clerk to each member of the Council or written notice may be left at his usual
place of residence or business by the Clerk or by someone designated by him.
Equal notice shall also be given to or delivered at the place of business of
each newspaper printed and published in the city, but this requirement shall
not be jurisdictional to the holding of any such meeting.
   (D)   In an emergency, any special meeting shall be a legal meeting if all
members are present, or, if there be a quorum present, and all absent members,
in writing waive the required notice thereof. Waivers may be made either before
or after the time of the meeting.
   (E)   An affidavit of the giving or service of any notice required by this
section shall be made a part of the journal of a special meeting. All waivers
of notice shall be attached to and made part of the journal of the meeting.
   (F)   No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council
except that stated or given in the notice of the meeting.
   (G)   All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be public
meetings and the public shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
   (H)   Four members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business. In the absence of a quorum, any number less than a quorum may adjourn
a meeting to a later date.
   (I)   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and
shall keep a journal of all its proceedings in the English language. The
journal of each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the Clerk after the
approval thereof by the Council. The vote upon all matters considered by the
Council shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" votes which shall be entered upon
record, except that, where the vote is unanimous, it shall be necessary only so
to state.
   (J)   The Council may compel the attendance at its meetings of its members
and of any officers or employees of the city. It may punish for nonattendance
in such manner as it may prescribe by its rules.
   (K)   No member of the Council may vote on any question upon which he has a
direct or indirect financial interest, otherwise each member of the Council
shall vote on each question before the Council for determination, unless
excused therefrom by the affirmative vote of all remaining members able to vote
on the question. If a question is raised under this section at any Council
meeting, such question shall be voted on before the question to which it
applies is voted upon, but the Council members affected may not vote on such
determination.
   (L)   The vote of at least four members shall be required for official
action by the Council, unless a larger majority is required by law.
   (M)   The Clerk shall prepare an agenda of the business to be considered at
each regular Council meeting. No business shall be considered by the Council at
a regular meeting, unless placed upon the agenda for the meeting not later than
12:00 o'clock noon, on the Friday preceding the meeting, except upon the
approval of five or more members of the Council.
Editor's note:
   Pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, see M.C.L.A. § 15.261 et seq., the time
required in Section
4.7(c) is now eighteen hours and Section
4.7(d) shall read as follows: The Council may hold emergency sessions without a
written notice or time constraints if the public health, safety or welfare is
severely threatened and if two-thirds of the Councilmembers vote to hold the
emergency meeting.
SECTION 4.8. RELATIONSHIP OF COUNCIL TO ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.
   Neither the Council nor any of its members or committees shall dictate the
appointment of any person to city office or employment by the City Manager or
in any way interfere with the City Manager or any other city officer to prevent
him from exercising his judgment in the conduct of the duties of his office or
the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative
service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall
deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager. Neither
the Council nor any member or committee thereof shall give orders or directions
to any of the subordinates of the City Manager.
Statutory reference:
   Standards of conduct and ethics, see M.C.L.A. § 15.341 et seq.
SECTION 4.9. HEALTH FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council shall be the Board of Health of the city. In such capacity it
shall act to preserve the public health as provided by and in accordance with
law. The health functions of the Council may be exercised by any county or
district health department which may have health jurisdiction in the city to
the extent and in the manner provided by law.
CHAPTER 5. CITY LEGISLATION
SECTION 5.1. FORMER CITY LEGISLATION PRESERVED.
   In order to preserve and provide for the public health and welfare and for
the safety of persons and property, and in so far as the same are consistent
with and permitted by law, the ordinances of the City of Charlotte which were
in effect on the effective date of this Charter shall be the ordinances of the
city. When this Charter requires the Council to adopt or provide any ordinance,
any existing ordinance which meets such requirement shall suffice.
Statutory reference:
   General authority relative to adoption of ordinances, see Mich. Const. 1963,
Art. VII, § 22;
   Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
SECTION 5.2. CITY CODE.
   Within two years after the effective date of this Charter, the Council shall
provide for and undertake the development of an ordinance code, which shall
supersede the ordinances of the city which are continued and carried over by
Section
5.1 hereof, and other ordinances of the city which have been adopted prior to
the effective date of such code.
   Such code shall be a city ordinance and shall be amended and parts thereof
shall be repealed only by ordinance.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to codify, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b
SECTION 5.3. INTRODUCTION, CONSIDERATION, STYLE, AND RECORDING OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style
of all ordinances adopted by the Council shall be, "The City of Charlotte
Ordains."
   (B)   Unless declared to be emergency in nature by a vote of not less than
five members of the Council, no ordinance shall be adopted by the Council,
except at a regular Council meeting held not less than one week subsequent to
its introduction. An emergency ordinance may be adopted at any regular or
special meeting of the Council.
   (C)   Each ordinance shall be recorded by the Clerk in the Ordinance Book
and such recording shall be prima facie evidence of the due and proper adoption
thereof.
   (D)   The amendment or repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall be by
ordinance. In the case of amendments, each section as amended shall be set
forth in full in the amending ordinance.
   (E)   All ordinances, resolutions, and official proceedings of the city may
be placed in evidence in all courts and tribunals by a copy thereof certified
as true by the Clerk, under the seal of the city, as an alternate to other
methods provided or permitted by law.
SECTION 5.4. PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   Each ordinance shall be published in a manner provided by the Council and
permitted by law, before it shall become operative. If publication is made by
posting, a notice of the places of posting and a brief statement of the purpose
of the ordinance shall be published in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the city within ten days after posting.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they
become operative, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
SECTION 5.5. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The Council shall provide in its rules for the procedure of adopting
ordinances, subject to the requirement of this Charter.
   (B)   Unless declared to be an emergency ordinance as provided in Section
5.3(B), no ordinance shall become operative until twenty days after adoption by
the Council, or by the electors of the city in the case of an ordinance adopted
through initiatory procedures.
   (C)   No ordinance which provides for or establishes a tax shall become
operative less than thirty days after adoption by the Council or the electors
of the city in the case of an ordinance adopted through initiatory procedures.
SECTION 5.6. PENALTIES.
   The Council shall provide for the punishment of violations of the ordinances
of the city. Such punishment may be by a fine of not to exceed $500.00, or by
imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the
Court. Imprisonment may be in the city or county jail, or in any workhouse or
penal institution of the State which is authorized by law to receive prisoners
of the city.
Statutory reference:
   Limitation on penalties, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(k)
SECTION 5.7. RESERVED.
(Amended by electors 11-2-2004)
SECTION 5.8. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   The electors of the city may initiate any ordinance or secure a referendum
on any ordinance by petition.
Statutory reference:
   Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, see M.C.L.A.
§ 117.4i(g)
SECTION 5.9. INITIATIVE OR REFERENDUM PETITIONS.
   An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by registered
electors of the city equal to not less than fifteen percent of the number of
registered electors of the city according to the records of the Clerk on the
date of the last previous regular city election. No referendum shall be
permitted respecting any ordinance required to be passed by the Council by any
law, except in the manner provided by such law. Such petition may be the
aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign
his name and shall, himself, place thereon after his name, the date and his
place of residence by street and number. To each petition paper there shall be
attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating that each
signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports
to be and that it was signed in the presence of the affiant. Such petition
shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within ten days, canvass the
signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. Any signatures
obtained more than sixty days before the filing of such petition with the Clerk
shall not be counted. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures
of registered electors, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the
requirements of this section, the Clerk shall notify, forthwith, the person
filing such petition, and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for
the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper,
the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular
meeting.
SECTION 5.10. SAME – COUNCIL PROCEDURE.
   Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the
Council shall, either:
   (1)   If it be initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the
petition within thirty days after the receipt thereof, or determine to submit
the proposal to the electors; or
   (2)   If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the
petition refers within thirty days after the receipt thereof, or determine to
submit the proposal to the electors.
SECTION 5.11. SAME – SUBMISSIONS TO ELECTORS.
   Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall
be submitted at the next election held in the city for any purpose, or, in the
discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be
determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases
where otherwise required by law.
SECTION 5.12. SAME – STATUS OF ORDINANCES ADOPTED.
   An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may
not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two years after the
date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more ordinances be
adopted at the same election which have conflicting provisions, the one
receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions.
SECTION 5.13. SAME – ORDINANCE SUSPENDED.
   The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition
within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition
refers shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question,
pending repeal by the Council or the final determination of the electors
thereon.
CHAPTER 6. THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
SECTION 6.1. THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Manager, the
Assessor, the City Attorney, the Director of Public Works, the Clerk, the
Treasurer, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief. The Council may, by ordinance,
upon the recommendation of the City Manager, create such additional
administrative offices, or combine any administrative offices, in any manner
not inconsistent with law, and prescribe the duties thereof as it may deem
necessary for the proper operation of the city government. No creation of any
administrative office, or combination thereof one with another, shall abolish
the office of City Manager, nor diminish any of the duties or responsibilities
of that office as set forth in this Charter.
   (B)   In making any appointment of an administrative officer, the appointing
authority shall consider only the good of the public service and the fitness of
the appointee for, and his ability to discharge the duties of, the office to
which he is appointed.
   (C)   All persons employed by the city who are not elective or
administrative officers, or members of a board created by this Charter, or
declared to be administrative officers by or under authority of this section
shall be deemed to be employees of the city.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of city officers, see M.C.L.A. §
117.3(d)
SECTION 6.2. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS – APPOINTMENT, TERMS, AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All administrative officers, except the City Attorney, shall be
appointed by the City Manager, subject to the confirmation of the Council
before any such appointment shall be final.
   (B)   The term of office of each such officer shall be indefinite. Officers
appointed by the City Manager shall be subject to removal by the City Manager,
upon approval of such action by the Council, and under the provisions of the
retirement plan of the city.
   (C)   The compensation of administrative officers shall be set in each
annual city budget.
SECTION 6.3. CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   To be eligible for appointment as City Manager a person must have had
training for or previous experience in city, public or business administration,
subject in all respects to Section
6.1(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Manager shall be the administrative agent of the Council,
shall be vested with all administrative powers of the city, except as otherwise
provided by this Charter, and shall perform the duties of his office under the
authority of, and be accountable to, the Council. Except as otherwise provided
in this Charter or required by law, all administrative officers, other than the
City Attorney and members of city boards, shall be responsible to him for the
performance of their duties.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to:
      (1)   Supervise and coordinate the work of the administrative officers
and departments of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, and
except the work of the Clerk insofar as set forth and required of him by law
and section
6.4(A) of this chapter: provided that the City Manager shall be responsible for
seeing that such duties are performed;
      (2)   Prepare and submit to the Council the annual budget proposal of the
city, together with supporting information in explanation thereof;
      (3)   Establish and maintain a central purchasing service for the city;
      (4)   Supervise and coordinate the personnel policies and practices of
the city;
      (5)   Keep informed and report to the Council concerning the work of the
several administrative offices and departments of the city, and, to that end,
he may secure from the administrative officers and department heads such
information and periodic or special reports as he or the Council may deem
necessary;
      (6)   In case of conflict of authority between officers and
administrative departments, or in case of absence of administrative authority,
occasioned by inadequacy of Charter or ordinance provisions, resolve the
conflict or supply the necessary authority, so far as may be consistent with
law and the ordinances of the city, and direct the necessary action to be taken
in conformance therewith, making a full report to the Council at the next
regular or special meeting thereof;
      (7)   Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to be heard in
all administrative matters before the Council, but without the right to vote;
      (8)   Recommend to the Council, from time to time, such measures as he
deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the city administration
or its services;
      (9)   Prepare and maintain an administrative code which, when adopted by
the Council, shall supplement this Charter in establishing the duties and
functions of each officer and department of the city;
      (10)   Furnish the Council with information concerning city affairs and
prepare and submit such reports as may be required or which shall consolidate
the reports of the several officers and departments of the city;
      (11)   Possess such further powers and perform such additional duties as
may be granted to or required of him, from time to time, by the Council, so far
as may be consistent with the provisions of law and the ordinances of the City.
SECTION 6.4. CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The Clerk shall be clerk of the Council. He, or his deputy, shall
attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its
proceedings, in the English language.
   (B)   He shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix it to all
documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He
shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the
city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided by law. He shall give to
the proper officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of their
terms of office and of any official bonds, and of franchises, contracts, or
agreements to which the city is a party.
   (C)   He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of
the Council and shall keep the City Manager informed with respect thereto.
   (D)   He shall have power to administer all oaths required by law and the
ordinances of the city.
   (E)   He shall certify all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by
the Council and such certification shall be prima facie evidence of the due and
proper action of the Council thereon.
   (F)   He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as
may be required of him by administrative order of the City Manager, with the
approval of the Council, and by law and the ordinances or resolutions of the
Council.
SECTION 6.5. CITY AUDITOR.
   (A)   The City Auditor shall be the general accountant of the city, shall
keep books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of the city,
and shall keep the Council and the City Manager informed as to the city's
financial affairs. He shall provide the accounting system of the city and each
of its departments. Such system of accounts shall conform to any uniform system
that may be required by law.
   (B)   He shall maintain an inventory of city-owned property, both real and
personal.
   (C)   He shall balance all the books of account of the city at the end of
each calendar month, and shall make reports thereon as required by the City
Manager.
   (D)   He shall, at any time, upon direction of the City Manager or the
Council, examine and audit all books of account kept by any official or
department of the city. He shall examine and test-check all books of account of
the Treasurer and the Municipal Court at least once each month.
   (E)   He shall perform such other duties as the Council, or the City Manager
with the approval of the Council, shall direct.
   (F)   Until such time as the Council shall provide for an independent City
Auditor, by ordinance adopted upon the recommendation therefor by the City
Manager, the Clerk shall be and perform the duties of the City Auditor.
Editor's note:
   The Municipal Court was abolished by M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
SECTION 6.6. CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Council and shall act as
the legal advisor of and be responsible to the Council in all respects
concerning the performance of his official duties. He shall advise the City
Manager concerning legal problems affecting the city administration, and the
Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor concerning their statutory and Charter duties,
when so requested, and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions
given by him.
   (B)   He shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the city
in cases before courts and other tribunals.
   (C)   He shall prepare or review all ordinances, regulations, contracts,
bonds, and such other instruments that may be required by this Charter or by
the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof.
   (D)   He shall attend the meetings of the Council, if requested by the Mayor
or the City Manager, or any two members of the City Council.
   (E)   He shall be the attorney for the several boards of the city.
   (F)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by
this Charter or the Council.
   (G)   Upon the Attorney’s recommendation, or upon its own initiative, the
Council may provide for an assistant to the City Attorney and may retain
special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest,
or to assist the City Attorney in connection therewith.
(Res. 2009-15, adopted by City Council 7-13-2009; adopted by vote of electorate
11-3-2009)
SECTION 6.7. CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the city, the
Clerk's bond if there be one, and all evidences of value belonging to or held
in trust by the city.
   (B)   He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only
in such places as the Council may determine or as may be required by law or
ordinance of the city.
   (C)   He shall have such power, duties, and prerogatives in regard to the
collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and
moneys as are conferred by law.
   (D)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
the City Manager with the approval of the Council.
SECTION 6.8. DEPUTIES OF THE CLERK, TREASURER.
   The Clerk and the Treasurer shall be entitled to at least one deputy, each,
and shall appoint and remove their deputies, subject to the budget allowances
therefor and the approval of the City Manager relative to appointments. Each
deputy shall possess all the powers and authorities of his superior officer.
SECTION 6.9. ASSESSOR.
   (A)   The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be
charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by law.
   (B)   He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in
the manner prescribed by or under authority of law.
   (C)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
the City Manager with the approval of the Council.
SECTION 6.10. PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   The Department of Public Works shall be under the direction of the
Director of Public Works.
   (B)   The Department shall be responsible for the construction, maintenance,
improvement, and extension of the streets, alleys, public places, water system
and facilities, the sewers, the sewage disposal facilities of the city, and
such other services and facilities of the city as the City Manager shall direct
with the approval of the Council.
SECTION 6.11. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall be under the direction of the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Police officers of the city shall have all the powers, immunities, and
privileges granted to peace officer[s] by law for the making of arrests, the
preservation of order, and the safety of persons and property in the city. Any
person arrested shall be taken before the proper magistrate or court for
examination or trial, without unnecessary delay. Police officers shall make and
sign complaints to or before the proper officers and magistrates against any
person known to be, or, upon complaint or information, believed to be, guilty
of any violation of this Charter or the ordinances of the city, or of the penal
laws of the state. For purposes of making arrests, violations of this Charter
and of city ordinances shall be deemed to be misdemeanors.
SECTION 6.12. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall be under the direction of the Fire Chief.
   (B)   In making the appointment of Fire Chiefs, primary consideration shall
be given to any recommendation made by the members of the Fire Department and
the appointment of any person who is not recommended or approved by the members
of the Department shall not be confirmed by the Council, except by the vote of
five or more of its members.
   (C)   The Fire Department shall be responsible for the prevention and
extinguishment of fires and the protection of persons and property against
damage and accident resulting therefrom. The Fire Chief shall be responsible
for the use, care, and management of the city's fire fighting apparatus and
property. He shall conduct supervisory and educational programs to diminish the
risk of fires within the city. He, or any of his authorized subordinates, may
command any person present at a fire to aid in the extinguishment thereof, and
to assist in the protection of life or property. If any person willfully
disobeys any such lawful requirement, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation
of this Charter.
   (D)   The Fire Chief or any of his authorized subordinates may cause any
building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary in order to
arrest the progress of a fire. In such case no action shall be maintained
against the city or any person therefor. If any person having an interest in
such building shall apply to the Council within three months after the fire for
damages or compensation for such building, the Council may pay him such
compensation as it may deem just. The Council may ascertain the amount of such
damage or compensation by agreement with the owner of the property or by the
appraisal of a jury selected in the same manner as in the case of juries
selected to appraise damages for the taking of property for public use. No
compensation shall be paid on account of any loss which would probably have
occurred to a building, if it had not been pulled down or destroyed under
authority of this section.
   (E)   The Fire Department of the city, as organized on the effective date of
this Charter, shall continue as then organized and conducted until the Council
shall reconstitute the same by an ordinance adopted by five or more of its
members.
SECTION 6.13. PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   The city's recreation properties and facilities and services and its
parks, including its cemeteries, may constitute a department of the city
government. Until such time as the Council shall make such facilities and
services a department of the city, they shall be a part of the Department of
Public Works.
   (B)   The city may join and cooperate with the School District of the city
and with any unit of government in the operation, maintenance, and improvement
of park and recreation property, facilities, and services, and in the conduct
of recreational programs.
SECTION 6.14. CITY PLANNING.
   The Council shall establish a Planning Commission. The Council shall
prescribe, by ordinance, the composition, terms of office, duties and
responsibilities, limitations of authority, place and times of meetings, and
such other details of procedures, instructions and responsibilities of said
Planning Commission as the Council may determine not inconsistent with this
Charter or applicable statutes.
(Amended by electors, 11-8-1966)
SECTION 6.15. CITIZEN PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   To afford citizen participation in the affairs of the city government
for the purpose of determining community needs and means of meeting such needs
through the government of the city, citizen advisory boards may be established
by ordinance.
   (B)   Each of such boards shall be comprised of citizens of the city who
have the qualifications required by this Charter for elective officers of the
city. When the scope of interest of any board may extend beyond the limits of
the city, one member of the board may be a nonresident of the city. The members
of such boards shall be appointed by the Council and shall receive no
compensation for their services to the city, but shall be allowed reasonable
and actual expenses when incurred on behalf of the city and approved by the
Council.
SECTION 6.16. ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES.
   From time to time, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, the Council
may, by ordinance, prescribe additional powers and duties, not inconsistent
with this Charter, to be exercised and administered by appropriate officers and
departments of the city.
SECTION 6.17. LIBRARY.
   (A)   The Charlotte Public Library and reading room created by the Council
and existing on the effective date of this Charter shall continue with its
organization unchanged by this Charter and with all the rights possessed by it
under law and the ordinances of the city.
   (B)   On or before the first day of February in each year, the Library Board
shall submit to the City Manager an estimate in detail of the anticipated
revenue and expenditures of the Board for the ensuing fiscal year of the city
for inclusion in the budget proposal to be presented to the Council.
   (C)   The Council shall provide in each annual budget for the operation and
conduct of the Charlotte City Library and shall appropriate therefor such
amounts which, in addition to revenues received from the State of Michigan and
other sources, will assure the conduct of the library in a manner consistent
with the needs of the community.
   (D)   In the conduct of the Charlotte City Library, the Library Board shall
be subject to the same accounting procedures and controls in the administration
of the affairs of the library and the annual budget therefor as are other
departments of the City.
SECTION 6.18. EMPLOYEE WELFARE BENEFITS.
   The Council shall have power to make available to the administrative
officers and employees of the city, other than members of city boards, any
recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health and accident
insurance, or any of them.
CHAPTER 7. GENERAL FINANCE
SECTION 7.1. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal and budget year of the city shall begin on the first day of July
of each year.
Statutory reference:
   Uniform budgeting and accounting, see M.C.L.A. §§ 141.421 et seq.
SECTION 7.2. BUDGET PROCEDURE.
   No later than the first day of February of each year, each officer,
department, and board of the city shall submit to the City Manager an itemized
estimate of its expected income and expenditures during the next fiscal year
for the department or activities under its control. The City Manager shall
compile such information and list the same upon a budget proposal form. He
shall review such budget requests, and in a column parallel to and adjacent to
that containing such budget requests, shall enter his budgetary recommendations
for each item requested by the several officers and departments, with such
additions thereto and deletions therefrom as he shall deem proper. Not later
than the first meeting of the Council in April of each year, he shall submit to
the Council a recommended budget for the next fiscal year which, considering
any anticipated unexpended balance or deficit at the end of the current fiscal
year, is within the tax limit and other anticipated revenue of the city. In
addition to the foregoing information, such recommended budget shall include
therein in parallel and adjacent columns at least the following information:
      (1)   The detailed estimates of the City Manager, with supporting
explanation, of proposed expenditures for each office, department, and board of
the city, with a comparison of the actual appropriations for corresponding
items for last preceding fiscal year, in full, and the appropriations for the
current fiscal year, together with the expenditures for such year to January
first, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year;
      (2)   Statements of bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing
the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and
unissued, and the consideration of sinking funds if any;
      (3)   Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from
sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts estimated
for and actually received from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding fiscal year in full, for the current fiscal year to January first,
and estimated revenues therefrom for the balance of the current fiscal year;
      (4)   A statement of the estimated accumulated cash and unencumbered
balances, or deficits, at the end of the current fiscal year;
      (5)   An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from taxes to be
levied, from delinquent taxes, and the amount to be raised from bond issues
which, together with available unappropriated funds and any revenues from other
sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
SECTION 7.3. PUBLIC INSPECTION OF BUDGET PROPOSAL.
   The budget proposal of the City Manager, together with his recommendations
and supporting schedules and information shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Clerk for at least one week in advance of the
meeting of the Council at which it is adopted.
SECTION 7.4. ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   At a regular meeting, held not later than the second Monday in June of
each year, the Council shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the ensuing
fiscal year and make an appropriation of the money needed therefor. Such
resolution shall designate the sum to be raised by taxation for the general
purposes of the city and for the payment of principal and interest on its
indebtedness. Failure to adopt such resolution within the time herein set shall
not invalidate either the budget or the tax levy therefor. Should the Council
fail to adopt a budget by the thirtieth day of June in any year, the budget
proposal of the City Manager shall constitute a de facto budget for the city,
until such time as the Council shall adopt a budget and an appropriation for
all expenditures thereunder shall exist as though made by the Council.
   (B)   A copy of the appropriations for each fiscal year, certified by the
Clerk, shall be furnished to the City Manager and the Assessor within ten days
after the date of the adoption of the budget resolution.
SECTION 7.5. BUDGET CONTROL.
   (A)   Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds
or by special assessments, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the
city, except in accordance with the budget in effect and the appropriation for
such purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred
without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such
obligation during the fiscal year. The Council, upon the written recommendation
of the City Manager, and by the affirmative vote of not less than five of its
members, may appropriate unappropriated funds or transfer any unencumbered
appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from any budget item or account,
department, or agency to another. When any expenditure is to be made for a
purpose to be financed by the proceeds of a bond issue or from special
assessments, the Council shall make an appropriation of the proceeds of such
bond issue or special assessment therefor.
   (B)   Expenditures shall not be charged directly to any contingent or
general account. Instead, the necessary amount of the appropriation from such
account shall be transferred to the appropriate budget item or account and the
expenditure then charged thereto. The Clerk shall be responsible for the
administration of the foregoing requirements in subsection (A) and (B) of this
section.
   (C)   During each month, the Clerk shall submit to the Council data showing
the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to the
end of the preceding month; and, if it shall appear that the revenues are less
than anticipated, the Council may, by resolution, reduce appropriations, except
amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be
necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues.
   (D)   Within thirty days following the end of each fiscal year, the Clerk
shall file with the Council a schedule of all encumbrances upon the budget
appropriations existing at the end of the fiscal year, with his recommendations
thereon, and the Council shall provide for the payment of such thereof as
constitute valid claims against the city from corresponding budget items from
the then current fiscal year.
SECTION 7.6. SPECIAL ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Council may, by ordinance, establish and maintain accounts for
accumulating moneys to be used for acquiring, extending, altering,
constructing, or repairing designated public improvements and for the purchase
of equipment of any type needed for the operation or services of the city.
   (B)   Appropriations to such accounts may be made by the Council either in
the annual appropriation resolution or, from time to time during the fiscal
year, from available funds, from whatever source derived, which are not
required for other appropriations or obligations of the city. Such accounts
shall be continuing accounts and the balances therein at the end of each fiscal
year shall remain a part thereof.
   (C)   At the end of each fiscal year, the Council may transfer any
unencumbered balance or any part thereof into one or more of the accounts
authorized to be created by this section.
   (D)   Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of public improvements,
as set forth in subsection (A) hereof, shall be used only at the direction of
the Council, and only for the purpose provided in the original ordinance
establishing such account, unless their use for some other municipal purpose be
authorized by a majority vote of the electors of the city who vote on the
proposition to amend such ordinance to provide for a change in the use of the
moneys in such account. After the purpose of any such account has been
fulfilled, any balance remaining therein may be transferred by the Council to
any other special account or to the general fund of the city.
   (E)   Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of purchasing equipment,
as set forth in subsection (A) hereof, shall be expended only for the purpose
provided in the ordinance establishing any such account, or as such ordinance
may be amended from time to time. When no longer required for such purpose,
such moneys or any remaining part thereof, may be transferred to the general
fund by resolution of the Council.
Statutory reference:
   Deposit of public moneys, see M.C.L.A. § 211.43b
SECTION 7.7. WITHDRAWALS OF CITY MONEYS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all moneys drawn
from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority and appropriation of
the Council. The Council, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, where
necessary to expedite operating procedures, may authorize by resolution,
designated officers and employees of the city to make minor disbursements from
petty cash accounts, which disbursements shall be accounted for and shall be
audited by the Clerk.
   (B)   Checks for the expenditure of city funds shall be signed by the Clerk
and countersigned by the Treasurer, pursuant to warrants therefor signed by the
Mayor after the approval of such expenditures by the Council. Should the
offices of Clerk and Treasurer be, at any time, combined, the Council shall
designate some other officer having knowledge of the accounts of the city to
countersign in lieu of the Treasurer.
   (C)   Checks may be issued prior to authorization by the Council for such
purposes and up to such amounts as the Council shall provide by ordinance. All
such checks and the purpose thereof shall be reported to the Council at its
next regular meeting.
SECTION 7.8. NOTICE TO CITY OF CLAIM FOR INJURIES.
   (A)   The city shall not be liable in damages for injury to person or
property by reason of negligence of the city, unless, within sixty days after
such injury occurred, the person damaged, or his representative, causes a
written notice to be served upon an officer of the city upon whom process may
be served by law. Such notice shall state that such person intends to hold the
city liable for such damages and shall set forth substantially the time and
place of the injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or
defect complained of, the extent of the injury so far as known, and the names
and addresses of witnesses known to the claimant.
   (B)   No person shall bring action against the city for damages to person or
property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless
brought within the period prescribed by law, nor unless he has first presented
to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath, setting forth specifically the
nature and extent of the injury and the amount of damages claimed. The Clerk
shall refer the claim to the Council for action.
   (C)   Failure to give notice of injury or present a claim within the time
and in the manner provided shall bar any action upon such claim.
   (D)   The provisions and requirements of this section shall not apply to or
control claims for damages to persons or property which arise out of the
exercise of any proprietary function of the city.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to waive any defense of governmental
or other immunity which the city may have from claims for damages arising out
of negligence or otherwise.
SECTION 7.9. DEPOSITORIES.
   The Council shall designate depositories for city funds in accordance with
law, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys.
Statutory reference:
   Designation of depositories, see M.C.L.A. § 129.12
SECTION 7.10. INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at
the close of each fiscal year, and shall be completed within ninety days
thereafter. Special independent audits may be made at any time that the Council
may designate. All such audits shall be made to the Council by a Certified
Public Accountant designated by it. Each audit and reports supplemental thereto
shall be made public in the manner that the Council determines and copies of
the audit shall be placed in the office of the Clerk, and the Charlotte
Library.
SECTION 7.11. ANNUAL REPORT.
   The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city,
after the completion of the annual audit. The report shall include condensed
financial statements showing the results of all city operations, including
statements for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Copies of
such report shall be made available for public inspection and distribution at
the office of the Clerk and by such other method as the Council may determine.
CHAPTER 8. TAXATION
SECTION 8.1. POWER TO TAX – TAX LIMIT.
   The city shall have the power to assess taxes and to lay and collect rents,
tolls, and excises. The annual general ad valorem tax levy for municipal
purposes shall not exceed one and one-half percent (15.0 mills) of the assessed
value of all real and personal property in the city.
Statutory reference:
   General Property Tax Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 et seq.
   Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes,
see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(g)
SECTION 8.2. SUBJECTS OF TAXATION – TAX PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be
the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law.
   (B)    Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, city taxes shall be
assessed, levied, and collected in the manner provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal
purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under
general law, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(f)
SECTION 8.3. EXEMPTIONS.
   The power of taxation shall never be surrendered or suspended by any grant
or contract to which the city shall be a party. No exemptions from taxation
shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or permitted by law.
Statutory reference:
   Property exempt from taxation, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.7 et seq.
SECTION 8.4. TAX DAY.
   Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by law, the taxable status
of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first day of
December, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, which
shall be deemed the tax day. Values on the assessment roll shall be determined
according to the facts existing on the tax day for the year for which such roll
is made, and no change in the status or location of any such property after
that day shall be considered by the Assessor or the Board of Review.
Statutory reference:
   Designation of tax day, see M.C.L.A. § 211.2;
   Time, place and method of assessment, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.10 et seq.
SECTION 8.5. PERSONAL PROPERTY – JEOPARDY ASSESSMENT.
   If the Treasurer finds or reasonably believes that any person who is, or may
be, liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in
the city on tax day, intends to depart or has departed from the city; or to
remove or has removed therefrom personal property which is, or may be, liable
for taxation; or to conceal or conceals himself or his property; or does any
other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partly ineffectual the
proceedings to collect such tax, he shall proceed to collect the same as a
jeopardy assessment in the manner provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Jeopardy assessment of personal property taxes, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.691 et
seq.
SECTION 8.6. PREPARATION OF THE ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   Prior to the date of the meeting of the Board of Review in each year, the
Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the
city. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of law,
and may be divided into volumes which the Assessor shall identify by number,
for purposes of convenience in handling the assessment roll and for locating
properties assessed therein. The attachment of any certificate or warrant
required by this chapter to any volumes of the roll, either as an assessment
roll or as a tax roll, shall constitute the attachment thereof to the entire
roll, provided the several volumes are identified in such certificate or
warrant. Values of property set forth on the assessment roll shall be
determined according to recognized methods of systematic assessment.
Statutory reference:
   Assessment roll, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.24 et seq.;
   Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(i)
SECTION 8.7. BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   A Board of Review is hereby created, composed of five members who have
the qualifications for holding elective city office, as set forth in Section
3.2 of this Charter and who are owners of property assessed for taxes in the
city. The Council shall set the compensation of the members of the Board of
Review, which compensation shall be on a per meeting attended basis.
   (B)   The members of the Board of Review shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the Council, and may be removed for reasons of
nonfeasance and misfeasance by a vote of five members of the Council. The first
members shall be appointed during the month of January, 1963, for terms which
shall be such that the term of one of the members will expire in the month of
January of each year. Thereafter one member shall be appointed in the month of
January of each year, for a term of five years, commencing upon his
appointment.
   (C)   The Board shall, annually, on the first day of its meeting, select one
of its members chairman for the ensuing year. The Assessor shall be Clerk of
the Board, and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no
vote on any proposition or question.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for a Board of Review, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
(a)
SECTION 8.8. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF BOARD OF REVIEW.
   For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review
shall have the same powers and perform like duties, in all respects, as are, by
law, conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as
otherwise provided in this Charter. At the time, and in the manner provided in
the following section, it shall hear the complaints of all persons considering
themselves aggrieved by assessments. If it shall appear that any person or
property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall
correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. Except as otherwise provided
by law, no person other than the Board of Review shall make any change upon, or
addition or correction to, the assessment roll. The Assessor shall make a
permanent record of all proceedings of the Board and enter therein all
resolutions and decisions of the Board. Such record shall be filed with the
Clerk on or before the first day of May following the meeting of the Board of
Review.
SECTION 8.9. MEETINGS OF BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   The Board of Review shall convene at 9:00 o'clock a.m. on the Tuesday
immediately following the first Monday in March in each year at a place
designated by the Council, or on such other date as may subsequently be
required by law for the meeting of boards of review in cities, and continue in
session from day to day for not less than six hours on each day for not less
than two days for the purpose of considering the assessment roll of the city.
   (B)   Not later than one week prior to his certification of the assessment
roll, the Assessor shall:
      (1)   Complete to the best of his ability a tentative assessment roll and
make it available for public inspection in his office for a period of at least
one week; and
      (2)   Give a notice of any change, as compared with the previous year, in
the assessed value of any property on, or of the addition of any property to,
the roll. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail with postage thereon
fully prepaid and addressed to the owner thereof according to the records of
the Assessor. Such notice shall advise the person to whom it is addressed that
the change in valuation or addition of property to the roll may be discussed
with the Assessor at his office prior to the meeting of the Board of Review.
The failure of any owner of property to receive any such notice shall not
invalidate any assessment roll or any assessment thereon.
   (C)   The Assessor shall, during such period of public inspection, hear and
review inquiries regarding the assessment of property on the assessment roll
and may consider information so received by him in determining values on the
assessment roll certified by him to the Board of Review.
(Amended by electors, 11-6-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Completion of review of assessments, see M.C.L.A.§ 211.30a
   Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of Board of Review, see M.C.L.A.
§ 117.3(i)
SECTION 8.10. NOTICE OF MEETINGS AND HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notice of the time and place of the annual meeting of the Board of
Review shall be published by the Assessor not less than one week nor more than
three weeks prior thereto.
   (B)   The Board of Review may examine on oath any person appearing before it
respecting the assessment of property on the assessment roll.
   (C)   If the Board shall undertake or propose to make any change in the
assessment of any property on the assessment roll as presented by the Assessor
or to add any property thereto, it shall give notice thereof to the owner of
such property by first class mail with full postage prepaid thereon and
addressed to such owner at the latest address shown in the records of the
Assessor. Such notice shall be mailed not less than five days prior to the
final adjournment of the Board and shall state the time when persons may be
heard thereon. The Board shall not finally adjourn, until a reasonable
opportunity is given for such persons to be heard.
Statutory reference:
   Open Meetings Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq.
SECTION 8.11. CERTIFICATION OF ROLL.
   After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll,
and not later than the fourth Monday in March, or such other date as may
subsequently be required by law, the majority of its members shall sign a
certificate to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for
the year in which it has been prepared, as approved by the Board of Review,
which certificate, when attached to any volume of the roll, shall constitute a
conclusive presumption of the validity of the entire roll, as provided in
Section 8.6 of this chapter. In the event that the Board of Review shall fail
or refuse to so review the assessment roll of the city, such roll, as prepared
and presented to the Board of Review by the Assessor, shall be the assessment
roll for the year for which it was prepared, and shall stand as though it had
been certified by the Board of Review.
Statutory reference:
   Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required,
see M.C.L.A. § 211.30a
SECTION 8.12. VALIDITY OF ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   Upon the completion of the assessment roll, and from and after midnight
ending the last day of the meeting of the Board of Review, it shall be the
assessment roll of the city for county, school, and city taxes, and for other
taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law. It shall be
presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid, and shall not be set aside,
except for cause set forth by law.
SECTION 8.13. CLERK TO CERTIFY LEVY.
   Within three days after the adoption of the budget for the ensuing year, the
Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council
determines shall be raised by general ad valorem taxation, together with such
other assessments and lawful charges and amounts which the Council requires to
be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon the city tax roll against property or
persons.
SECTION 8.14. CITY TAX ROLL.
   After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll,
the Assessor shall prepare a tax roll, to be known as the "City Tax Roll." Upon
receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, assessed, and
charged for city taxes, as provided in the preceding section, the Assessor
shall proceed forthwith: (1) to spread the amounts of the general ad valorem
tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said
assessment roll, and (2) to place such other assessments and charges upon the
roll as are required and authorized by the Council. For convenience, the city
tax roll may be divided into two or more volumes. The city tax roll may be,
either, an independent tax roll, or may be a combination city tax roll and a
tax roll for state, county, school, and other taxes, charges and assessments.
Statutory reference:
   Avoidance of fractions, see M.C.L.A. § 211.39
SECTION 8.15. TAXES A DEBT AND LIEN.
   The taxes on real and personal property shall become a debt to the city from
the owner or person otherwise to be assessed, on the tax day provided by law.
The amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon
such real property on the first day of July following the said tax day and the
lien for such amounts, and for all interest and charges thereon, shall continue
until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior,
superior, and paramount, on all personal property of persons so assessed from
and after the first day of July following the said tax day and shall so remain
until paid. Said tax liens on personal property shall take precedence over all
other claims, encumbrances, and liens, upon said personal property whatsoever,
whether created by chattel mortgage, title retaining contract, execution, or
upon any other final process of a court, attachment, replevin, judgment or
otherwise. No transfer of personal property assessed for taxes shall operate to
divest or destroy such lien, except where such property is actually sold in the
regular course of retail trade.
SECTION 8.16. TAX ROLL CERTIFIED FOR COLLECTION.
   After spreading the taxes and placing other assessments and charges upon the
roll, the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and attach his warrant thereto
directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect, prior to March first of the
following year, from the several persons named in the roll the several sums
mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax, charge, or
assessment. Said warrant shall grant to and vest in the Treasurer, all the
statutory power and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the
collection of taxes. The tax roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer on or
before the fifteenth day of July.
Statutory reference:
   Collection of taxes, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.44 et seq.
SECTION 8.17. TAX PAYMENT DATE.
   City taxes shall be due and payable on August thirty-first of each year.
SECTION 8.18. TAXES DUE – NOTIFICATION THEREOF.
   The Treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the payment
of taxes but, upon receipt of the city tax roll, he shall, forthwith, mail a
tax statement to each person named in the tax roll, which mailed statement
shall be a sufficient demand for the payment of all taxes assessed. Neither the
failure on the part of the Treasurer to mail such statement nor the failure of
any person to receive the same, shall invalidate the taxes on the tax roll or
release any person or property assessed from the liabilities provided in this
Charter in case of nonpayment.
SECTION 8.19. TAX PAYMENT SCHEDULE.
   The Council shall provide by ordinance, a tax payment schedule and the
amount of collection charges and interest to be added to taxes, charges, and
assessments on the city tax roll. When so added, such collection charges and
interest shall be treated in all respects as an item of taxes and collected as
such. If delinquent city taxes are collected by returning the same to the
County Treasurer, then all charges and assessments on the tax roll, and any
collection charges and interest thereon, which remain unpaid at the time the
delinquent tax roll is returned to the County Treasurer shall be treated in all
respects as an item of taxes and shall be included with the city taxes spread
upon such roll and shall be collected by the County Treasurer in like manner as
delinquent taxes are collected on delinquent tax rolls returned to County
Treasurers under the general property tax act.
SECTION 8.20. FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO PAY PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX.
   If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax on personal property
assessed to him, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing any personal
property of such person, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, together with
any charges and interest added thereto, wherever the same may be found in the
State. No property shall be exempt from such seizure. He may sell the property
seized, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, together with any charges and
interest added thereto, wherever the same may be found in the State. No
property shall be exempt from such seizure. He may sell the property seized, to
an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges, fees, penalties, and
interest, in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may also sue
the person to whom a personal property tax is assessed, in accordance with the
powers granted him by law.
Statutory reference:
   Failure or refusal to pay tax, see M.C.L.A. § 211.47
SECTION 8.21. STATE, COUNTY, AND SCHOOL TAXES.
   For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county, and
school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all
provisions of law relative to the collection of, and accounting for, such taxes
and the penalties and interest thereon shall apply. For the purpose of
collecting state, county, and school taxes, the Treasurer shall perform the
same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under state law.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state,
county and school taxes, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(i)
SECTION 8.22. PROTECTION OF CITY LIEN.
   The city shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not
conflict with or contravene the provisions of law, to acquire such interest in
any premises within the city, by purchase at any tax or other public sale, or
by direct purchase from or negotiation with the State of Michigan or the owner,
as may be necessary to assure to the city the collection of its taxes, special
assessments, charges and any interest thereon which are levied against any lot
or parcel of real property or to protect the lien of the city therefor, and may
hold, lease, or sell the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city to
assure the collection of its taxes or the protection of its tax or other liens
shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. The Council may adopt any ordinance
which may be necessary to make this section effective.
Statutory reference:
   Return of delinquent taxes, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.55 et seq.
SECTION 8.23. COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES.
   All taxes, assessments, and charges upon real property on the tax roll,
together with collection charges and interest added thereto, remaining
uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when
the roll was received by him shall be subject to one of the following
procedures:
   (1)   The real property against which such taxes, assessments, and charges
are assessed shall be subject to disposition, sale, and redemption for the
enforcement and collection of the tax lien against the same in the method and
manner which may be provided by ordinance. The Council may provide by ordinance
the procedure for the sale and redemption of real property for such unpaid
taxes, assessments, and charges, together with collection charges and interest
added thereto, by judicial sale on petition filed in behalf of the city. Such
procedure shall correspond substantially to the procedure provided by law for
the sale by the State of tax delinquent real property and redemption therefrom,
except that the acts performed by state and county officers shall be performed
by appropriate city officers and that city tax sales shall be held not less
than thirty nor more than ninety days prior to the dates of corresponding tax
sales under the general law.
   (2)   If no ordinance is in effect pursuant to subsection (1) of this
section, such taxes, assessments, and charges, together with any collection
charges and interest added thereto, shall be returned to the County Treasurer,
to the extent and in the same manner and with like effect as provided by law
for returns by township treasurers of township and county taxes. The taxes,
assessments, and charges, together with any collection charges and interest
added thereto, thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other
taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected in accordance with law,
and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are
assessed until paid.
Statutory reference:
   Return of delinquent taxes, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.55 et seq.
SECTION 8.24. DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTY HELD BY CITY FOR TAXES.
   When the city has acquired any interest in property to protect the city's
tax lien thereon, the owner of any interest therein, by fee title, as
mortgagee, or as vendor or vendee under a land contract shall have the right to
purchase the city's interest therein, upon payment to the city of the amount of
money which the city has invested therein in the form of taxes, special
assessments, charges, fees, penalties, interest, and costs and expenses paid by
the city to acquire and protect its interest in such property. After the lapse
of 90 days after the date the city acquired title to any such property, the
Council may remove the same from the market by determining that such property
is needed for and should be devoted to public purposes, naming such purposes,
or may sell the same at a price which shall be not less than its market value,
as determined and certified to the Council by the Assessor or by 2 competent
real estate appraisers selected by the Council.
CHAPTER 9. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
SECTION 9.1. GENERAL POWER RELATIVE TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Council shall have the power to make public improvements within the
city. As to public improvements which are of such a nature as to benefit
especially any property or properties within a district, the Council shall have
the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part of the
expense of any such public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment
upon such property, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived.
Statutory reference:
   Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of public improvements,
see M.C.L.A. § 117.4d
   Power re assessments, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5
SECTION 9.2. DETAILED PROCEDURE TO BE FIXED BY ORDINANCE.
   The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment
procedure governing the initiation of public improvement projects, the
preparation of plans and cost estimates, the creation of special assessment
districts, notices and hearings, making of special assessment rolls, the
correction of errors in such rolls, the confirming of special assessment rolls,
the number of installments in which special assessments may be paid[,] the
collection of special assessments, the making of additional assessments where
the original special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay the cost of the
improvement or the cost of the repayment of the principal of and interest on
money borrowed to pay for such improvement, refunds of excessive assessments:
Provided, That, when such excess is less than five percent of the total amount
of the assessment roll, the excess may be placed in the general fund: any other
matters concerning the making and financing of improvements [shall be] by the
special assessment method. Such ordinance shall include provisions for the
following:
      (1)   The procedure for filing petitions for public improvements;
      (2)   A survey and report by the City Manager concerning the need for,
desirable extent of, and probable cost of such proposed public improvement;
      (3)   A public hearing by the Council on the necessity of the making of
such public improvement with a publication of notice of such hearing;
      (4)   A resolution of the Council determining to proceed or not to
proceed with the proposed public improvement;
      (5)   A public hearing by the Council on the special assessment roll for
the project with a publication of notice of such hearing;
      (6)   A resolution of the Council confirming the special assessment roll
for public improvements and stating the date upon which the special assessment
therefor, or the first installment thereof, if installment payments be allowed,
shall be due and payable, the number of annual installments, if allowed (not to
exceed twenty years), in which the special assessment may be paid, and the rate
of interest to be charged upon such deferred installments;
      (7)   That no additional assessment for any public improvement which
exceeds 10% of the original assessment shall be made, unless such additional
assessment be reviewed at a meeting of the Council, for which meeting notices
shall be published as provided in the case of review of the original special
assessment roll;
      (8)   If, under item (4) above, the determination is to proceed
determining the probable life of the improvement, finally fixing the special
assessment district therefor, and ordering the Assessor to prepare a special
assessment roll therefor: Provided, That, if prior to the adoption of the
resolution to proceed with the making of the public improvement, written
objections thereto have been filed by the owners of property in the district
which, according to the City Manager's report, will be required to bear more
than fifty percent of the cost thereof, or by a majority of the owners of
property to be assessed, no resolution determining to proceed with the
improvement shall be adopted while such objections remain, except by the
affirmative vote of five members of the Council.
      (9)   Publication of notices required by this section shall be given in a
newspaper published in the city and by first class mail addressed to the owners
of the property to be affected according to the current assessment roll of the
city, which publication and mailing shall be not less than seven days prior to
the hearing to which it applies.
      (10)   In the event that funds are on hand or a revolving fund exists to
defray the expense of any public improvement prior to the completion thereof,
the special assessment roll therefor may be made within thirty days after the
improvement is completed and shall be based upon the actual cost thereof.
(Amended by electors 11-2-2004)
Code reference:
   Special assessments, see
Ch. 54
SECTION 9.3. RECONSIDERATION OF PETITIONS.
   In the event that the Council shall fail to make any public improvement
petitioned for as required by ordinance during the calendar year during which
the petition is filed because of lack of funds therefor, such petition shall be
reconsidered by the Council prior to the first day of March of the succeeding
calendar year for the purpose of determining whether such improvement should be
made during such calendar year.
SECTION 9.4. CONDEMNATION COSTS.
   The cost of condemning or otherwise acquiring property needed for any public
improvement shall constitute a part of the cost of the improvement.
SECTION 9.5. LIMITATION ON SUITS AND ACTIONS.
   No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the
purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment or
additional special assessment, (1) unless, within thirty days after the
confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice be filed with the
Clerk of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it
is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (2) unless such suit or action shall
be commenced within ninety days after the confirmation of the roll.
SECTION 9.6. LIEN AND COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special
assessments thereon shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom
they are assessed and, until paid shall be a lien upon the property assessed
for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges which may
accrue thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as that
created by this Charter for city taxes and shall be treated as such in all
procedures for the collection of special assessments and all collection fees or
charges and interest which may have been added or accumulated thereto.
SECTION 9.7. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS.
   Moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be
credited to a special assessment account, and shall be used to pay the special
assessment portion of the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was
levied and of expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the
principal of and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive
assessments, if refunds be authorized.
SECTION 9.8. CERTAIN POSTPONEMENTS OF PAYMENTS.
   The Council may provide that any person who, in the opinion of the Assessor
and not less than five members of the Council, by reason of poverty is unable
to contribute toward the cost of the making of a public improvement, may
execute to the city an instrument creating a lien for the benefit of the city
on all or any part of the real property owned by him and benefitted by any
public improvement, which lien will mature and be effective from and after the
execution of such instrument, shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds of
Eaton County, and shall not be discharged or released until the terms thereof
are met in full. The Council shall establish the procedure for making this
section effective.
SECTION 9.9. ALL REAL PROPERTY LIABLE FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   All real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, shall
be liable for the cost of public improvements benefitting such property, unless
specifically exempted from special assessments by law.
SECTION 9.10. HAZARDS AND NUISANCES.
   When any lot, or premises, building or structure within the city, because of
age of dilapidation, the accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled
growing of noxious weeds, or because of any other condition or happening
becomes, in the opinion of the Council, a public nuisance or hazard which is
dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or
of those residing or habitually going near such lot or premises, or such
building, or structure, the Council may, after investigation, give notice to
the owner or owners of the land upon which such nuisance or hazard exists or to
the owner or occupant of the land or the building or structure itself, by
posting notice upon the premises, by personal service, or by registered or
certified mail addressed to the address set forth in the current assessment
roll of the city, or the records of the Assessor, specifying the nature of the
nuisance or hazard and requiring such owner or occupant to alter, repair, tear
down, abate or remove the nuisance or hazard within a time to be specified by
the Council which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance or
hazard. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the owner has
not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of
the land or of the building or structure itself is not known or cannot be
found, the Council may order such nuisance or hazard to be abated by the proper
department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, or
may do the work by contract or by hire, and the cost of such abatement may be
assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which
such nuisance or hazard is located, by special assessments which shall be due
and payable at the direction of the Council.
CHAPTER 10. BORROWING POWER
SECTION 10.1. MUNICIPAL BORROWING POWER.
   (A)   Subject to the applicable provisions of law, the city may borrow money
for any purpose within the scope of its powers or which may be permitted by
law, and may issue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, which
shall include, but not be limited to the following types:
      (1)   General obligation bonds for the payment of which the full faith
and credit of the city is pledged;
      (2)   Special assessment bonds which are issued in anticipation of the
payment of special assessments for the purpose of defraying the cost of any one
or more public improvements, which bonds shall be both an obligation of the
special assessment district and a general obligation of the city;
      (3)   Revenue bonds as authorized by law;
      (4)   Tax anticipation notes, which may be issued in anticipation of the
collection of taxes for the current or next succeeding fiscal years of the
city, or any other year permitted by law, in the manner and subject to any
limitations provided by law;
      (5)   Mortgage bonds, as authorized by law, for the acquiring, owning,
purchasing, construction, improving, or operating of any public utility which
the city is authorized by law to finance in this manner;
      (6)   Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the Motor
Vehicle Highway Fund or any other fund of the State which the city may be
permitted by law to pledge for the payment of the principal and interest
thereof, which bonds, if the law so permits, may also be a general obligation
of the city[;]
      (7)   Water main extension bonds, in an amount not to exceed one percent
of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city, for
the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged for the
refunding from time to time of moneys advanced or paid on special assessments
imposed for water main extensions as buildings are connected with such
extensions, which bonds shall be payable in not more than thirty years, with
interest thereon at a rate which shall not exceed six percent per annum;
      (8)   Calamity bonds, issued in case of fire, flood, or other calamity
for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of
municipal property, in a sum not to exceed three-eights of one percent of the
assessed value of the real and personal property in the city, which shall
become due in not more than five years.
   (B)   Whenever any portion of public improvements shall be assessed by or
charged to the city at-large and the balance of such cost assessed against the
property benefitted, the Council may provide for the payment of the city's
portion of such cost in installments. In such case, bonds may be issued in
anticipation of the payment of the amount assessed against the city at-large,
the same as they may be issued in anticipation of the payment of the amount
assessed against the benefitted property[.] In such case, the Council shall
appropriate in each fiscal year an amount which is sufficient to pay the
principal of and interest on such bonds which are required to be paid during
that year. Such bonds may be included as a part of a total issue of bonds for
the public improvement to which they apply and need not be separated from bonds
issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments assessed against
the benefitted property.
   (C)   Bonds may be issued in anticipation of the collection of special
assessments levied with respect to two or more public improvements, but no
special assessment district shall be required to pay the obligation of any
other special assessment district and the ordinance or resolution creating such
districts shall so provide.
   (D)   All collections on special assessment rolls or on any combination of
such rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund and shall be used for the
purpose for which levied, and for the payment of the principal of and interest
on bonds issued in anticipation of such special assessments. If there is any
deficiency in any special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal
or interest to be paid therefrom, there shall be levied a tax upon the real and
personal property in the city for that purpose. Moneys may be advanced from the
general funds of the city to meet such deficiency, and shall be replaced in the
general funds when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor.
   (E)   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face
a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and the
proceeds thereof shall not be used for any other purpose, except that, whenever
the proceeds of any bond issue, or a part thereof, remain unexpended and
unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the Council
may, by the confirming vote of not less than five members, authorize the use of
such unexpended and unencumbered funds:
      (1)   For the retirement of such bond issue, or
      (2)   If such bond issue has been fully retired, then for the retirement
of other bonds or obligations of the city provided for by this section:
Provided, That in the case of special assessment bonds, such funds shall be
refunded to the owners of property against which special assessments therefor
were made, or placed in the general fund of the city in accordance with the
provisions of Section
10.2 of this Charter, or
      (3)   For such other purposes as may be permitted by law, subject to the
proviso in paragraph (2) above; or
      (4)   If such funds cannot be so used, then in any manner approved by the
vote of not less than five members of the Council.
   (F)   No bond or other evidence of indebtedness, regardless of type or
purpose, shall bear interest at a rate exceeding that fixed by law.
   (G)   All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest
coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Treasurer. A
complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness
shall be kept by the Treasurer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence
of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled" or otherwise defaced by
the Treasurer to indicate payment. After all of the bonds of any issue have
been paid, they may be destroyed by cremation, with a proper certificate of
such destruction filed in the office of the Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds
therefor, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4a(1)
   Municipal Finance Act, see M.C.L.A. § 141.210
SECTION 10.2. LIMITATIONS UPON BORROWING POWER.
   (A)   The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not
at any time exceed ten percent of the assessed value of all the real and
personal property in the city: Provided, That, in computing such net bonded
indebtedness, there shall be excluded money borrowed under the provisions of
Section
10.1.(A), clauses (2), (3), and (4) of this chapter, and any other bonds which
are not, by law, subject to the debt limitation of the city. The resources of
any debt retirement or sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any
outstanding bonds which are subject to the debt limitation here established,
shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness.
   (B)   No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that
for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold
within three years after authorization such authorization shall be null and
void except when delay is caused by litigation or when a bond issue has been
authorized by the electors to be issued in two or more parts or series. In case
of litigation, the three year period shall start at the time of the filing of
the final judgment or decree. In case of bonds authorized to be issued in two
or more parts or series, the first part or series shall be sold within three
years after authorization and the final part or series shall be sold within ten
years after authorization.
Statutory reference:
   Limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.4a(1)
CHAPTER 11. SUPERVISORS
SECTION 11.1. NUMBER OF SUPERVISORS.
   The city shall be entitled to four representatives upon the Board of
Supervisors of Eaton County, until such time as the city may be entitled by law
to a larger number of representatives. One of such representatives shall be the
Mayor, and one shall be the Assessor. If the Mayor cannot serve regularly in
such capacity, a member of the Council designated by the Council shall serve in
his stead. The Mayor shall appoint persons who are familiar with the city's
business to fill the remaining positions to which the city is entitled on the
Board of Supervisors, subject to confirmation by the Council. Appointed
Supervisors shall be appointed and confirmed during the month of December in
even numbered years, to assume office on the first day of January following. In
the event that the city becomes entitled to any additional representative, such
appointment shall be made forthwith after such eligibility occurs for a term
ending on the first day of January of the next odd numbered year. Except in
such first instances, the term of office of each such Supervisor shall be for
two years, commencing on and dating from the first day of January following his
appointment.
Editor's note:
   The election and appointment of members of the Board of Supervisors is now
done pursuant to M.C.L.A. §§ 46.401 et seq.
SECTION 11.2. TEMPORARY ABSENCES OR INABILITY TO SERVE.
   In case of the temporary absence or inability of any city member of the
Board of Supervisors, including the Mayor to serve or perform the duties of his
office as a representative on the Eaton County Board of Supervisors, the Mayor
shall designate and certify to the Board of Supervisors another city officer or
an elector of the city having the qualifications required by this Charter of
elective officers to serve in his stead during the period of such temporary
absence or inability.
SECTION 11.3. DUTIES OF CITY SUPERVISORS.
   Supervisors shall perform the duties required to be performed by members of
Boards of Supervisors under the general laws of the state.
SECTION 11.4. COMPENSATION OF SUPERVISORS.
   Each Supervisor shall be entitled to retain any compensation and mileage
paid to him by the county as a member of its Board of Supervisors.
CHAPTER 12. MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION 12.1. MUNICIPAL COURT CREATED.
   The Municipal Court of the City of Charlotte created and existing under the
prior Charter of the city is hereby abolished and a new municipal court is
hereby created under and to be governed by the provisions of the Michigan
Uniform Municipal Court Act, being Act No. 5, P.A., 1956, as amended. The
Municipal Court shall be presided over by a municipal Judge who is an attorney
and counselor at law, licensed to practice in the State of Michigan. Such court
shall be known and designated as the "Municipal Court of the City of
Charlotte."
SECTION 12.2. ASSOCIATE MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   The Council may provide for the office of Associate Municipal Judge in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Act No. 109 of the Public Act
of 1947.
SECTION 12.3. LEGAL PRACTICE OF JUDGE.
   The Municipal Judge is not prohibited by law to practice law. He should,
therefore, give heed to and always bear in mind Cannon No. 31 of the Judicial
Code of Ethics, adopted by the Michigan Supreme Court. Neither he nor the
Associate Municipal Judge, nor any partner of the Municipal Judge, shall
practice law in any manner inconsistent with Act No. 5, P.A., 1956, as amended.
Editor's note:
   The Municipal Court was abolished by M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
SECTION 12.4. COMPENSATION OF MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   The Municipal Judge shall be compensated by the City of Charlotte by a
salary in such sum and in such manner as the Council shall determine. No action
of the Council determining the salary of the Municipal Judge shall be taken
less than thirty days before the last day of filing nominating petitions for
election to that office at the next regular city election. The compensation of
the Municipal Judge shall remain as fixed by the Council until changed as in
this section provided.
   (B)   The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be in lieu of all fees, both
in civil and criminal cases, to which the Municipal Judge might be entitled,
but for the provisions of this section. Such fees in civil cases, shall be
collected by the Municipal Judge and turned over by him to the Treasurer on the
first and fifteenth day of each month, or as otherwise required by law. The
Municipal Judge shall turn over to the Treasurer all fines and costs collected
by him for violations of this Charter and of the ordinances of the city. He
shall account for and turn over to the County Treasurer of Eaton County all
fines and costs received by him in connection with State criminal cases in the
manner and with like effect as provided by law relative thereto and shall pay
the same over to the City Treasurer when the same are received by him from said
County Treasurer.
SECTION 12.5. JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall have the same powers, jurisdiction, and
duties as are or may be set forth in Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of 1956.
   (B)   The Municipal Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction in the trial of
actions involving violations of this Charter and of ordinances of the city,
subject to appeals therefrom to the Circuit Court for the County of Eaton and
the Supreme Court.
   (C)   The Municipal Court shall have such original jurisdiction as is
provided by law for justices of the peace and municipal courts under Act No. 5
of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, in civil and criminal actions, and, as
provided and permitted in that act, shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the
Circuit Court for the County of Eaton in all civil actions, and actions of
replevin, wherein the debt or damages claimed, or the value of the property
involved, as the case may be, does not exceed one thousand dollars. Should any
law permit the Court to have a higher dollar limit jurisdiction at any time,
the Court shall have jurisdiction to the amount of such higher limit, without
the necessity of amending this Charter or any action by the Council.
   (D)   The Municipal Court shall have the jurisdiction herein granted in all
townships throughout the County of Eaton.
SECTION 12.6. COURT CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Municipal Court. Such Court Clerk
and any Deputy Clerk or Clerks shall, by virtue of their office, be empowered
to administer oaths and do all things required of and permitted to them by law,
including Section 28 of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended,
subject to audit as in such section required.
SECTION 12.7. BONDS OF MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   The Municipal Judge shall give bond to the City and to the County of Eaton
in the sum of $1,000.00, each for the faithful performance of the duties of his
office and the requirements of law.
SECTION 12.8. CONSTABLE – COURT OFFICER.
   The Municipal Judge shall appoint a Constable subject to the confirmation of
the Council before such appointment shall be final. Such Constable shall serve
for an indefinite term and may be removed by the Municipal Judge. In all other
respects, he shall be subject to the general provisions of this Charter
concerning officers of the city. The Constable shall have all of the powers
conferred upon Constables, and shall do and perform all acts and duties
required of Constables, by law. At the request and under the direction of the
Municipal Judge, the Constable shall be the court officer of the Municipal
Court and shall be responsible to the Municipal Judge for the maintenance of
order in the courtroom and for the custody of violators of the provisions of
this Charter and of the ordinances of the city while such persons are in the
court. With the consent of the Chief of Police, the Constable may be one of the
members of the Police Department of the city. As his compensation, the
Constable shall be entitled to the fees to which constables are entitled by
law. In addition to such compensation, the Council may provide for the payment
of such additional salaried compensation as it deems proper. If the Constable
is a member of the Police Department of the city and receives a salary from the
city for his duties as a police officer, he shall not receive any additional
salary for his duties as a Constable.
SECTION 12.9. VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   The Court shall have power to establish a Violations Bureau, comparable to
the provisions of any law permitting the establishment of violations bureaus.
In addition to violations of the traffic ordinances, the said bureau shall also
assist the court in the disposition of such other ordinance violations which
may lawfully be handled by such Bureau, as the Council shall prescribe. Any
person who has received notice to appear in answer to any such violation may,
within the time specified in the notice, answer at the Violations Bureau to the
charge set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine, which fine cannot
be waived by the Bureau and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge, waiving
a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the
Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in court. Acceptance of the
prescribed fine and the power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be
complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a
receipt which so states. The creation of such a Bureau by the Court shall not
operate so as to deprive any person of the right to a full and impartial
hearing in court, either with or without a jury, should such person so choose.
SECTION 12.10. WARRANTS FOR ARREST.
   No warrant for any violation of this Charter or a city ordinance shall be
issued without the approval of the City Attorney, unless security for costs in
an amount approved by the Municipal Court be posted.
CHAPTER 13. ELECTIONS
SECTION 13.1. REGULAR CITY ELECTIONS.
   (A)   A regular city election shall be held in each odd numbered year on the
date set by law for the election of State and County officers in that year.
   (B)   The term of the Mayor shall be 2 years and the term of the Council
members shall be 4 years; provided, however, commencing with the election of
November, 2023, the term of the Mayor shall also be 4 years.
   (C)   At each regular city election there shall be elected a Mayor, one
member of the Council from each of the two wards of the city and one member of
the Council from the city at-large.
   (D)   In the 2005 election, the Mayor will be elected, as well as one
Counsel member from each ward and a Council member at-large, replacing those
Council members whose terms expire in 2005. In the 2007 election, the Mayor
shall be elected as well as one Council member from each ward and one Council
member at-large, replacing the remaining Council members whose terms expire in
2007.
(Amended by electors 11-2-2004; 11-8-2022)
Editor's note:
   The Municipal Court was abolished by M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for election of certain officers, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(a);
   Mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding
elections, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(c);
   Michigan election laws, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.1 et seq.
SECTION 13.2. SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the
Council, adopted at least forty five days in advance of such election. If a
special election is to be held on the date of any State primary or election,
such election shall be called in ample time for the giving of notice to the
County Clerk of questions to be voted thereat, as required by law. Any
resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such
election. Unless otherwise permitted by law, no more than two special city
elections shall he held in any one calendar year.
Editor's note:
   Special primaries and elections controlled by M.C.L.A. §§ 168.631 et seq.
SECTION 13.3. QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS.
   Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in the
State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next election
held in the city, shall be entitled to register as an elector of the city.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, see M.C.L.A. §
117.3(c);
   Qualifications for registration as elector, see M.C.L.A. § 168.492;
   Registration of electors generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.491 et seq.
SECTION 13.4. ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   All city elections for the election of officers shall be nonpartisan. The
general election laws of the State shall apply to and control, as nearly as may
be, all procedures relating to notices for, to registrations for, and to the
conduct of, city elections, except as such general laws relate to political
parties or partisan procedures, and except as otherwise provided by this
Charter. The compensation of all election personnel shall be determined by the
Council.
Statutory reference:
   Michigan election laws, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.1 et seq.
SECTION 13.5. ELECTION COMMISSION.
   An election Commission, consisting of the Clerk, the City Attorney and the
Assessor, is hereby created. The Clerk shall be chairman. The Commission shall
have charge of all activities and duties required of it by law relating to the
conduct of elections in the city. In the absence of a quorum, the member
present may create a quorum, as permitted by law. In any case where election
procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to
follow.
SECTION 13.6. NOMINATING PETITIONS.
   A person desiring to qualify as a candidate for any elective office under
this Charter shall file with the Clerk an official nominating petition
therefor. Official blank nominating petitions, in substantially the same form
as required by law for nonpartisan nomination petitions, shall be prepared and
furnished by the Clerk. Such petition shall be signed by not less than fifty
nor more than one hundred of the registered electors of the city. Such
petitions shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 5:00 o'clock in the
afternoon on the Tuesday following the first Monday in August. Before the Clerk
shall furnish a form of nominating petition to any person, he shall enter
thereon with typewriter or in ink the name of the candidate and the name of the
office for which he is to be a candidate. No petition which has been altered
with respect to such entries shall be received by the Clerk for filing.
Nominating petitions for the purpose of filling a vacancy shall so state in
connection with the name of the office for which they are to be used. If any
person signs his name to a greater number of petitions for any office than
there will be persons elected to that office, his signature shall be
disregarded on all petitions for that office.
Editor's note:
   Odd-numbered year election law, M.C.L.A. § 168.644a, controls this topic
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that Charter provide for nomination of elective officers, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(b);
   Nonpartisan nominating petitions, see M.C.L.A. § 168.544a
SECTION 13.7. APPROVAL OF PETITIONS.
   The Clerk shall accept for filing only nominating petitions on official
blanks issued by him containing the required number of signatures for
candidates having those qualifications required for elective city officers by
this Charter. Within five days after the filing of a petition, the Clerk shall
determine the sufficiency of the number of genuine signatures on the petition.
If he finds that any petition does not contain the required number of genuine
signatures, he shall immediately notify the candidate, in writing, of the
insufficiency of his petition. If the Clerk does not so notify a candidate, his
petition shall be deemed to be sufficient as to the number of signatures
thereon and not subject to challenge with regard thereto. No additional
signatures on any petition shall be received by the Clerk after the final date
and time fixed for filing nominating petitions.
SECTION 13.8. AFFIDAVIT OF QUALIFICATION FOR OFFICE.
   On or before the third day after the last day for filing nominating
petitions, each person for whom a valid, nominating petition has been filed, or
someone acting on his behalf, shall file with the Clerk an affidavit that he is
possessed of all of the qualifications set forth in this Charter for an
elective city office. Such affidavit shall be on a form provided by the Clerk.
If such affidavit be not filed as herein required, the candidate shall be
deemed to have withdrawn and his name shall not be placed on any election
ballot.
SECTION 13.9. FORM OF BALLOTS.
   The form, printing, and numbering of ballots used in any city election shall
conform, as nearly as may be, to that prescribed by law, except that no party
designation or emblem shall appear thereon. The names of qualified nominees for
each office shall be listed on the ballot under a separate heading for each
office and shall be rotated on the ballots as required by law.
Statutory reference:
   Arrangement of ballot, see M.C.L.A. § 168.706
SECTION 13.10. DELIVERY OF REGISTRATION BOOKS AND SUPPLIES.
   The Clerk shall be responsible for the custody and safekeeping of all
registration books and supplies. On election day, he shall deliver them to the
respective Boards of Inspectors of Election, taking their receipt therefor. For
such purposes, the services of the Police Department shall be available under
the direction of the Chief of Police, and for the return of election records to
the office of the Clerk after the closing of the polls and the tallying of the
votes cast thereat.
SECTION 13.11. ABSENTEE BALLOTS.
   The electors of the city shall be entitled to vote by absentee ballots at
any city election under the circumstances and in the manner provided by law.
SECTION 13.12. CANVASS OF VOTES.
   The Election Commission shall constitute the Board of Canvassers to canvass
the votes cast at all city elections. If any of such persons are candidates for
office at an election to be canvassed, such person shall not be a member of the
Board of Canvassers at such election, and the Council shall designate a person
to act in his stead. A majority of the members of such board shall be a quorum
for the transaction of the business of the Board. In the absence of a quorum,
the member present may create a quorum, as permitted by law. The Board of
Canvassers shall meet at the City Hall at 10:00 o'clock in the forenoon on the
second day following each city election, and publicly canvass the returns of
such election, and shall determine the vote upon all questions and
propositions, and declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and
which persons have been elected to office.
Editor's note:
   The Eaton County Board of Canvassers acts as the City of Charlotte's Board
of Canvassers pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 168.30a
SECTION 13.13. PERSONS ELECTED – TIE VOTE.
   Candidates receiving the highest number of votes for election to an office
shall be declared to have been elected to that office. If, at any city
election, the outcome cannot be determined because two or more persons received
an equal number of votes, the Election Commission shall name a date for the
appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the election of one
of them by lot. Should any person fail to appear, in person or by
representative, to determine the result of any tie at the time and place named,
such determination shall be made by lot in his absence, at the direction and
under the supervision of the Election Commission. Such determination shall be
final.
Statutory reference:
   Determination of election by lot, see M.C.L.A. § 168.851, 168.852
SECTION 13.14. RECOUNT.
   A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or upon any
proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the
State.
Statutory reference:
   Recounts, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.861 et seq.
CHAPTER 14. UTILITY FRANCHISES AND MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP
SECTION 14.1. PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES.
   All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter,
whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to
the right of the city:
      (1)   To repeal the same for misuse, or nonuse, or for failure to comply
with the provisions thereof;
      (2)   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service
maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency;
      (3)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
      (4)   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
      (5)   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the
Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the
public;
      (6)   To require the public utility to which any franchise is granted to
permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets,
alleys, and public places of the city by the city and other utilities insofar
as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable
rental therefor: Provided, That, in the absence of agreement, upon application
by the public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms
and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor;
      (7)   To require the utility to pay such part of the cost of improvement
or maintenance of the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city,
as shall arise from its use thereof, and to protect and save the city harmless
from all damages arising from said use.
Statutory reference:
   Permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, see M.C.L.A. §
117.4c, 117.4f;
   Mandates relative to public utilities, see Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, §§
24, 25
SECTION 14.2. LIMITATIONS ON THE GRANTING OF FRANCHISES.
   No franchise shall be granted by the city for a term exceeding thirty years
and no exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. Each franchise shall include
a provision requiring the franchise to take effect within one year after the
adoption of the ordinance granting it, except in the case of grants to take
effect at the end of an existing franchise. An irrevocable franchise and any
extension or amendment of such franchise may not be granted by the city, unless
the ordinance granting such franchise has first received the affirmative vote
of at least three-fifths of the electors of the city voting thereon at a
regular or special city election. An irrevocable franchise ordinance may be
approved by the Council, for referral to the electorate, only after a public
hearing has been held thereon and after the grantee named therein has filed
with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of the franchise.
No special election for such purpose may be ordered by the Council, unless the
expense of holding such election has first been paid to the Treasurer by the
grantee.
Statutory reference:
   Expenses of special elections to be paid by grantee, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5a
   Submittal to electors required if irrevocable, see Mich. Const. 1963, Art.
VII, § 25
SECTION 14.3. PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING FRANCHISES.
   Every ordinance granting a franchise, or right to occupy or use streets,
alleys, bridges, or public places shall remain on file with the Clerk for
public inspection in its final form for at least thirty days before the final
adoption thereof, or the approval thereof for referral to the electorate.
SECTION 14.4. SALE OR ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISES.
   The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to
use the same, unless the Council gives its consent. Nothing in this section
shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to
mortgage its property or franchise, nor shall restrict the rights of the
purchaser, upon foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except that such
mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and
provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 14.5. PLANS OF FACILITIES IN STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   The Council may, by ordinance, require, as a condition to the placing or
installment thereof, that each public utility conducting a business in the city
file with the city a duplicate copy of layout plans of pipes, conduits, and
other facilities which are to be placed on, under, or above the surfaces of the
city's streets, alleys, bridges, and public places.
SECTION 14.6. GENERAL POWERS RESPECTING MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES.
   The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted
to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend,
repair, and maintain either within or without its corporate limits, a hospital
and public utilities, including but not by way of limitation, public utilities
for treating and supplying water, and for supplying light, heat, power, gas,
sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the city
and its inhabitants, and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power,
gas and other public utilities and services without its corporate limits to an
amount not exceeding the limitations set by or in accordance with law. The
power to supply, as herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to
extract and process water, electricity, or gas from natural sources, to
manufacture the same, or to purchase the same from others.
SECTION 14.7. ADMINISTRATION AND OPERATION OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   The Council shall be responsible for the care, protection, preservation,
control, improvement, and extension of the utility plants and facilities of the
city, and shall adopt such ordinances and resolutions as are required therefor.
Such utility plants and facilities shall each be a department of the city, and
the management thereof shall be the duty of the City Manager. Such public
utility department shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter relating
to departments of the city, including such as relate to annual budgets and
financial accounting, and to the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager
may appoint a Director of the city utilities, with the approval of the Council,
and other administrative personnel as shall be required to carry out the
operation, maintenance, improvement, and extension of the said city utilities
and utility facilities.
SECTION 14.8. UTILITY CHARGES – COLLECTIONS.
   The Council shall fix the rates to be charged for all public utility
services of the city. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the
collection of public utility charges, and for such purpose shall have all the
power granted to cities by Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of 1939 [M.C.L.A. §§
123.161 et seq.] and Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933 [M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101
et seq.], as amended in each case. When any person shall fail, or refuse to pay
to the city any sum due on utility bills, the utility service or services upon
which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued by the city, and
suit may also be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 14.9. ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The cost of making the annual audit of the accounts of each public utility
of the city shall be defrayed from the funds of the utility.
SECTION 14.10. ANNUAL REPORTS.
   The annual audit of each public utility of the city shall show, as nearly as
possible, the financial results of the city ownership and operation of the
public service works of the city.
SECTION 14.11. PURCHASE OF ELECTRICITY, WATER, SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE.
   The city may purchase and resell electricity, water, and sewage disposal
services, or any one or more of them, from any person, municipal or private, if
such purchase may be deemed by the Council to be in the best interests of the
city and its inhabitants.
SECTION 14.12. DISPOSAL OF PLANTS.
   Except for purposes permitted by law, the city shall not sell, exchange,
lease, or in any other way alien or dispose of the property, easements, income,
or other equipment, privileges, or assets belonging to and appertaining to any
utility which it may own or acquire, unless and except such proposition shall
first have been submitted at an election held for that purpose in the manner
provided in this Charter, to the electors of the city and approved by them at a
regular city election by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting
thereon. All contracts, negotiations, leases, grants, or other forms of
transfer in violation of this provision, shall be void and of no effect as
against the city. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to
the sale or exchange of any article of equipment that is obsolete, worn out, or
useless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and
improved machinery or equipment.
CHAPTER 15. CONTRACTS
SECTION 15.1. CONTRACTING AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city
is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the
provisions of law.
   (B)   All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance
with the provisions of Section 15.2 hereof, shall be authorized by the Council
and shall be signed on behalf of the city by the Mayor and the Clerk.
SECTION 15.2. PURCHASE AND SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The Council shall establish, by ordinance, the procedure for the purchase
and sale of personal property. Such ordinance shall also provide for
centralized purchasing on behalf of the city. The ordinance shall also provide
the dollar limit within which purchases and sales of personal property may be
made without the necessity of securing competitive bids, and the dollar limit
and conditions within which purchases and sales of personal property may be
made without the necessity of Council approval and signature by the Mayor and
the Clerk. No purchase of personal property shall be made unless a sufficient
unencumbered appropriation is available therefor.
SECTION 15.3. LIMITATIONS ON CONTRACTUAL POWER.
   (A)   The Council shall only have power to enter into contracts which, by
the terms thereof, will be fully executed within a period of ten years, unless
such contracts shall first receive the approval of a majority of the qualified
electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special election. This
limitation shall not apply to any contract for services with a public utility
or one or more other governmental units, nor to contracts for debt secured by
bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the city by law.
   (B)   The city shall not have power to purchase, sell, lease, or dispose of
any real estate unless:
      (1)   The resolution authorizing the sale, lease, or disposal thereof
shall be completed in the manner in which it is to be finally passed and has
remained on file with the Clerk for public inspection for twenty-five days
before the final adoption or passage thereof, and unless,
      (2)   Such action is approved by the affirmative roll call vote of five
or more members of the Council, and unless,
      (3)   When the proposition is to sell any park, cemetery or any part
thereof, except when such park is not required under an official master plan of
the city, the proposition to sell, lease, or dispose of the same shall also be
approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors of the city voting thereon at
any general or special election.
   (C)   Except as provided by ordinance authorized by Section 15.2 of this
chapter, each contract for the construction of public improvements or for the
purchase or sale of personal property shall be let after opportunity for
competitive bidding. All bids shall be opened in public in the Council room by
the Clerk, or by the City Manager, at the time designated in the notice of
letting and shall be reported to the Council at its next meeting. The Council
may reject any or all bids, if deemed advisable. If, after two or more
opportunities for competitive bidding, no bids are received or such bids as
were received were not satisfactory to the Council, the Council may either
endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or may authorize the City Manager or
other proper official of the city to negotiate for a contract in the open
market. The second bid herein required may be waived by a vote of five or more
members of the Council.
   (D)   No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to the
city.
   (E)   No extra compensation shall be paid to any agent, employee, or
contractor after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into.
SECTION 15.4. BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH CITY.
   An officer or employee of the city who intends to have business dealings
with the city, whereby he may derive any income or benefits, other than such as
are provided as remuneration for his official duties or employment shall file
with the Clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of such
business dealings, and his interest therein. The statement shall be filed with
the Clerk not less than ten days before the date when action may be taken by
the Council or any other agency of the city upon the matter involved. The
statement shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council for the meeting
at which it is received and published in full therewith. In each case where the
type of dealings with the city is on a continuing basis, involving more than
one, or a sequence of transactions, described in the statement, each such
statement shall stand for and apply to such transactions for a period of one
year and may be renewed at the end of each one year's period for so long as
such transactions continue. Each such renewal shall be spread upon the
proceedings of the Council and published as in the case of the original
statement.
   In the event that the interest of any officer or employee of the city in any
business dealings with the city changes at any time, he shall file a statement
thereof, which shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and
published as herein required. Approval of any such business dealings shall
require a concurring vote of at least five members of the Council, not
including any member who is disqualified under Section 4.6(K) of this Charter.
Any business dealings made in violation of this section shall be void.
APPENDIX
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this appendix is to set forth the boundaries of the City of
Charlotte on the effective date of this Charter. It shall not constitute a part
of the Charter, but shall be included with each printing of the Charter with
the boundaries stated as the same exist on the date of such printing.
SECTION 2. BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY OF CHARLOTTE.
   In December 1991, the boundaries of the City of Charlotte were described as
follows:
   Part of Sections 6, 7, 8, 9, 18 and 19, T2N, R4W, Eaton Township, Eaton
County, Michigan, and part of Sections 1, 12, 13, 14, and 24, T2N, R5W, Carmel
Township, Eaton County, Michigan, described as: Beginning on the West line of
Section 6, T2N, R4W, at a point 600 ft. North of the SW corner thereof; thence
East 400 ft. parallel with the South line of said section; thence North
2,064.76 ft. parallel with said West line, to the E-W 1/4 line of said section;
thence East 3,306.65 ft. along said E-W 1/4 line to the NE corner of the W 1/
2 of the SE 1/4 of said section; thence South 1,906.58 ft. along the East line
of said W 1/2 to the Northwesterly R/W of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad;
thence Southwesterly along said Northwesterly R/W the following two courses:
Southwesterly 387.72 ft. along the arc of a 9,225.50 ft. radius curve concave
to the SE whose chord bears S 38°31'26" W 387.69 ft. to a point of tangency;
thence along said tangent S 37°19'12" W 540.35 ft. to the South line of said
section; thence East along said South line 1,903.93 ft. to the SE corner of
said section; thence South along the East line of Section 7, T2N, R4W, 2,342
ft. to the Southeasterly R/W of State Highway Temporary I-69; thence
Northeasterly along said R/W line 3,500 ft. more or less to the Southeasterly
line of a parcel described in Liber 351 of Deeds on Page 404; thence
Northeasterly along said line to the N-S 1/4 line of Section 8, T2N, R4W;
thence South along said quarter line to the E-W 1/4 line of said section;
thence East, 1,318.25 ft. along the E-W 1/4 line of said section to the West
line of the E ½ of the NE 1/4 of said section; thence North 1,161.50 ft. along
said line to a line 1,485 ft. South of and parallel with the North line of said
section; thence East 440 ft. along said parallel line; thence North 180 ft.
along a line parallel with the N-S 1/4 line of said section; thence East 330
ft. along a line parallel with the North line of said section; thence N
33°11'21" E 954.08 ft.; thence N 0°43'27" E 500 ft. to said North section line;
thence East 45 ft. along said North line to the NE corner of said section;
thence South 264 ft. along the West line of Section 9, T2N, R4W; thence East
264 ft. parallel with the North line of said section; thence North 264 ft.
parallel with the West line of said section to the North line thereof; thence
East 294 ft. along said North line; thence South 183 ft. perpendicular to said
North line; thence East 758.3 ft. parallel with said North line; thence South
234.32 ft.; thence East 208.67 ft. parallel with said North line; thence North
417.33 ft. to said North line; thence East 181.87 ft. along said North line;
thence South 600 ft. parallel with the N-S 1/4 line of said section; thence
East 600 ft. parallel with the North line of said section to a line 330 ft.
West of and parallel with the N-S 1/4 line of said section; thence South
3,377.81 ft. along said parallel line to the South line of the N 1/2 of the SW
1/4 of said section; thence West 2,304.59 ft. along said South line to the West
line of said section, also being the East line of Section 8, T2N, R4W; thence
West 1,317.63 ft. along the South line of the N 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said
section to the West line of the NE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 thereof; thence North
638.09 ft. along said West line; thence West 350 ft. parallel with the E-W 1/
4 line of said section; thence North 350 ft. parallel with the West line of the
NE 1/4 of the SE 1/4; thence West 968.10 ft. parallel with the E-W 1/4 line of
said section to the NE corner of the South 35 acres of the E 1/4 of the SW 1/
4 of said section; thence West 660 ft. more or less along the North line of
said South 35 acres; thence South 2,310 ft. more or less along the West line of
said South 35 acres to the South line of said section; thence West 1,320 ft.
more or less to the East line of the W 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of said section;
thence North 2,640 ft. more or less along said East line to the E-W 1/4 line of
said section; thence West 660 ft. more of less to the W 1/4 corner of said
section; thence South 1,320 ft. more or less to the South line of the N of the
SE 1/4 of Section 7, T2N, R4W; thence West along said South line to a point
287.7 ft. East of the West line of the E 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said section,
said point being on the Westerly R/W line of Interstate Highway I-69; thence
along said Westerly R/W line the following three courses: S 0°16'14" E 202.40
ft. to a point on the arc of a curve concave to the East whose chord bears S
2°53'49" W420.25 ft.; thence Southerly 420.44 ft. along said curve to a point
of tangency; thence S 0°16'46" E 401.13 ft. to the relocated Northerly R/W line
of Island Highway; thence S 89°53'46" W 129.65 ft. along said R/W line to a
point 1,462.43 ft. East and 297.10 ft. North of the S 1/4 corner of said
section; thence N 0°29'07" E 161.63 ft.; thence N 54°33'39" W to the West line
of the E 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said section; thence South along said West line
to the South line of said section; thence South 2,640 ft. more or less along
the East line of the W 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of section 18, T2N, R4W; thence South
2,640 ft. more or less along the East line of the W 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said
section to the South line thereof; thence West along said South line to a point
327.50 ft. East of the N 1/4 corner of Section 19, T2N, R4W; thence South 425
ft. perpendicular to the North line of said section; thence East 62.50 ft.
parallel with said North line; thence South 215 ft. perpendicular to said North
line; thence East parallel with said North line to the Westerly R/W of
Interstate Highway I-69; thence along said R/W the following six courses: S
49°01'37" E 299.70 ft.; thence S 43°34'29" E 180 ft. more or less; thence S
0°17'21" W 360 ft. more or less; thence East 180 ft. more or less parallel with
the North line of said section; thence S 15°17'14" E 120 ft. more or less;
thence S 0°06'14 " W 1,525 feet more or less; thence West 200 ft. more or less
parallel with the E-W 1/4 line to the East line of the W 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of
said section; thence North 330 ft. more or less to the E-W 1/4 line of said
section; thence West 1,320 ft. more or less along said E-W 1/4 line to the N-
S 1/4 line of said section; thence South 2,640 ft. more or less along said N-
S 1/4 line to the S 1/4 corner of said section; thence West 2,640 ft. more or
less along the South line of said section to the SW corner thereof; thence N
1°53' E 83.82 ft. along the West line of said section to the SE corner of
Section 24, T2N, R5W; thence West 2,640 ft. more or less along the South line
of said section to the S 1/4 corner thereof; thence North 5,280 ft. more or
less along the N-S 1/4 line of said section to the N 1/4 corner thereof; thence
West 660 ft. more or less to the East line of the W 1/2 of the E 1/2 of the NW
1/4 of said section; thence South 2,640 ft. more or less along said East line
to the E-W 1/4 line of said section; thence West 1,985 ft. more or less along
said E-W 1/4 line to the W 1/4 corner of said section; thence N 0°00'40" W
2,567.58 ft. to the NW corner of said section; thence N 89°44'10" E 86.77 ft,
along the North line of said section to the center line of State Highway —78;
thence N 71°44' E 309.53 ft. along said centerline; thence N 87°17'18" W 466.05
ft.; thence S 2°42'42" E 221 ft. to the South line of Section 14, T2N, R5W;
thence S 87°17'18" W 528.50 ft. along said South line; thence N 2°55'41" W
2,657.12 ft. to the E-W 1/4 line of said section; thence West along said E-W 1/
4 line to the SW corner of the E 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of said section; thence
North 2,558.07 ft. along the West line of the E ½ of the NE 1/4 of said section
to the centerline of State Highway —79; thence along said centerline the
following two courses: Southeasterly 1,014.02 ft. along the arc of a curve
concave to the Southwest whose chord bears S 68°49'47" E 1,011.04 ft. to a
point of tangency; thence S 61°13'29" E 442.5 ft. more or less along said
tangent to the East line of said section; thence North 685.5 ft. more or less
to the NE corner of said section; thence East 1,980 ft. more or less along the
South line of Section 12, T2N, R5W, to the West line of the East 1/4 of the SW
1/4 of said section; thence North 2,640 ft. more or less along said West line
to the E-W 1/4 line of said section; thence East 660 ft. more or less along
said E-W 1/4 line to the N-S 1/4 line of said section; thence North 1,320 ft.
more or less to the North line of the S 1/2 of the NW 1/4 of said section;
thence West 88.94 ft. along said North line to the Southwesterly R/W of the
former Michigan Central Railroad; thence Northwesterly along said former R/W to
the North line of said section; thence East along said North line to the former
Northeasterly R/W of said Railroad; thence Northwesterly along said
Northeasterly R/W to the North line of the S 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of Section 1,
T2N, R5W; thence East to the N-S 1/4 line of said section; thence South 1,320
ft. more or less to the S 1/4 corner of said section; thence East 2,640 ft.
more or less along the South line of said section to the East line of said
section, also being the West line of Section 6, T2N, R4W; thence North along
said West line 439.8 ft. more or less to the point of beginning.
   Also, a noncontiguous parcel of land lying in the W 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of
Section 8, T2N, R4W, Eaton Township, Eaton County, Michigan, described as:
Commencing at a point S 88°37'20" E 300.0 ft. from the N 1/4 corner of said
section and being on the East line of a 300 ft. wide by 20 ft. vertical height
restriction easement for Fitch H. Beach Airport; thence S 1°36'35" W277.15 ft.
along said East line for a point of beginning; thence N 30°16'02" E 157.57 ft.
along the nonprecision approach clear zone area line; thence N 68°15'35" W
80.48 ft. continuing along the nonprecision approach clear zone area line to a
point on the East line of a 300 ft. wide by 20 ft. vertical height restriction
easement for Fitch H. Beach Airport; thence S 1°36'35" W 165.97 ft. along said
East line to the point of beginning.
SCHEDULE
SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND STATUS OF SCHEDULE CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the
City of Charlotte under this Charter and provide the transition from the
government of the city under the previous charter to that under this Charter.
It shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time
required to accomplish that end.
SECTION 2. ELECTION TO ADOPT CHARTER.
   (A)   This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of
the territory comprising the City of Charlotte at the regular city election to
be held on Monday, April 2, 1962, between the hours of 7:00 o'clock a.m. and 8:
00 o'clock p.m. All provisions for the submission of the question of adopting
this Charter at such election shall be made in the manner provided by law. The
Council shall canvass the vote cast at said election.
   (B)   If, at said election, a majority of the electors voting thereon shall
vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, then the City Clerk shall
perform all other acts required by law to carry this Charter into effect.
SECTION 3. FORM OF BALLOTS.
   The form of the question of submission of this Charter shall be as follows:
Shall the proposed charter of the City of Charlotte, drafted by the Charter
Commission which was elected April 3, 1961, be adopted:
   YES                  NO
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER.
   If the canvass of the votes upon the adoption of this Charter shows it to
have been adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the Charter of the
city for all purposes on Saturday, July 1, 1962, at 12:00 o'clock a.m. except
as to such provisions as pertain to the composition of the Council.
SECTION 5. [CONTINUATION OF OFFICERS – ELECTION.]
   (A)   The elected officers of the city who held office on the effective date
of this Charter, shall continue to hold the offices to which they were elected
for the balance of the terms to which they were elected and shall conduct their
several offices subject to the provisions of this Charter.
   (B)   A regular city election for the election of officers shall be held on
the first Monday in April in the year 1964. At such election there shall be
elected one member of the Council from each Council district and one member of
the Council at-large, who shall serve for a term of one year. Thereafter,
members of the Council and the Municipal Judge shall be elected as in this
Charter provided.
SECTION 6. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Until otherwise provided by ordinance, regular meetings of the Council shall
he held in the established Council chamber in the City Hall on the second and
fourth Monday of each calendar month.
SECTION 7. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   Notwithstanding any other requirements or limitations contained in this
Charter, the persons who held the offices of City Attorney, Clerk, Treasurer,
Assessor, Supervisors and each other administrative officer of the city who
held office on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in such office
as though appointed under the provisions of this Charter, and shall perform
their several duties and, in all respects, be subject to the provisions
thereof. The term of all such officers who are elected or appointed for
definite terms shall not be shortened under the provisions of this section.
SECTION 8. FIRST BOARD OF REVIEW.
   The first members of the Board of Review created by this Charter shall be
appointed during the month of January 1963, and their terms shall be so
arranged that thereafter the term of one member shall expire in each year,
beginning with January 1, 1964.
SECTION 9. CITY SUPERVISORS.
   The Supervisors representing the city and its inhabitants under the previous
charter shall be and remain such Supervisors for the balance of the terms for
which they were severally elected or appointed and until their successors are
appointed or assume such office, in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter. The first appointive Supervisors appointed under this Charter, shall
be appointed and confirmed during the month of March in 1963 and shall assume
office at the organizational meeting of the Eaton County Board of Supervisors
in the following month of April.
SECTION 10. MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   The First Municipal Judge elected under this Charter shall serve for a term
beginning on January 1, 1968, and shall hold office for a term of four years
thereafter.
SECTION 11. COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.
   The compensation of elective officers set forth in this Charter shall apply
to officers elected or appointed after the effective date of this Charter and
the stating of any such compensation in this Charter shall not operate to
change the compensation of an officer after his election or appointment in
violation of the Constitutional prohibition thereof.
SECTION 12. COUNCIL ACTION.
   In all cases involving the transition of the city government from that under
the previous charter to that under this Charter, which are not covered by this
Schedule, the Council shall supply necessary details and procedures and may
adopt such rules, regulations, and ordinances as may be required therefor.
SECTION 13. NEW STATE CONSTITUTION.
   It is recognized that, at the time of the drafting and adoption of this
Charter, and on its effective date, there was in preparation and awaiting the
vote of the people of Michigan, a proposed new State Constitution. In so far as
such Constitution, if the same be adopted and becomes effective, is
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, such provisions shall be
subject to and governed by such constitution and general laws enacted in
compliance therewith and no amendment of this Charter shall be required to make
the provision of this section effective.
SECTION 14. VESTED RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   After the effective date of this Charter, the city and all its agencies
shall be vested with all property[,] moneys, contracts, rights, credits,
effects, and the records, files, books and papers, belonging to it under and by
virtue of the previous charter. No right or liability, contract, lease, or
franchise, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the time this
Charter became effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character shall be
affected in any manner by any change resulting from the adoption of this
Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All
taxes, debts, and liabilities due to the city from any person, and all fines
and penalties, imposed and existing at the time of such change, shall be
collected by the city. All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall
be continued in accordance with the terms thereof, subject to the cy pres
doctrine.
   RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION
   At a meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Charlotte held on the
29th day of January 1962, at the usual meeting place of the Commission, the
following members of the Charter Commission were present: Herbert Black,
Richard L. Davis, George F. Dean, Edward S. Elles, Clarence M. Hoedeman,
Franklin (Bud) Loucks, Wells Rauser, Don P. Smith, Duane E. Wertz.
   At such meeting the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Black
and supported by Commissioner Wertz.
   Resolved, That the Charter Commission of the City of Charlotte does hereby
adopt the foregoing instrument as the proposed charter of the City of
Charlotte, and the Clerk of this Commission is hereby instructed to transmit
the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the
provisions of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, for his
approval.
   The vote on the adoption of the resolution was as follows:
   Ayes: 9
   Nays: None
   Absent: None
               (s)   Bernadine Vaughn,
                  Clerk of the Charter
                  Commission of the City
                  of Charlotte, Michigan.
Attested by the following Commissioners:
   (s)   Richard L. Davis
   (s)   George F. Dean
   (s)   Edward S. Elles
   (s)   Clarence M. Hoedeman
   (s)   Franklin Loucks
   (s)   Wells H. Rauser
   (s)   Don P. Smith
   (s)   Duane E. Wertz
   (s)   Herbert R. Black, Chairman
   The said Commissioners having attested as to said resolution, as above set
forth and, also, having attested the copy to be signed by the Governor, the
meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman.
   I hereby approve the foregoing Charter of the City of Charlotte, Michigan.
         (s)   John B. Swainson Governor of the State of Michigan
Dated March 6, 1962
   AMENDMENT TO THE PROPOSED CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CHARLOTTE
   At a meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Charlotte called by
the Chairman, a quorum being present, the following amendment to the Schedule
Chapter of the proposed charter for said city, as adopted by the Charter
Commission on January 29, 1962, was adopted:
   Amend the Schedule Chapter by adding a new section thereto to be numbered
Section 15 and to read as follows:
SECTION 15. PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT.
   The provisions of the first sentence of Section 3.3 of this Charter shall
not apply to, or affect persons holding an administrative city office at the
time this Charter became effective.
   I certify that the foregoing Section 15 is a true copy of the amendment
adopted as above stated.
Dated: March 20, 1962.
               Bernadine Vaughn,
               City Clerk and Clerk of the
               Charter Commission
   I hereby approve the foregoing amendment to the Schedule Chapter of the
proposed charter for the City of Charlotte which was approved by me on March 6,
1962.
Dated: March 22, 1962.
            John B. Swainson,
            Governor of the State of Michigan
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1   Code designated and cited
   
1-2   Definitions and rules of construction
   
1-3   Interpretation per state acts
   
1-4   Application to territorial boundaries.
   
1-5   Captions
   
1-6   References and notes
   
1-7   Application to future legislation
   
1-8   Rules of severability
   
1-9   Reference to other sections
   
1-10   Reference to offices
   
1-11   Certain provisions saved from repeal
   
1-12   Supplementation of Code
   
1-13   Enforcement official or agent
   
1-14   Conflicting regulations
   
1-15   Notice
   
1-16   General penalty
   
1-17   Misdemeanor; municipal civil infraction
§ 1-1 CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of
Ordinances, City of Charlotte, Michigan."
(1993 Code, § 1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Codification authority, see M.C.L.A. § 117.51
§ 1-2 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they
are inconsistent with the intent of the Council or the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Charlotte, Michigan, effective July 1,
1962, and shall include any amendment to such Charter.
   CITY. The City of Charlotte, Michigan.
   CODE or THIS CODE. The Code of Ordinances, City of Charlotte, Michigan, as
designated in §
1-1 and as modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new chapters,
articles, divisions or sections.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided
in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in
days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded;
when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday,
from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded, except for parking tickets.
   COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Charlotte.
   COUNTY or THIS COUNTY. The County of Eaton in the State of Michigan.
   GENDER. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   GENERAL TERMS. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not
to be limited to the class enumerated, unless expressly so limited.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give joint authority to 3 or more
public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such  authority
to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise
expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority.
   M.C.L.A., M.S.A. The abbreviations refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws
Annotated and Michigan Statutes Annotated, respectively, as amended.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
   OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION OR OTHER AGENCY. Whenever
any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the City of Charlotte, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of
this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency
of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency
shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or
agency or any deputy or authorized subordinate.
   PERSON. The word PERSON and its derivatives and the word WHOEVER shall
include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate
body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   SHALL/MAY. Whenever the word SHALL appears in this Code, it shall be
considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided. MAY is
permissive.
   STATE or THIS STATE. The State of Michigan.
   TENSE. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as
the present and past.
(1993 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Rules of construction, see M.C.L.A. §§ 8.3 et seq.
§ 1-3 INTERPRETATION PER STATE ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public
Acts of Michigan.
(1993 Code, § 1-3)
§ 1-4 APPLICATION TO TERRITORIAL BOUNDARIES.
   All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial
boundaries of the municipal corporation and any territory over which the
municipal corporation shall have legal jurisdiction.
(1993 Code, § 1-4)
§ 1-5 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this Code, such as the chapter, article,
division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and
shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section and do not limit the
subject matter.
(1993 Code, § 1-5)
§ 1-6 REFERENCES AND NOTES.
   Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's
notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the
text of any section.
(1993 Code, § 1-6)
§ 1-7. APPLICATION TO FUTURE LEGISLATION.
   All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future
legislation, shall apply to ordinances adopted that amend or supplement this
Code, unless otherwise specifically provided.
(1993 Code, § 1-7)
§ 1-8 RULES OF SEVERABILITY.
   Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible,
subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be severable, and the invalidity
of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection shall not be
construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division,
section or subsection of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 1-8)
§ 1-9 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section of this Code,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(1993 Code, § 1-9)
§ 1-10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public officer shall be deemed to apply to any office,
officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or functions
contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or
change in the official title of the functionary.
(1993 Code, § 1-10)
§ 1-11 CERTAIN PROVISIONS SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the
following when not inconsistent with this Code:
      (1)   Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established
prior to the effective date of the Code;
      (2)   Any ordinance levying annual taxes;
      (3)   Any ordinance appropriating money;
      (4)   Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of
money;
      (5)   Any ordinance establishing utility rates;
      (6)   Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to
certain persons;
      (7)   Any ordinance authorizing public improvements;
      (8)   Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property;
      (9)   Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory;
      (10)   Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication
of land to public use;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, and the like any street or
public way in the city;
      (12)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city;
      (13)   Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or
compensation of any city officers or employees;
      (14)   Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions
pertaining to specific streets;
      (15)   Any ordinance pertaining to zoning;
      (16)   Any other ordinance or part thereof which is not a general and
permanent nature;
   and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such
ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's office.
(1993 Code, § 1-11)
§ 1-12 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Council. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," and the like, as the case may
be, or to "sections                  to              " (inserting section
numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
(1993 Code, § 1-12)
§ 1-13 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL OR AGENT.
   If sections of this Code do not directly name a city official who is
responsible for carrying out enforcement provisions, the City Manager may
direct any one of its employees, officers or another agency to perform the
stated enforcement provisions.
(1993 Code, § 1-13)
§ 1-14 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where there is a difference or conflict between other provisions of this
Code or those contained in lawfully adopted county, state, city, federal or
other governmental agency rules, regulations, ordinances or laws, the most
liberal interpretation of the most restrictive standard shall prevail.
(1993 Code, § 1-14)
§ 1-15 NOTICE.
   Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous
structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if
performed by the city may be assessed against the premises under the provisions
of this Code, shall be served:
      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the
notice at his residence, office or place of business with some person of
suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   By mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to such owner
at his last known address; or
      (3)   If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises at least 5 days before the act or action concerning which
the notice is given is to take place. No person shall interfere with, obstruct,
mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any
city officer, unless permission is given by the officer.
(1993 Code, § 1-15)
§ 1-16 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any
particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Code or any rule, regulation or order adopted or issued in
pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such
fine, costs and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each act of
violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is
expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code,
whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
   (C)   The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating
condition, any injunctive relief or revocation of any permit or license.
(1993 Code, § 1-16)
Statutory reference:
   Limitation on penalties, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
§ 1-17 MISDEMEANOR; MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   (A)   Misdemeanor. The word MISDEMEANOR means an act or omission that is
prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, which is a crime under
this Code or other ordinance, that is punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 plus costs, penalty or forfeiture, or by imprisonments for not more than
93 days, or both, in the discretion of any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Municipal civil infraction. The words MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION mean
an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the
city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinance, and for
which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses
and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Public Act 236 of 1961, Chapter 87,
being M.C.L.A. § 600.8727, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a
lesser, included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal
offense.
      (1)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance,
plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under
Public Act 236 of 1961, Chapter 87, being M.C.L.A. § 600.8727, as amended, and
other applicable laws.
         (a)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular
municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil
fine for a violation shall be not less than $50, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each infraction.
         (b)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by
a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used
in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent) municipal
civil infraction violation of the same requirements or provision: committed by
a person within any 6 month period (unless some other period is specifically
provided by this code or any ordinance); and, for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise
specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as
follows:
            1.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall
be no less than $150, plus costs;
            2.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or
any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $300, plus costs.
      (2)   A VIOLATION includes any act which is prohibited or made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance, and any
omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any
ordinance.
      (3)   Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance
continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or
sanctions as a separate offense.
      (4)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent
or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance.
   (C)   When the performance of any act is prohibited by this Code or any
other ordinance of the city, and no penalty for the violation of the Code or
other ordinance is imposed, either in a section of the ordinance or a portion
of the Code, the doing of such act shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
(1993 Code, § 1-17) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995(1))
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
Section
Article I. In General
   
2-1   Approval of legal documents
   
2-2   Bonds
Article II. Council
   
2-31   Meeting place
   
2-32   Meeting dates
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Administrative Code
   
2-51   Division of the administrative service
   
2-52   Administrative officers
   
2-53   Assessor's office
   
2-54   Attorney's office
   
2-55   Clerk’s office
   
2-56   Fire Department
   
2-57   Manager’s office
   
2-58   Police Department
   
2-59   Public Works Department
   
2-60   Treasurer's office
Division 2. Vacancies in Administrative Offices
   
2-66   Vacancies in administrative offices
   
2-67   Absence of the City Manager
   
2-68   Designation of interim, acting City Manager
Division 3. Department Heads
   
2-76   Duties
   
2-77   Compliance
Division 4. Charlotte Volunteer Fire Department
   
2-81   Organization, constitution and bylaws
Article IV. Boards and Commissions
Division 1. Economic Development Advisory Board
   
2-101   Created; purpose
   
2-102   Composition
   
2-103   Terms of office
   
2-104   Compensation
   
2-105   Time of meetings
   
2-106   Conduct of meetings
   
2-107   Assistance of City Manager
   
2-108   Duties
   
2-109   Removal from office
   
2-110   Vacancy in office
Division 2. Local Officers Compensation Commission
   
2-111   Created; composition; appointment; terms of office; vacancies;
qualifications
   
2-112   Duties
   
2-113   Meetings and time of determination; quorum; Chairperson; compensation
Division 3. [Reserved]
Division 4: Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport Advisory Board
   
2-131   Created; purpose
   
2-132   Membership: terms, vacancies, removal
   
2-133   Regular and special meetings; minutes
   
2-134   Compensation
Division 5. Sustainability Advisory Committee
   
2-135   Purpose
   
2-136   Members
   
2-137   Terms of office
   
2-138   Organization
   
2-139   Compensation
   
2-140   Reports and initiatives
   
2-141   Sunset provision
Article V. Finance
Division 1. Generally
   
2-151   Payment of monies
Division 2. Taxation
   
2-161   Payment schedule
   
2-162   Tax abatements
   
2-163   Cost recovery
Division 3. Purchasing, Contracting and Selling Procedures
   
2-176   Definitions
   
2-177   Purchasing agent
   
2-178   General purchasing policy
   
2-179   Purchases or contracts under $10,000
   
2-180   Purchases or contracts over $10,000
   
2-181   Prohibitions
   
2-182   Emergency purchases
   
2-183   Inspection of materials
   
2-184   Sale of personal property
   
2-185   Sale of real property
   
2-186   Cooperative purchases
Division 4. Lost, Unclaimed, Recovered or Stolen Property
   
2-196   Request for disposal
   
2-197   Notice of public sale
   
2-198   Conduct of sale; deposit of moneys
   
2-199   Owner's claim
Division 5. Charges for Certain Emergency Response Services
   
2-200   Purpose
   
2-201   Definitions
   
2-202   Charges imposed upon responsible party
   
2-203   Billing procedures
   
2-204   Other remedies
   
2-205   Exemptions
   
2-206   Non-exclusive charges
   
2-207   Definitions for incidents involving drivers operating motor vehicles
under the influence
   
2-208   Purpose and intent
   
2-209   Liability for expense
   
2-210   Presumptions
   
2-211   Responsibility for payment of charges
   
2-212   Cost recovery schedule
   
2-213   Billing
   
2-214   Failure to pay charges
   
2-215   Medical treatment of those in custody
Article VI. Ethics
   
2-250   Definitions
   
2-251   Principles of ethical conduct
   
2-252   Implementation
Charter reference:
   Administrative service, see
Chapter 4;
   Borrowing power, see
Chapter 10;
   City legislation, see
Chapter 5;
   Council, see
Chapter 1;
   General finance, see
Chapter 7;
   Municipal powers, see
Chapter 2;
   Officers, see
Chapter 3;
   Taxation, see
Chapter 8;
   Special assessments, see
Chapter 9
Cross-reference:
   Advisory Park Board, see §§
38-31 et seq.;
   Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any
city officers or employees saved from repeal, see §
1-11(13)
   Community development, see
Chapter 22;
   Development plan and tax increment financing plan, see §§
22-46 et seq.;
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Chapter 30;
   Offenses affecting governmental functions, see §§
34-36 et seq.;
   Planning Commission, see §§
42-26 et seq.;
   Special assessments, see
Chapter 54;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Statutory reference:
   Freedom of Information Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.;
   Municipal Finance Act., see M.C.L.A. 141.2101;
   Open Meetings Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq.;
   Standards of conduct and ethics, see M.C.L.A. §§ 15.341 et seq.
   Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 141.421 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 2-1 APPROVAL OF LEGAL DOCUMENTS.
   The Mayor shall sign, the City Clerk shall attest to, the City Manager shall
approve as to substance and the City Attorney shall approve as to form all
contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the city, unless otherwise
provided for by law, the Charter, ordinances or the provisions of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 2-1)
§ 2-2 BONDS.
   (A)   Surety bonds, conditioned as required by Charter, §
3.7, shall be filed by the following officers of the city in not less than the
amounts indicated:
      (1)   Treasurer: $50,000;
      (2)   Manager: $25,000;
      (3)   Deputy Treasurer: $25,000;
      (4)   Clerk: $10,000;
      (5)   Deputy Clerk: $10,000.
   (B)   All other officers of the city and employees, except the Mayor and
Council members, shall each file a blanket bond in the amount of $2,500.
(1993 Code, § 2-2)
§§ 2-3 -- 2-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. COUNCIL
§ 2-31 MEETING PLACE.
   In accordance with Charter, §
4.7(A), the Council chamber and regular meeting place of the Council is hereby
designated and established as the premises located at 111 E. Lawrence Avenue in
the city.
(1993 Code, § 2-31)
§ 2-32 MEETING DATES.
   (A)   Meeting days. All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held
in the established Council Chamber in City Hall on the first and third Monday
of each calendar month, except where modified by resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   Ratification and reaffirmation of prior Council actions. The City
Council hereby ratifies and reaffirms all actions taken by the City Council at
any and all of the prior regular meetings of the City Council which were held
on the first and third Mondays of each calendar month as authorized by the City
Council in 2020.
   (C)   Further Council date changes. From the effective date of this
ordinance, the City Council may, by resolution, change the weeks of the month
in which Council meetings are to occur.
(Ord. 2021-11, passed 12-6-2021)
§§ 2-33 -- 2-50 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
§ 2-51 DIVISION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.
   The administrative service of the City shall be under the supervision and
direction of the City Manager, except as provided by the City Charter, and
shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which
shall be the responsibility of and under the control of an administrative
officer or department director, as listed below opposite such office or
department:
Office or Department Officer or Director
Office or Department         Officer or Director
Assessor's Office            City Assessor
Attorney's Office            City Attorney
Clerks Office                City Clerk
Treasurer's Office           Finance Director/Treasurer
Community Development Office Director of Community Development
Fire Department              Fire Chief
Manager's Office             City Manager
Police Department            Police Chief
Public Works Department      Director of Public Works
 
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-25-2018; Ord. 2021-08, passed 6-
17-2021)
§ 2-52 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   The administrative officers of the City shall be the City Assessor, City
Attorney, City Clerk, Treasurer, Fire Chief, City Manager, Police Chief and the
Director of Public Works.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-25-2018; Ord. 2021-08, passed 6-
17-2021)
§ 2-53 ASSESSOR'S OFFICE.
   The assessor's office shall be under the direction of the City Assessor, who
may be an employee of the City or whose services may be provided pursuant to
contract, and who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such
office in the City Charter, this code and state statutes.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008)
§ 2-54 ATTORNEY'S OFFICE.
   The attorney's office shall be under the direction of the City Attorney, who
may be an employee of the City or whose services may be provided pursuant to
contract, and who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such
office in the City Charter, this code and state statutes.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008)
§ 2-55 CLERK’S OFFICE.
   (A)   The clerk’s office shall be under the direction of the City Clerk, who
shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for the office of the City
Clerk in the City Charter, this code and state statutes. In addition, he or she
shall act as clerk for the Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   There is hereby established within the clerk’s office, the human
resources office. This office shall be charged with development of personnel
policies, assisting officers and department heads in the development of work
rules applicable to their departments, negotiation of collective bargaining
agreements, overseeing the process of recruiting, hiring, disciplining and
terminating employees, the development and implementation of employee training
programs, the preparation and administration of pay plans, and the
administration of employee benefit programs.
   (C)   Pursuant to
6.5(F) of the City Charter, the City Clerk shall perform the duties of City
Auditor. Such duties shall be performed under the supervision and with the
assistance of the City Manager and may be carried out by the City Clerk,
through the use of contractual services or through a combination of the two.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-25-2018; Ord. 2021-08, passed 6-
17-2021)
§ 2-56 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall be under the direction of the Fire Chief,
who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the
City Charter, this code and state statutes. In addition, the Fire Chief shall
have the responsibility for supervising the work of such other employees or
contractors employed by the city for the purpose of providing building and
property maintenance inspection services.
   (B)   There is hereby established within the Fire Department a building
division, which shall have the responsibility of providing, with Fire
Department employees and/or through the use of contractors, building and
property maintenance inspection services.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-
25-2018)
§ 2-57 MANAGER’S OFFICE.
   (A)   The manager’s office shall be under the direction of the City Manager,
who may be an employee of the City or whose duties may be provided by contract,
and who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in
the City Charter, this code and state statutes, and such additional duties and
responsibilities assigned to him or her from time to time by the City Council.
The City Manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations
adopted by the City Council and the provisions of this code are properly
enforced.
   (B)   There is hereby established within the manager’s office, the community
development office. The community development office shall be under the
direction of the Director of Community Development. He or she shall have
responsibility for activities related to a general program of community and
economic development, including, but not limited to, providing assistance to
city boards and commission engaged in community and economic development
activities, representing the City with other organizations in the community
engaged in community and economic development, representing the City with
business enterprises, overseeing the City’s cable television governmental
programming, and such other duties as are assigned to him or her from time to
time by the City Manager. In addition, the Director of Community Development
shall have the responsibility for administering the zoning ordinance, shall
function as the primary staff person assigned to assist the Planning Commission
and the Zoning Board of Appeals in carrying out their duties under said
ordinance, and shall perform such other duties as are assigned under said
ordinance to the building office.
   (C)   The City Manager is authorized to adopt such administrative
regulations in addition to, but not inconsistent with, the City Charter and
this code, as he or she shall deem necessary and proper to provide for the
adequate functioning of all departments. Such regulations shall comprise the
administrative manual.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-25-2018)
§ 2-58 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall be under the direction of the Police Chief, who
shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the City
Charter, this code and state statutes.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-25-2018)
§ 2-59 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   The Public Works Department shall be under the direction of the Director of
Public Works, who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such
office in the City Charter, this code and state statutes, including duties and
responsibilities associated with the City’s parks and recreation properties and
facilities. In addition, he or she shall have the responsibility for overseeing
the operations of the recycling center.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2008; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-25-2018)
§ 2-60 TREASURER'S OFFICE.
   The treasurer's office shall be under the direction of the Finance Director/
Treasurer, who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for the
offices of Treasurer in the City Charter, this code and state statutes. In
addition, he or she shall assist the City Manager in preparation of the annual
budget, and shall be responsible for reconciliation of the city's bank
accounts, for preparation of bills and the receipt of payments of utility and
other services rendered by city departments, and for payroll and related
functions for city employees.
(Ord. 2021-08, passed 6-17-2021)
§§ 2-61 -- 2-65 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. VACANCIES IN ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES
§ 2-66 VACANCIES IN ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES.
   In the case of a vacancy in office, the absence from the city of an
administrative officer or department director, or the inability on the part of
an administrative officer or department director to perform the duties of the
position due to illness, injury or other reasons, the City Manager may
designate an interim, acting administrative officer or department head, or
perform personally the functions of the office, until such vacancy is filled in
accordance with the City Charter; provided, however, that the provisions of
this section shall not be applicable to the attorney's office.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2009)
§ 2-67 ABSENCE OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   In the case of his or her own absence from the city, the City Manager may
designate an administrative officer or department director to perform the
duties of the office of manager. In making such a designation, the City Manager
shall establish such limitations on the authority of the individual appointed
to perform his or her duties as he or she deems appropriate.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2009)
§ 2-68 DESIGNATION OF INTERIM, ACTING CITY MANAGER.
   If the City Manager is unable to perform the duties of his or her office due
to illness, injury or other reasons, the City Council may designate an
individual to act as interim, acting City Manager, or may assign the duties of
the office to one or more administrative officers or department heads.
(Ord. passed 7-28-2009)
DIVISION 3. DEPARTMENT HEADS
§ 2-76 DUTIES.
   All administrative officers are responsible to the City Manager for the
effective administration of their respective departments and offices and all
activities assigned to them. The City Manager shall employ or appoint all
officers and employees, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or this
Code. The City Manager may set aside any action taken by any administrative
officer and may supersede him in the functions of his office but, as to
officers appointed by the City Council, such action shall be subject to
approval by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 2-76)
Charter reference:
   Administrative service, see
Chapter 6
§ 2-77 COMPLIANCE.
   All departments of the city shall comply with the following:
      (1)   All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices
in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the City
Manager in the case of departments responsible to him or in the case of other
departments with the approval of the officer or body to whom the department
head is responsible, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the
service and to the public;
      (2)   Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the
Manager as he shall direct;
      (3)   Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation
of all public records under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of
filing and indexing the records. No public records, reports, correspondence or
other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or
removed permanently from the files except in accordance with law.
(1993 Code, § 2-77)
§§ 2-78 -- 2-80 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. CHARLOTTE VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 2-81 ORGANIZATION, CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS.
   The Charlotte Volunteer Fire Department of the city shall be organized and
conducted as stated in the constitution and bylaws of said department. Changes
to these documents shall be approved by the 2/3 vote of the members of the
Volunteer Fire Department at a regular business meeting and shall be adopted
unless the City Council shall take action within 60 days after written
notification of the proposed change. If the City Council denies these changes,
or in any way proposes to alter the constitution and by-laws, 60 day notice
must be provided, in writing, a public hearing must be held, and no action may
be taken by the City Council without the affirmative vote of 5 of its members.
(1993 Code, § 2-81) (Ord. passed 1-10-2000)
§§ 2-82 -- 2-100 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD
§ 2-101 CREATED; PURPOSE.
   The Economic Development Advisory Board is hereby created pursuant to
Charter, §
6.15. The purpose of the Board shall be to create a shared vision of economic
development which will unify the Charlotte community. The Board shall promote
economic growth with the goal of balancing the need for such growth with the
protection and enhancement of the character and identify of Charlotte. The
Board shall periodically report its findings and suggestions to the City
Council. It is the goal of this Board to afford citizen participation in the
affairs of the government of the city. To meet this goal subcommittees may be
established to expand citizen participation and to carry out duties outlined in
this division.
(1993 Code, § 2-101) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(l))
§ 2-102 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall consist of 10 regular
voting members and 2 alternate members.
   (B)   Eight voting members shall be appointed by the City Council from the
general population of the city and shall have the qualifications required by
the City Charter for elective officers of the city.
   (C)   Two voting members shall be nonresidents of the city, 1 representing
Carmel Township and 1 representing Eaton Township.
   (D)   One alternate member shall be the Mayor and 1 alternate member shall
be the City Manager. The alternate members may be called on a rotating basis to
sit as regular members of the Economic Development Advisory Board in the
absence of a regular member and at that time may have the same voting rights as
a regular member of the Economic Development Advisory Board.
   (E)   The Economic Development Advisory Board may, from time to time, add
ex-officio members who shall be nonvoting and need not be residents of the
city.
(1993 Code, § 2-102) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(l); Ord. passed 1-8-1996(l); Ord.
passed 5-10-1999)
§ 2-103 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office for the members of the Economic Development Advisory
Board shall be 3 year staggered terms. Three of the members shall be appointed
for 1 year initially, 3 members appointed for 2 years initially, and 3 members
for 3 years initially. Thereafter all members shall serve 3 year terms.
(1993 Code, § 2-103) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(1); Ord. passed 1-8-1996(1))
§ 2-104 COMPENSATION.
   The members shall receive no compensation for their service to the city but
shall be allowed reasonable and actual expenses when incurred on behalf of the
city and approved by the City Council in advance of their incurrence.
(1993 Code, § 2-104) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(1))
§ 2-105 TIME OF MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Economic Development Advisory Board shall be open to the
public and shall be held the second Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the
City Hall community room.
(1993 Code, § 2-105) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(l))
§ 2-106 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   At its first regularly called meeting, the Economic Development
Advisory Board shall appoint a Chairperson who shall preside over all meetings.
   (B)   In order for the Economic Development Advisory Board to make decisions
or in any way conduct other business for which it has been created, it will be
necessary that 5 affirmative votes be cast.
   (C)   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question, or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact.
(1993 Code, § 2-106) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(1); Ord. passed 1-8-1996(1))
§ 2-107 ASSISTANCE OF CITY MANAGER.
   The Economic Development Advisory Board, with the approval of the City
Council, may request the City Manager for such services and data from the
various city departments as it may deem necessary.
(1993 Code, § 2-107) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(1))
§ 2-108 DUTIES.
   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall include within its various
duties the following:
      (1)   To develop a long-term plan for economic growth in the city;
      (2)   To plan and promote economic development specifically for the Sam
Combs Industrial Park;
      (3)   To plan and promote economic development generally within the
corporate limits of the city;
      (4)   To develop plans for reserving, retaining and improving existing
business and industry within the corporate limits of the city;
      (5)   To coordinate economic development with the various community
groups throughout the city;
      (6)   To report periodically to the City Council recommendations in
accordance with the above duties;
      (7)   To assume such other duties as the City Council shall from time to
time assign to it consistent with the purposes of the Economic Development
Advisory Board;
      (8)   Any regulatory issues related to economic development, including,
but not limited to amendments to: sign, zoning, nuisance, and licensing
ordinances;
      (9)   Utility extensions related to economic development;
      (10)   All industrial park lot sales;
      (11)   Any industrial development variances that come before the Zoning
Board of Appeals;
      (12)   Any existing or proposed industrial property annexations;
      (13)   Serve in an advisory capacity to other city boards and commissions
such as the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, local development
finance authority, and downtown development authority by allocating 1 member of
the Economic Development Advisory Board to serve on these boards.
(1993 Code, § 2-108) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(1); Ord. passed 2-8-1999)
§ 2-109 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Any member may, upon recommendation to the City Council, by a majority of
the Economic Development Advisory Board, be removed from office by the City
Council.
(1993 Code, § 2-109) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(1))
§ 2-110 VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   In the event that a vacancy in office shall arise within the Economic
Development Advisory Board, it shall be filled by the City Council within 60
days from the creation of such vacancy.
(1993 Code, § 2-110) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(l))
DIVISION 2. LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION
§ 2-111 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES;
QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Compensation Commission is hereby created which shall be
responsible for and have the duty of determining the salaries of all elected
officials.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of 5 members who are registered electors
of the city. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of a majority of the members of the City Council elected and serving.
   (C)   The term of office shall be for a period of 5 years. Members shall be
appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (E)   No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch
of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or
employee shall be eligible to be a member of the Commission.
(1993 Code, § 2-111)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create a Local Officers Compensation Commission, see M.C.L.A. §
117.5c
§ 2-112 DUTIES.
   The Compensation Commission shall determine the salaries of all elected
officials. The determination of the Commission shall be the salary of such
elected officials, unless the City Council, by a resolution adopted by 2/3 of
the members elected to and serving on the Council, reject them. The
determination of the Commission shall be effective 30 days following their
filing with the City Clerk, unless rejected by the City Council. If the Council
should reject the determination of the Commission, the existing salary shall
prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials, in
addition to salary, shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city
business and accounted for to the city.
(1993 Code, § 2-112)
§ 2-113 MEETINGS AND TIME OF DETERMINATION; QUORUM; CHAIRPERSON; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session
days in every odd-numbered year, and shall make its determination within 45
calendar days of its first meeting. As used in this subsection, SESSION DAY
means any calendar day on which the Commission meets and a quorum is present.
   (B)   A majority of the members of the Commission constitutes a quorum for
conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall take no action
or make any determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members
appointed and serving on the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members.
   (D)   The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation, but shall
be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties.
(1993 Code, § 2-113) (Ord. passed 2-13-2006)
§§ 2-114 -- 2-130 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. [RESERVED]
DIVISION 4. FITCH H. BEACH MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
§ 2-131 CREATED; PURPOSE.
   The Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport Advisory Board, established under the
authority of the Aeronautics Code of the State of Michigan, Act 327 of the
Public Acts of 1945, as amended, M.C.L.A.§§ 259.1 et seq., is hereby
established and shall provide advice and recommendations to the City Council,
the City Manager, and the Airport Manager on the maintenance, procedures and
policies concerning the operation of the Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport. The
Board shall function in an advisory capacity only and shall have no authority
to adopt, amend, modify, alter or rescind any rule, regulation or ordinance for
the management, governance or use of the Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§ 2-132 MEMBERSHIP: TERMS, VACANCIES, REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Board shall be comprised of 5 members appointed by the Mayor, with
approval of the City Council. In addition, 1 Council member, a representative
of Eaton Township appointed by the Mayor, and the Airport Manager (or City
Manager if none appointed) will serve as nonvoting, ex officio members.
   (B)   The term of appointment shall be 3 years. One member's term shall end
on April 1, 2009. Two other members' terms shall end on April 1, 2010. The
remaining 2 members' terms shall end on April 1, 2011. These staggered
appointments shall continue in future years.
   (C)   If any member, for any reason, resigns or relinquishes his or her
membership on the Board, the replacement shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
approval of the Council, to fill the vacancy for the remainder of that
unexpired term.
   (D)   Members of the Board serve at the pleasure of Council and may be
removed, with or without cause, at any time. In addition, if any member misses
3 consecutive meetings without a valid excuse, he or she shall be removed. The
Chairperson of the Board shall notify the Mayor, who shall appoint a
replacement, with the approval of Council.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§ 2-133 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS; MINUTES.
   (A)   The Board shall hold regular quarterly meetings at a date, place and
time to be set by the Board. A schedule of meetings adopted by the Board shall
be provided to the City Council, posted at City Hall, and available to the
general public through the office of the clerk.
   (B)   The chairperson of the Board or a majority of the members of the Board
may call a special meeting of the Board whenever, in their opinion, the
business of the Board may require it. Notice of special meetings shall be made
in conformance with the Michigan Open Meetings Act.
   (C)   At the first meeting following April 1 of each year, the Board shall
select a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary. The chairperson shall
assume the duties of the presiding officer immediately following his or her
election.
   (D)   A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum and
be necessary for the transaction of business. If a quorum is not present, those
in attendance shall be named and the meeting shall be adjourned.
   (E)   The meetings of the Board shall be conducted pursuant to the
provisions of the Michigan Open Meetings Act. The procedure for conducting the
meetings shall be controlled by Robert's Rules of Order.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§ 2-134 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services to
the city, but shall be allowed reasonable and actual expenses, when incurred on
behalf of the city and approved by the city Council.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
DIVISION 5. SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 2-135 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to § 6.15 of the City Charter, the Sustainability Advisory
Committee is hereby established for the purpose of involving Charlotte citizens
in researching and advising the City Council regarding policies and initiatives
designed to better enable humans and nature to exist in productive harmony
while addressing long-term economic, environmental and energy needs and trends.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 2-136 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Sustainability Advisory Committee shall consist of at least 5 but
not more than 7 voting members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council.
   (B)   One member shall be a member of the Downtown Development Authority,
the Economic Development Advisory Board or the Planning Commission.
   (C)   One member shall be a member of the City Council.
   (D)   One member may be a non-resident.
   (E)   The Committee shall have the authority to appoint ex-officio members
with the right to participate in discussion but without the right to vote.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 2-137 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of the voting members of the Sustainability Advisory Committee
shall be 3 years in duration; provided, however, that the initial terms of
office shall be established such that approximately 1/3 of the members’ terms
end on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 2-138 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Officers. During the first meeting in each calendar year, the
Sustainability Advisory Committee shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary.
   (B)   Meetings. The Sustainability Advisory Committee shall meet at least
bi-monthly. During its first meeting in each calendar year, it shall approve a
schedule of regular meetings.
   (C)   Bylaws. The Sustainability Advisory Committee may adopt such bylaws as
it feels are necessary for its organization and operation; provided, no
provisions of the bylaws shall conflict with any provision of the city’s
Charter or Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 2-139 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Sustainability Advisory Committee shall receive no
compensation for their services to the city but shall be allowed reasonable and
actual expenses when incurred on behalf of the city and approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 2-140 REPORTS AND INITIATIVES.
   (A)   The Sustainability Advisory Committee shall present to Council each 6
months a written report summarizing its activities.
   (B)   Within 12 months after its first meeting, the Sustainability Advisory
Committee shall present to City Council a report summarizing its
recommendations regarding specific programs or initiatives that it believes are
most practical in advancing the purposes for which the Committee was formed. In
evaluating possible programs or initiatives, the Committee may examine the
Michigan Green Communities Challenge or similar programs in use by other
organization or communities.
   (C)   Within 60 days following its receipt of the report referenced above,
the City Council shall, by resolution, accept the recommendations of the
committee with or without modification, identity specific programs or
initiatives that it wishes the Committee to pursue and identify such additional
reports as it desires the Committee to prepare.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 2-141 SUNSET PROVISION.
   This Division 5, §§
2-135 to
2-140 shall be null, void and of no force and effect 2 years from the effective
date of this division, March 16, 2014.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-24-2014)
§§ 2-142 -- 2-150 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. FINANCE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 2-151 PAYMENT OF MONIES.
   All monies belonging to the city shall be paid out in accordance with the
Charter, by checks drawn by the City Clerk and countersigned by the City
Treasurer.
(1993 Code, § 2-151)
§§ 2-152 -- 2-160 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. TAXATION
§ 2-161 PAYMENT SCHEDULE.
   All taxes, charges and assessments levied or spread by the city on any city
tax roll under authority of law which are paid on or before February 15 of each
year shall be collected by the Treasurer, plus a 1% administrative fee, but
without penalty or interest thereon. The Treasurer shall add to all such unpaid
taxes, charges or assessments, paid on or after February 15, a 4% fee,
consisting of a 1% property tax administrative fee and a 3% late penalty fee.
Such charges and interest so added shall be a lien against the property to
which the original taxes, charges or assessments apply and shall be collectable
in the same manner as the taxes, charges and assessments to which they are
added.
(1993 Code, § 2-161) (Ord. 2018-06, passed 11-26-2018)
§ 2-162 TAX ABATEMENTS.
   The city shall not grant any municipal tax abatements to any class of
housing projects within its boundaries to which Public Act 346 of 1966, § 15a
(1), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended, shall apply.
(1993 Code, § 2-162)
§ 2-163 COST RECOVERY.
   All residents and/or taxpayers of the city are hereby obligated to pay all
costs incurred to the city when a statement is rendered. These costs shall
include but not be limited to costs assessed for drinking and driving offenses,
fencing replacement, Freedom of Information Act requests, freezer removal,
frozen meter replacement, health insurance, plugged sewer charges, tree
replacement charges, and weed control charges, or miscellaneous services. Those
charges which remain unpaid for 90 days shall be and remain a lien upon the
real property of the individuals involved of the same character and effect as
the lien created by general law for county and school taxes and by the Charter
for city taxes. The lands upon which the lien is levied shall be subject to
sale therefor the same as are our lands upon which delinquent city taxes
constitute a lien. The City Treasurer is directed to place these lien charges
on the tax rolls of the individuals involved as provided by law. This section
shall not apply to water and sewer liens.
(1993 Code, § 2-163) (Ord. passed 4-22-2002)
§§ 2-164 -- 2-175 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. PURCHASING, CONTRACTING AND SELLING PROCEDURES
§ 2-176 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   AGENT. The Clerk, Deputy Clerk or any other officer or employee designated
by the City Manager to act as purchasing agent.
   CONTRACT. Includes contracts for services, subject to the exclusion
mentioned in this division, and shall include any type of service, leases for
grounds, buildings, offices or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other
city-owned personal property.
   LOWEST COMPETENT BIDDER. In determining the lowest competent bidder, and in
addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider the following, as
applicable:
      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      (2)   The ability to perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, within the time specified;
      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgement, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (4)   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
      (5)   The compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances related to
the contract or service;
      (6)   Demonstration of financial resources sufficient to perform the
contract or service;
      (7)   Quality and availability of the supplies or services;
      (8)   Ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service;
and/or
      (9)   The number and scope of conditions of the bid.
(1993 Code, § 2-176) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-10-2022)
Charter reference:
   City contracts, see
Chapter 15
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 2-177 PURCHASING AGENT.
   The purchasing agent shall prepare rules concerning purchasing, the
necessary forms therefor and a purchasing manual. Copies of the manual shall be
issued to all departments of the city, to the members of the Council and to the
Manager. The rules, forms and manual shall be in effect, except as and when
amended by the majority vote of the Council.
(1993 Code, § 2-177)
§ 2-178 GENERAL PURCHASING POLICY.
   (A)   Competitive prices for all purchases and public improvements shall be
obtained and the purchase made from or the contract awarded to the lowest
competent bidder.
   (B)   Formal sealed bids shall be obtained in all transactions involving the
expenditure of $10,000 or more or such other amount which may be established by
the Council by resolution.
   (C)   When other considerations are equal, contracts shall be awarded to
local vendors.
   (D)   If the lowest competent bids are for the same amount, the purchasing
agent shall negotiate with the low bidders for a reduced bid and shall make or
recommend purchase which shall appear to be to the advantage of the city.
   (E)   Competitive bidding may not be required in the following cases:
      (1)   Where the subject of the contract is other than a public work or
improvement; the product, material, or services contracted for is not
competitive in nature or no advantage to the city would result from requiring
competitive bidding; and the Council authorizes execution of a contract without
competitive bidding;
      (2)   Where the city elects to do, with city forces, work suitable for
contracting, provided such work is authorized by the Council;
      (3)   In purchasing any type of insurance coverage.
(1993 Code, § 2-178) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-10-2022)
§ 2-179 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS UNDER $10,000.
   (A)   Purchases of supplies, materials, services, or equipment, the cost of
which is less than $10,000 or such other amount which may be established by the
Council by resolution, may be made in the open market by the purchasing agent,
but such purchase shall be based on competitive prices and shall be awarded to
the lowest competent bidder, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   The agent shall solicit prices in accordance with the city's
Purchasing Manual.
   (C)   If the purchase is not made from the lowest bidder, a statement of the
reasons for placing the order with a higher bidder shall be prepared by the
agent, provided that when the amount of the transaction shall be $2,500 or more
or such other amount which may be established by the Council by resolution, the
agent shall report such purchase to the Council with a copy of the required
statement.
(1993 Code, § 2-179) (Am. Ord. passed 12-27- 2004; Am. Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-
10-2022)
§ 2-180 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS OVER $10,000.
   (A)   Any expenditure for supplies, materials, services, equipment,
construction projects or contracts obligating the city, where the amount of the
city obligation is in excess of $10,000 or such other amount which may be
established by the Council by resolution, must be approved by the Council.
   (B)   Sealed bids shall be requested by the purchasing agent by
electronically noticing the request, mailing a copy of the specifications or
requirements to such qualified vendors as may be known, and by posting a copy
of the request in the City Hall.
   (C)   Unless fixed by the Council, the agent with the concurrence of the
Manager shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid
and, in the case of construction contracts, the amount of labor and material or
performance bonds to be required of the successful bidder. Such security shall
be in the form of certified or cashier’s check or bond written by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state.
   (D)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the
notice requesting bids. Bids shall be opened in the presence of the agent and
at least 1 other city employee. Immediately following the opening, the bids
shall be examined, tabulated and made available for inspection.
   (E)   The full tabulation of all bids shall be submitted to the meeting of
the Council next following the opening of bids, together with the
recommendation of the agent, department head or City Manager. The Council in
its discretion may accept the low bid, reject all bids or determine the low bid
to be unsatisfactory and make the award to the lowest competent bidder.
   (F)   After the opening of the submitted bids, such bids may not be
withdrawn without forfeiture of the bid deposit. Deposits of security
accompanying the 3 low bids shall be retained until the contract is awarded and
signed, other deposits shall be returned to the unsuccessful bidders
immediately after the bids have been tabulated. If any successful bidder fails
or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within 10 days after being
notified of such an award or file any bond required within the same time, the
deposit accompanying his bid shall be forfeited to the city, and the Council
may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lowest bidder or
readvertise the project.
   (G)   At the time the contract of a construction project is executed by the
contractor, he shall file a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state, assuring payment of all just debts incurred in the
performance of the contract, including wages and material bills, and shall file
a performance bond when one is required in the bid specification. The
contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance and workers’
compensation insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Manager and shall also
protect the city from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason
of negligence of the contractor or his employees.
   (H)   The Council shall reserve the right to accept or reject any or all
bids as submitted if in the Council’s discretion such action would be in the
best interests of the city.
(1993 Code, § 2-180) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-10-2022)
§ 2-181 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements
of this division.
   (B)   The purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the city are
expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person
doing business or contemplating doing business with the city, any rebate, gift,
money or anything of value.
(1993 Code, § 2-181)
§ 2-182. EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   In an emergency or an apparent emergency endangering the public peace,
health or safety of the city, the purchasing agent, the Manager or any
department head may purchase directly any supplies, materials or equipment
which he deems immediately necessary upon approval by the City Manager. The
Manager shall advise the Council of the purchase no later than the next regular
meeting of the Council.
(1993 Code, § 2-182) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-10-2022)
§ 2-183 INSPECTION OF MATERIALS.
   The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials,
supplies and equipment purchased under this division shall rest with the
department head.
(1993 Code, § 2-183)
§ 2-184 SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whenever any city personal property is no longer needed for corporate
or public purposes, the property may be offered for sale in accordance with the
restrictions established in Charter, §
15.2 and in accordance with the adopted Purchasing Manual.
   (B)   The purchasing agent, City Manager, or designee shall have the
authority to initiate the disposal of obsolete or excess materials or
equipment.
   (C)   Sealed bids shall be taken if the estimated value of the materials or
equipment is $2,500 or more.
   (D)   Verbal bids may be taken if the estimated value of the materials or
equipment is less than $2,500.
   (E)   City Council approval is required prior to disposal if the estimated
value of the materials or equipment is greater than $10,000.
(1993 Code, § 2-184) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-10-2022)
§ 2-185 SALE OF REAL PROPERTY.
   Whenever any city real property or utility plant is no longer needed for
corporate or public purposes, the property may be offered for sale in
accordance with the restrictions established in Charter, §
8.24,
14.12, and
15.3(B).
(1993 Code, § 2-185) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-10-2022)
§ 2-186 COOPERATIVE PURCHASES.
   The Council or purchasing agent shall have the power to enter into purchase
contracts with and from other governmental agencies, should there be an
opportunity for a saving to the city or where the Council determines that it
would be in the best interests of the city. However, the Council shall give its
prior approval to such purchases, and all such purchases shall be in compliance
with the provisions of this division and the Charter.
(1993 Code, § 2-186)
§§ 2-187 -- 2-195 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. LOST, UNCLAIMED, RECOVERED OR STOLEN PROPERTY
§ 2-196 REQUEST FOR DISPOSAL.
   Whenever the Chief of Police has any lost, unclaimed, recovered or stolen
property, including money, which is unclaimed for 6 months after recovery, he
shall report the fact to the City Council and request authority from the City
Council to dispose of it as provided in this division.
(1993 Code, § 2-196)
§ 2-197 NOTICE OF PUBLIC SALE.
   The City Council shall act upon the request of the Chief of Police to
dispose of any lost, unclaimed, recovered or stolen property within 6 months
after the receipt of the request. If the City Council approves the request, the
Chief of Police shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city at least 5 days before the sale. The notice shall describe the
property, including money, and shall state the time and place of the public
sale at which the property may be purchased by the highest bidder. Until the
date of the sale, the property, including money, may be claimed at the office
of the Chief of Police. If ownership is proved, the Chief of Police shall turn
the property, including money, over to the owner and cancel the sale insofar as
the claimed property is concerned.
(1993 Code, § 2-197)
§ 2-198 CONDUCT OF SALE; DEPOSIT OF MONEYS.
   The Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall conduct the sale
of the lost, unclaimed, recovered or stolen property and shall deposit the
proceeds of the sale, after deducting the cost of the sale, together with any
other money included in the notice, with the City Treasurer to the credit of
the city's General Fund.
(1993 Code, § 2-198)
§ 2-199 OWNER'S CLAIM.
   If within 6 months after the sale of the lost, unclaimed, recovered or
stolen property the owner of the property, including money, files with the City
Council a claim for the property, including money, and proves his right to the
property, the City Council shall direct the City Treasurer to pay the money or
the amount received for the property to the owner. The City Council shall not
approve any claims filed more than 6 months after the sale. Any police officer
disposing of property in the manner so provided in this division shall not be
liable to the owner thereof.
(1993 Code, § 2-199)
DIVISION 5. CHARGES FOR CERTAIN EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES
§ 2-200 PURPOSE.
   This division is adopted to defray some costs incurred in providing certain
emergency response services. It is not the purpose of this division to provide
complete reimbursement of funding for the Charlotte Police Department and/or
the Charlotte Fire Department.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A fire detection system, intrusion or holdup device designed
or arranged to signal the presence of any fire hazard, intrusion or holdup of
any residential, commercial or business property. Excluded from this definition
are single-family residence battery-operated smoke or heat detectors.
   ALARM USER. Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a
motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using
such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the
coverage of this division are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal
persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located; however,
systems using a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the
premises shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject
to this division.
   ASSESSABLE COSTS. Those charges and fees incurred by the city as a result of
assistance provided by the Police or Fire Department or by a third party on
behalf of the city in connection with a Fire Department response to an incident
including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs (including
without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead,
costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of
transportation, costs of material disposal, and costs of contracted labor,
legal fees, collection costs, and the like) provided.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The following actions or services provided by the city,
or by a private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction
of the city:
      (1)   Extinguishing or fighting any fire occurring on or at a structure,
vehicle, or any other fire occurring on public or private property;
      (2)   Any incident requiring a response by the city that involves any
public or private utility property and requires city equipment or personnel to
remain at the incident to protect health, safety, and welfare of the public
until the utility provider responds to the incident and takes corrective
measures, lasting greater than one hour;
      (3)   The extrication of an individual(s) from a vehicle involved in an
accident;
      (4)   Extinguishing or fighting any vehicle fire; and/or
      (5)   Any response to a false alarm at a property in excess of once in a
calendar year. This includes, but is not limited to: fire, medical, burglary,
panic, hold-up, and other types of alarms.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, negligence or the intentional activation of
the alarm system without reasonable and legitimate need or cause by the person
or their employees and agents using an alarm system. False alarm does not
include an alarm caused by meteorological or geological conditions or by
disruption or disturbance of telephone or other communication systems.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE. The owner, operator, and/or person in charge of or
person in possession of the structure, property or vehicle to which the
emergency response is directed, including any private  contractor, such as
alarm companies, requesting or initiating such a response. This also includes
the person or persons who require rescue of a technical nature, and/or who
cause extrication, rescue, or hazardous materials response to be needed.
   VEHICLE. All motor vehicles (including but not limited to cars, trucks, semi
tractors, motorcycles, and trailers), trains, aircraft, or watercraft.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-202 CHARGES IMPOSED UPON RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   The assessable costs of an emergency response shall be charged against
the person(s) responsible. If there is more than one person responsible,
liability shall be joint and several and the city may bill any or all persons
responsible, however the city may not collect more than the total amount owed.
Liability for charges assessed under this division shall not be dependent upon
fault or negligence. The charge constitutes a debt of the person(s) responsible
and shall be collectible by the city in the same manner as an obligation under
a contract.
   (B)   The assessable cost within the expense of an emergency response may
not exceed an amount set forth by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-203 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   Following the conclusion of the emergency incident, the Police Chief or Fire
Chief shall submit a detailed listing of all known costs and expenses to the
City Clerk, who shall prepare an invoice to the responsible party for payment.
The Clerk's invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of receipt of the
bill. Any additional costs or expenses that become known following the
transmittal of the bill to the responsible party shall be billed in the same
manner on a subsequent bill to the responsible party. For any amounts due that
remain unpaid after 30 days, the city shall impose a late charge of 1% per
month, or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-204 OTHER REMEDIES.
   In case of default, the city may commence a civil suit to recover the costs
and expenses of the response and court costs and attorney fees incurred in the
collection of such debt. The statement submitted to the person responsible
shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of such costs and the person
responsible bears the burden of challenging said costs. The city may pursue any
other remedy, or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding, in a court
of competent jurisdiction to collect charges imposed under this division. The
recovery of charges imposed under this division does not limit the liability of
responsible parties under state or federal law, rule or regulation. In addition
to any other court costs, the prevailing party shall be entitled to their
reasonable attorney fees incurred in bringing or defending the action.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-205 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following persons responsible shall be exempt from the charges
authorized by this division for an emergency response which does not involve
hazardous material or a hazardous substance as defined under
Chapter 30, Article IV:
   (A)   Fires caused by railroad trains which are the specific responsibility
of railroad companies;
   (B)   Fire service provided outside the jurisdiction of the city under a
mutual aid or similar contract with an adjoining municipality;
   (C)   Fire service to property owned by the United States of America, or the
State of Michigan, or any political subdivision of the State of Michigan;
   (D)   Charges waived by the City Council; and
   (E)   Persons responsible in circumstances in which the City Manager finds
imposition of assessable costs of an emergency response would clearly result in
a manifest injustice. The City Manager's decision may be appealed to the City
Council.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-206 NON-EXCLUSIVE CHARGES.
   All charges for services rendered pursuant to this division shall be in
addition to any charges or taxes made by the Department or the city pursuant to
law for the maintenance or operation of the Department.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-207 DEFINITIONS FOR INCIDENTS INVOLVING DRIVERS OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLES
UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in §§ 2-208 et seq., shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
      (1)   The providing, sending or utilizing of police, firefighting,
emergency medical and rescue services by the city, or by a private individual
or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, to an
incident resulting in an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more
of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an
alcoholic beverage and controlled substance; or
      (2)   An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest by a police
officer when a driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence
of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance.
   EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The direct and reasonable costs incurred
by the city, or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or
direction of the city, when making an emergency response to the incident,
including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue services at
the scene of the incident. These costs further include all of the salaries and
wages of the city personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages
of the city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report
preparation, and all costs connected with the administration and provision of
all chemical tests of driver's blood, and prosecution of the person causing the
incident.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-208 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic
accidents in the city involve drivers who operate a motor vehicle while under
the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances. In addition, the
city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating motor
vehicles while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property
damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and
financial burden is placed upon the city's police, firefighting, rescue and
other services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-209 LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE.
   Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response if, while
under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the
combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance, such
person's operation of a motor vehicle proximately causes any incident resulting
in an emergency response.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-210 PRESUMPTIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, a person is under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influences of an
alcoholic beverage and controlled substance, when his/her physical or mental
abilities are impaired to a degree that he/she no longer has the ability to
operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of
ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a
motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical
analysis of his/her blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol
in his/her blood was in excess of 0.07%.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-211 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
   The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person
liable for the expenses under this division. The charge constitutes a debt of
that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the
same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or
implied.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-212 COST RECOVERY SCHEDULE.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs
included within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be
available to the public from either the City Clerk or the Police Department.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-213 BILLING.
   The Chief of Police or City Treasurer, or his/her designee, may, within ten
days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for an
emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or
personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this
division. The bill shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of
service.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-214 FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES.
   Any failure by the person described in this division as liable for the
expenses of an emergency response to pay the bill within 30 days of service
shall be considered a default. In case of default, the city may commence a
civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 2-215 MEDICAL TREATMENT OF THOSE IN CUSTODY.
   Any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city, including,
but not limited to: individuals who are i) under arrest; ii) incarcerated; iii)
imprisoned; iv) escaped from confinement; v) under supervised release; vi) on
medical furlough; vii) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house;
viii) living under home detention; or ix) confined completely or partially in
any way under a state or local penal statute, ordinance or rule shall be solely
responsible for the payment of any medical services rendered to, and received
by, that person during the course of his or her confinement with the city, or
at the city's or court's direction, including without limitation,
transportation to and from a medical treatment facility, and any treatment
deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not requested by
the prisoner; and shall be required to reimburse the city in full for any fees
or charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly to the medical
facility or practitioner by the prisoner or his or her insurance carrier.
However, a person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city shall
not be responsible for payment of any medical services provided to treat
illness or injury caused or worsened by an intentional or negligent act of a
city employee.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-7-2021)
ARTICLE VI. ETHICS
§ 2-250 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Charlotte.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual employed by the city, whether part-time or full-
time, but excluding city contractors and officials as defined in this section.
   OFFICIALS. The elected officers of the city, the members of the appointed
boards and commissions of the city, the administrative officers and department
directors described in §
2-51 and the deputies of administrative officers and department directors.
   RELATIVE. A person related to an official within the third degree of
consanguinity or affinity.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 2-251 PRINCIPLES OF ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   To ensure that every citizen can have complete confidence in the integrity
of city government, each official shall respect and adhere to the following
principles of ethical service.
   (A)   Public service is a public trust requiring officials and employees to
place loyalty to laws, ordinances, rules and policies above private gain.
   (B)   Officials and employees shall not hold financial interests that
conflict with the conscientious performance of duty.
   (C)   Officials and employees shall not engage in financial transactions
using nonpublic city information or allow the improper use of such information
to further any private interest.
   (D)   Officials and employees shall not, except pursuant to such reasonable
exceptions as are provided by policy promulgated by the City Council, solicit
or accept any gift or other item of monetary value from any person or entity
seeking official action from, doing business with, or conducting activities
regulated by the city, or whose interest may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official’s duties.
   (E)   Officials and employees shall put forth honest effort in the
performance of their duties.
   (F)   Officials and employees shall make no unauthorized commitments or
promises of any kind purporting to bind the government.
   (G)   Officials and employees shall not use public office for private gain
for themselves or their relatives.
   (H)   Officials and employees shall act impartially and not give
preferential treatment to any private organization or individual.
   (I)   Officials and employees shall protect and conserve city property and
shall not use it for other than authorized activities.
   (J)   Officials and employees shall not engage in outside employment or
activities, including seeking or negotiating employment, that conflict with
official city duties and responsibilities.
   (K)   Officials and employees shall disclose waste, fraud, abuse and
corruption to appropriate authorities.
   (L)   Officials and employees shall adhere to all laws and regulations that
provide equal opportunity for all regardless of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, age or disability.
   (M)   Officials and employees shall endeavor to avoid any actions creating
the appearance that they are violating the law or the ethical standards
promulgated pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 2-252 IMPLEMENTATION.
   The City Council shall implement the principles of ethical conduct contained
in §
2-251 by promulgating policies, defining terms, establishing rules and
regulations and providing sanctions or penalties for violations. The City
Council shall have the authority to repeal, replace or amend such policies from
time to time as circumstances warrant.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-26-2009)
CHAPTERS 3-5: RESERVED
CHAPTER 6: ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
Section
Article I. In General
   
6-1   Definitions
   
6-2   Penalties
   
6-3   Consumption in public
   
6-4   Uncapped containers
   
6-5   Peddling
   
6-6   Sanitary conditions
   
6-7   Employees
   
6-8   Sales to unauthorized persons
   
6-9   Purchases by unauthorized persons
   
6-10   Minor in possession
   
6-11   Prohibitions for licensees
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly intoxication, see §
34-191;
   Use of alcoholic beverages and drugs at open house parties, see §
34-383
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Control Act, see M.C.L.A. 436.1101 et seq.
§ 6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL LIQUOR. Means the same as defined by the Michigan Liquor Control
Code of 1998. Any bodily alcohol content means either of the following:
      (1)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as
a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
   CLUB LICENSE.  A license for the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the
premises issued by the state liquor control commission to a club, as defined by
the Michigan Liquor Control Act.
   LICENSE. A contract between the state liquor control commission and the
licensee granting authority to the licensee to sell any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises.
   LICENSEE. Any person possessing a license to sell alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises by the state liquor control commission.
   SALE. Exchange, barter or traffic, furnish or give away alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises.
   SPECIAL LICENSE. A contract between the state liquor control commission and
the special licensee granting authority to the licensee to sell any alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises.
(1993 Code, § 6-1) (Ord. passed 7-14-2003; Ord. passed 9-13-2004)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 6-2 PENALTIES.
   Unless penalties are otherwise set forth in a specific section, any person
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this chapter
is committed, and upon conviction such person shall be penalized by a fine as
provided in §
1-16 of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 6-3 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC.
   No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the public streets, parks or in any
other public places, including any store or establishment doing business with
the public not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises, except in areas designated as the city’s Social District Commons Area
and only during days and hours of operations as determined by City Council
resolution in accordance with state law or as permitted pursuant to §
38-2(B).
(1993 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. 2017-07, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2024-01, passed 8-26-
2024)
§ 6-4 UNCAPPED CONTAINERS.
   No person shall transport or possess any alcoholic liquor in a container
which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken, on the public
streets, including any store or establishment doing business with the public
not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, except
in areas designated as the city’s Social District Commons Area and only during
days and hours of operations as determined by City Council resolution in
accordance with state law.
(1993 Code, § 6-4) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 6-5 PEDDLING.
   No person shall peddle alcoholic liquor in the city.
(1993 Code, § 6-5)
§ 6-6 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of
such liquor for sale shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.
(1993 Code, § 6-6)
§ 6-7 EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor
any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious,
infectious or venereal disease, and no person who is afflicted with or is a
carrier of any such disease shall work in or about any premises or engage in
any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(1993 Code, § 6-7)
§ 6-8 SALES TO UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, clerk, agent, servant
or employee, shall at any time sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor to any person unless such person shall have attained the age of 21
years.
(1993 Code, § 6-8)
§ 6-9 PURCHASES BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, obtain, consume or
bring into any premises licensed under this chapter any alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   No person shall misrepresent the age of a person under the age of 21
years for the purpose of inducing the sale of alcoholic liquor to such person.
   (C)   No person under the age of 21 years shall misrepresent his age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place where
alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the purchase of
alcoholic liquor by or for a person under 21 years under the authority of and
pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician.
(1993 Code, § 6-9)
§ 6-10 MINOR IN POSSESSION.
   (A)   Prohibited; enforcement.
      (1)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess
alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in
this section. A minor who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in §
6-10(h) of this Code.
      (2)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the
person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If the minor does
not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not
be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a
court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding
or criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or
possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content.
      (3)   A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is
less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, M.C.L.A. §§
722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor,
attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily
alcohol content in violation of subsection (1) shall comply with M.C.L.A. §
436.1703(8).
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor during regular working hours
and in the course of his or her employment, if employed by a person licensed
under the Michigan Liquor Control Code, by the Liquor Control Commission, or by
an agent of the Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or
her personal consumption.
      (2)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an
academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member,
if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of
the course.
      (3)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple.
      (4)   An undercover operation as set forth at M.C.L.A. § 436.1703(15).
      (5)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily
presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment
for any condition arising from a violation of M.C.L.A. §§ 750.520b to 750.520g
of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, M.C.L.A. §§ 750.520b to 750.520g,
committed against a minor.
      (6)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the
following criteria:
         (a)   Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
         (b)   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility of
agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of
M.C.L.A. §§ 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.
      (7)   A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency
medical service personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a
legitimate health care concern.
   (C)   Affirmative defense. In a prosecution for a violation of this section,
it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed alcoholic liquor in a
venue or location where that consumption is legal.
   (D)   Definition of “any bodily alcohol content.” As used in this section
ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT means either of the following:
      (1)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as
a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
   (E)   Definition of “emergency medical services personnel.” As used in this
section EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL means that term as defined in
section 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A. § 333.20904.
   (F)   Definition of “health facility or agency.” As used in this section
HEALTH FACILITY OR AGENCY means that term as defined in section 20106 of the
Public Health code, 1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A. § 333.20106.
   (G)   Definition of “minor.” As used in this section a MINOR means a person
less than 21 years of age.
   (H)   A person who violates §
6-10(a) is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as
follows and subject to the following fines, penalties and sanctions:
      (1)   For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $100. A court may order a minor
under this subsection to participate in substance use disorder services as
defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A. § 333.6230,
and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may order
the minor to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in M.C.L.A. § 436.1703
(5). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under
this subsection or a corresponding subdivision of state law or another
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If a violation of § 6-10(a) occurs after one prior judgement, the
minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this subsection is
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds the
minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any
treatment, screening or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction, a fine of not more than $200 or both. A court
may order a minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
prevention disorder services as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code,
1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A. § 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of
substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo
substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in M.C.L.A. § 436.1703(5). A person is also subject to sanctions against his or
her operator’s or chauffeur’s license imposed under state law.
      (3)   If a violation of §
6-10(a) occurs after two or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this section is punishable by imprisonment for
not more than 60 days if the court finds the minor has violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that
conviction, by a fine of not more than $500, or both, as applicable. A court
may order a minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
disorder services as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
M.C.L.A. § 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in M.C.L.A. §
436.1703(5). A person is also subject to sanctions against his or her
operator’s or chauffeur’s license imposed under state law.
      (4)   If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of §
6-10(a), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt, with the consent of
the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on
probation. The terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not
limited to, the sanctions set forth in §
6-10(h)(3), payment of the costs including any minimum state costs, and the
costs of probation. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or
condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing a corresponding
provision in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and
proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and
conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss
the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without
adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or
for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon
conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one discharge or dismissal
under this section as to an individual or any corresponding provision of the
state law or local ordinance. In accordance with the corresponding provisions
of state law, the court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while
proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation under this section.
The court shall provide the Secretary of State with a record of the plea and
discharge under this section to allow the Secretary of State to retain and
disseminate a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal
under the procedures established for the corresponding state law provision.
      (5)   A misdemeanor violation of §
6-10(a) successfully deferred, discharged and dismissed under §
6-10(h)(4) is considered a prior judgment for the purposes of § 6-10(h)(3).
      (6)   As used in this section, PRIOR JUDGMENT means a conviction,
juvenile adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of
responsibility for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of
the United States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law
of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state:
         (a)   M.C.L.A. §§ 436.701, 436.703 or 436.707.
         (b)   M.C.L.A. §§ 257.624a, 257.624b or 257.625.
         (c)   M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80176, 324.81134 or 324.82127.
         (d)   M.C.L.A. §§ 750.167a and 750.237.
(1993 Code, § 6-10) (Ord. passed 7-14-2003; Ord. passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 2017-
10, passed 10-9-2017)
§ 6-11 PROHIBITIONS FOR LICENSEES.
   No alcoholic liquor licensee, his agent or employee shall:
      (1)   Permit the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed
premises without being licensed to sell alcoholic liquor;
      (2)   Permit any gambling on the premises or the placing or using of any
gambling apparatus or paraphernalia therein;
      (3)   Permit an intoxicated person to frequent, loiter or be employed
upon the licensed premises;
      (4)   Permit any disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace
and good order of the neighborhood;
      (5)   Permit any resorting of thieves, prostitutes or other disorderly
persons;
      (6)   Permit upon the licensed premises any lewd, indecent, profane or
obscene language, songs, entertainment, literature, pictures or advertising
materials or cooperate to have any lewd, indecent or obscene literature,
pictures or advertising materials;
      (7)   Refuse to cooperate with any law enforcement officer in the
performance of such officer's duties upon the licensed premises.
(1993 Code, § 6-11)
CHAPTERS 7-9: RESERVED
CHAPTER 10: ANIMALS
Section
   
10-1   Cruelty to animals
   
10-2   Poisoning animals
   
10-3   Birds and birds' nests
   
10-4   Domestic animals and fowl
   
10-5   Removal of dog and cat droppings
   
10-6   Control of dogs
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, see M.C.L.A. § 287.290;
   Crimes relating to animals and birds, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.49 et seq.
§ 10-1 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird.
(1993 Code, § 10-1)
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals, see M.C.L.A. § 750.55
§ 10-2 POISONING ANIMALS.
   No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed
public or private place where it endangers or is likely to endanger any animal
or bird.
(1993 Code, § 10-2)
§ 10-3 BIRDS AND BIRDS' NESTS.
   No person, except a public officer acting in his official capacity, shall
molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird or molest or disturb any wild
bird's nest or the contents thereof.
(1993 Code, § 10-3)
§ 10-4 DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section, no person shall keep or house any
animals or fowl within the city.
   (B)   Dogs, cats, birds and animals commonly classified as household pets
may be kept within the city.
   (C)   Ponies, cattle and horses may be kept on premises constituting a farm,
as defined in the zoning chapter of this Code.
   (D)   Persons may keep chickens if done so in conformity with all of the
following:
      (1)   Any person who keeps chickens in the city shall obtain a permit
from the city prior to acquiring the chickens. Application shall be made to the
City Clerk with a fee as determined by Council resolution;
      (2)   The number of permits shall be determined by City Council
resolution;
      (3)   Permits may be revoked at any time if the applicant fails to comply
with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations;
      (4)   Permits expire and become invalid two years after the date of
issuance. A person who wishes to continue keeping chickens shall obtain a new
permit on or before the expiration date of the previous permit. Application for
a new permit shall be pursuant to the procedures and requirements that are
applicable at the time the person applies for a new permit;
      (5)   Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by the city, private
restrictions on the use of property shall remain enforceable and take
precedence over a permit. Private restrictions include but are not limited to
deed restrictions, condominium master deed restrictions, neighborhood
association by-laws, and covenant deeds. A permit issued to a person whose
property is subject to private restrictions that prohibit the keeping of
chickens is void. The interpretation and enforcement of the private restriction
is the sole responsibility of the private parties involved;
      (6)   A person who keeps or houses chickens on his or her property shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
         (a)   Have been issued the permit required under division (D)(1) of
this section;
         (b)   The number of chickens shall be determined by City Council
resolution;
         (c)   The principal use of the person's property is for a single-
family dwelling;
         (d)   No person shall keep any rooster;
         (e)   No person shall slaughter any chickens outdoors;
         (f)   The chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and must
be kept in the covered enclosure or an adjoining fenced enclosure at all times;
         (g)   A person shall not keep chickens in any location on the property
other than in the backyard as defined by the Zoning Code;
         (h)   All enclosures for the keeping of chickens shall be so
constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being
harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure;
         (i)   All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens
that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats,
mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other
rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them;
         (j)   The coop and fenced enclosure may not be located nearer than 15
feet to any property line; and
         (k)   The coop and enclosures must comply with all zoning ordinance
requirements for accessory structures and use, including lot coverage
requirements.
      (7)   The city may initiate prosecution for a civil infraction violation
for any violation of this section. Each day a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a permit shall submit it for
examination upon demand by any Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer;
      (9)   This section shall not regulate the keeping of chickens on a farm,
as defined at § 82-4 of the City Code, which is located outside the boundaries
of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat and having an area of not less
than five acres, and where the raising of poultry is a permitted principal use
when conducted in compliance with the Michigan Right to Farm Act and the
Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices promulgated
thereunder;
      (10)   The Council may adopt additional rules and regulations as
necessary to implement the ordinance codified herein; and
      (11)   Violation of this section shall be a civil infraction issued under
either municipal citation payable at the City Municipal Bureau, or district
court citation in the district courts of Eaton County. Municipal fines shall be
established by City Council resolution and subject to amendment.
(1993 Code, § 10-4) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 5-29-2012; Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-25-
2016; Ord. 2020-03, passed 5-11-2020; Ord. 2025-07, passed 7-28-2025)
§ 10-5 REMOVAL OF DOG AND CAT DROPPINGS.
   (A)   No person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog or cat
shall cause, suffer, or allow such dog or cat to soil, defile, defecate, or to
commit any nuisance on any public thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass,
play area, park, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any
public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without permission of
the owner of said property, unless:
   (B)   The person who so owns, harbors, keeps, or is in charge of such dog or
cat shall:
      (1)   Immediately remove all droppings deposited by such dog or cat by a
sanitary method;
      (2)   Possess a container of sufficient size to collect and remove above-
mentioned dog or cat droppings, and exhibit the container, if requested by any
official empowered to enforce this section; and
      (3)   Remove the droppings from the aforementioned areas, and dispose of
them in a sanitary method.
(Ord. passed 7-10-2006(1))
§ 10-6 CONTROL OF DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      DOG. All dogs, male, female and unsexed, and with no exception for size
or breed.
      OWNER. When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, means every person
who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his care, and every person who
permits such dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
      RUNNING AT LARGE. Any dog appearing within the city that is not within an
enclosure sufficient to restrain him at all times and/or any dog not
accompanied by his owner or custodian under leash.
   (B)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of
this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to
payment of a civil fine as set forth in §
1-17. Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as
set forth in §
1-17.
   (C)   Common law liability. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed as limiting the common law liability of the owner of a dog for
damages committed by it.
   (D)   Confinement required. Except when the dog is under the reasonable
control of its owner or custodian by a leash, every dog shall at all times be
confined upon the premises of its owner or custodian or within the passenger
compartment of a vehicle while being transported by its owner or custodian.
   (E)   Acts prohibited. The following acts are prohibited:
      (1)   Running at large. No person who is the owner or custodian of a dog
shall permit the dog to run at large in the city, nor shall the dog be
permitted upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or other public
place within the city unless leashed in compliance with division (F) of this
section and accompanied by the owner or person having custody thereof; and
      (2)   Public parks and public places. No person shall take or permit a
dog to remain in any public park in the city, except pursuant to rules adopted
by the City Council, unless the dog is leashed in compliance with division (F)
of this section. No person shall take or permit a dog to remain in any area of
any city park or other public property in which playground equipment is
installed or where signs are posted indicating that dogs are prohibited.
   (F)   Dogs on leashes. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps,
or harbors a dog, to walk the dog on any public street, alley, sidewalk,
parking lot or other public place unless the dog is restrained by a leash of
adequate strength and of limited length.
      (1)   Leashes of a non-reel-in type shall not be longer than six feet.
      (2)   Leashes of a reel-in type may be extended temporarily longer than
six feet, provided the leash is reeled in to six feet or less whenever other
persons or other persons with leashed dogs are approached.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to dogs which have been specially
trained for and are used as guide dogs for the blind while such dogs are being
used for such purpose.
   (G)   Exemptions for specially trained dogs. This section shall not apply to
dogs trained to assist persons with disabilities when being used by such
persons for the purpose for which the dog was trained or to a trained police
dog working under direction of a sworn police officer in the performance of
duties for which the dog was trained.
(Ord. passed 7-10-2006(2); Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-11-2010)
CHAPTERS 11 - 13: RESERVED
CHAPTER 14: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Article I. In General
   14-1 – 14-25 Reserved
Article II. State Construction Code
   
14-26   Adopted
   
14-27   References in code
   
14-28   Reserved
   
14-29   Reserved
   
14-30   Reserved
   
14-31   Reserved
   
14-32   Reserved
   
14-33   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas
 
   14-34 – 14-55 Reserved
Article III. Rental Dwelling Registration
   
14-56   Definitions
   
14-57   Purpose of standards
   
14-58   Applicability; exclusions
   
14-59   Registration
   
14-60   Inspections
   
14-61   Responsible local agent
   
14-62   Certificate of compliance
   
14-63   Requirements for issuance
   
14-64   Applicable standards
   
14-65   Noncompliance with Code
   
14-66   Fees
   
14-67   Violations
   
14-68   Appeals
 
   14-69 – 14-85 Reserved
Article IV. House Numbering
   
14-86   Numbering system
   
14-87   Street maps
   
14-88   Assigned numbers
   
14-89   Display of official numbers
   
14-90   Change of address request
 
   14-91 – 14-110 Reserved
Article V. Oversize Structure or Equipment
   
14-111   Permit; fee and insurance
 
   14-112 – 14-119 Reserved
Article VI. Building Board of Appeals
   
14-120   Creation; membership; rules
   
14-121   Hearings
   
14-122   Decisions
   
14-123   Specific variance requirements
   
14-124   Fees
   
14-125   Effect of appeal on orders, determinations, decisions and action
   
14-126   Violations of the construction code as civil infractions
   
14-127   Sunset
Cross-reference:
   Community development, see
Chapter 22;
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Chapter 30;
   Planning, see
Chapter 42;
   Streets, sidewalks and other public places, see
Chapter 58;
   Subdivision regulations, see
Chapter 62;
   Utilities, see
Chapter 68;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82.
Statutory reference:
   State Construction Code Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 14-1 -- 14-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 14-26 ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code Act, Public Act
230 of 1972, § 8b(6), as amended, the State Construction Code is hereby adopted
by reference subject to the modifications contained in this chapter.
(1993 Code, § 14-26) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 14-27 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the State Construction Code to “state” and “Michigan” shall
mean the State of Michigan; references to “municipality” shall mean the City of
Charlotte; references to the “municipal charter” shall mean the Charter of the
City of Charlotte and references to “local ordinances” shall mean the Charlotte
City Code.
(1993 Code, § 14-27) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 14-28 RESERVED.
§ 14-29 RESERVED.
§ 14-30 RESERVED.
§ 14-31 RESERVED.
§ 14-32 RESERVED.
§ 14-33 DESIGNATION OF REGULATED FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
entitled Eaton County, Michigan (all jurisdictions) dated November 26, 2010 and
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel numbers 26045C; 303E, 304E, 311E,
312E and 325E dated November 26, 2010 are adopted by reference for the purposes
of administration of the Michigan Construction Code and declared to be a part
of § 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the
“Flood Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code.
(Ord. 2010-06, passed 11-22-2010)
§§ 14-34 -- 14-55 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. RENTAL DWELLING REGISTRATION
§ 14-56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative designated by
the City Manager.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official or Fire Official who is charged with
the administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized
representative of the City Manager.
   HOTEL, MOTEL, BOARDINGHOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE. A building held out to the
public as a place for lodging for a nightly, weekly or monthly rate, including
bed and breakfasts.
   OCCUPANT. Includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a rental
dwelling or rental unit.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity having a legal or
equitable interest in the premises. If more than one person or entity owns the
subject real property or if more than one person or entity is a land contract
vendee of the subject real property, property owner refers to each person or
entity holding any portion of that interest in the property, and the property
owners’ obligations in this article are joint and several as to each property
owner.
   OWNER’S REPRESENTATIVE. A person or representative of a corporation,
partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association, organization or other
entity designated by the owner of the premises as responsible for operating
such property in compliance with all the provisions of the city’s ordinances.
   RENTAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building containing one or more rental
units.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any portion of a rental building in the city that
contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation, which is occupied by a person other than a property owner or
the parents or children of a property owner. The definition of rental unit
includes a single-family dwelling, or a unit in a multifamily or multi-purpose
dwelling, or a unit in a condominium, or any room or group of rooms located
within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities that are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-57 PURPOSE OF STANDARDS.
   The city recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards for the
maintenance of sanitary and safe residential rental structures in the city as
an important factor for the general health, safety and welfare of all of its
citizens. This article is designed to promote the continued maintenance of
quality and safe rental properties and to enhance and maintain property values
by adopting legislation which will be applicable to all rental housing units.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 14-58 APPLICABILITY; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   This article shall apply to any rental dwelling unit, or part thereof,
which is occupied by persons pursuant to any oral or written rental or lease
agreement or other valuable compensation. No person shall lease or rent a
rental dwelling unit unless they have registered their property.
   (B)   This article does not apply to jails, hospitals, nursing homes,
convalescent homes, foster homes or temporary group shelters provided by legal
nonprofit agencies which are inspected, certified and/or licensed by the state.
This article does not apply to a hotel, motel, boardinghouse, or rooming house
as defined herein.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 14-59 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Compliance required. All rental dwelling unit owners are required to
register their rental dwelling units. Recertification shall take place every
two years or biennially, thereafter. All rental dwelling unit owners must abide
by the registration process and procedures of this article and shall comply
with the following:
      (1)   All existing rental dwelling units shall be registered with the
City of Charlotte, Clerk’s Office;
      (2)   All newly constructed or purchased buildings which will be used as
rental dwelling units shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy as a
rental dwelling unit and every two years thereafter;
      (3)   Any existing registration may be transferred to the new owner. The
new owner shall register the transfer of ownership within 30 days of the date
of the closing. A license which has been transferred upon sale of the property
shall be valid until its expiration or revocation for noncompliance with city
codes and ordinances; and
      (4)   Any existing building which is converted to a rental dwelling unit
shall be registered prior to the date on which the unit is first occupied for
rental purposes and every two years thereafter. Failure to comply will result
in penalties as described in this article or by resolution.
   (B)   Applications for registration, renewal, and notice of transfers shall
be made in such form and in accordance with such instructions as may be
provided by the code official designated by the City Manager and shall include
at least the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the owner
(no post office box shall be accepted);
      (2)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
owner's representative or responsible local agent, if the rental property owner
has chosen to appoint a representative;
      (3)   The name and phone number of an emergency contact. The emergency
contact must be able to respond within one hour of being contacted;
      (4)   The authorization appointing a local agent, signed by both the
owner and the local agent, as designated;
      (5)   The address of the rental unit(s); and
      (6)   The number of dwelling or rooming units in each building on the
premises.
   (C)   Upon registration, the owner shall be responsible for notifying the
City of Charlotte, Clerk’s Office of any change of address of either the owner
or owner's representative.
   (D)   A renewal registration shall require a satisfactory inspection being
completed before a renewal certificate shall be issued.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-60 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The city employee assigned to inspect a particular rental unit shall
give notice by email or by first class mail to the local agent and the tenant
within seven days of the scheduled inspection, which shall occur during regular
city business hours. The landlord, the tenant and/or the agent shall permit the
inspection by the city inspector as notified or at the time otherwise agreed to
by the parties. The landlord or the landlord agent shall be present during the
inspection.
   (B)   The city inspector may, at the request of the owner, tenant, or agent,
inspect the property. If the inspector is invited to inspect the property, no
notice shall be required to be given.
   (C)   A reinspection notification shall be given by email, first class mail,
or telephone within seven days of the scheduled reinspection.
   (D)   (1)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the
provisions of this Code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists within a structure or upon the premises a condition
in violation of this Code, the code official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties
imposed by this Code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied
the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry.
      (2)   If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, owner’s authorized
agent or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and
request entry.
      (3)   If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (E)   The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall
accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of
such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer
of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report on
unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing
authority.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-61 RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT.
   At the discretion of the property owner, a responsible local agent may be
designated. The responsible local agent shall be a person or representative of
a corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization or other entity, and shall be designated by the owner of the
premises as responsible for operating such property in compliance with all the
provisions of this Code. All official notices of the city may be sent to the
responsible local agent, and any notice so sent shall be deemed to have been
delivered upon the owner of record.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 14-62 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   No person shall operate, lease, rent or occupy a rental unit unless there is
a valid certificate of compliance issued by the code official in the name of
the operator and issued for the specific rental unit. The certificate shall be
issued for each building containing a rental unit and shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place. The certificate shall be issued after registration with the
city upon satisfactory inspection by the code official. The certificate shall
state that the unit or units inspected comply with the provisions of this Code
and state law. A certificate of compliance is valid for a period of two years
from its date of issuance and must be renewed in conformity with the
registration provisions of this article. The name, address and telephone number
of the property owner or the designated responsible local agent shall be posted
on the certificate of compliance.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-63 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The code official shall not issue a certificate of compliance unless a
current housing registration is submitted, the responsible local agent, if any,
is properly designated, any fees for registration plus applicable penalties are
paid in full, and inspection of each unit has determined that compliance has
been secured with the minimum standards listed herein and other applicable
provisions of the City Code.
   (B)   As it pertains to multiple-unit dwellings, the code official may,
after inspection, issue a certificate of compliance for a portion, but not all,
of the units in a multiple-unit dwelling. All non-complying units may not be
leased or allowed to be occupied. Owners of non-complying units may appeal the
decision of the code official through the procedures listed in §
14-68.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-64 APPLICABLE STANDARDS.
   The standards used to determine rental property and dwelling unit compliance
with city codes and ordinances shall be the International Property Maintenance
Code, and the City of Charlotte fire codes, as adopted and amended by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-65 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
   (A)   In addition to the inspections required with the registration process,
the code official may enter rental dwelling units under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written complaint from an owner, owner's
representative, or occupant that the structure and/or premises are in violation
of this article;
      (2)   Upon receipt of a report or referral from the Police Department,
Fire Department, public or private school, or another public agency, of failure
to comply with this article;
      (3)   Upon evidence of an existing ordinance violation observed by the
code official; or
      (4)   At the request of the owner to determine compliance with the
International Property Maintenance Code and the City of Charlotte fire codes.
   (B)   The code official may make an appointment with the owner or owner's
representative of the rental dwelling unit regarding a complaint pursuant to
the inspection process in §
14-60 unless an emergency requiring 24 hours’ notice or less exists.
   (C)   The code official shall issue a written report noting any violations
of this article or any other provision of the city's ordinances and shall
provide a copy of the report to the owner or owner’s representative. The code
official shall direct the owner or owner’s representative to correct violations
within the time set forth in the report. A reasonable time for correcting
violations shall be determined by the code official in light of the nature of
the violations and all relevant circumstances, which shall not exceed 60 days,
unless correction of the violation within a 60-day period is impossible due to
seasonal considerations. Upon request of the person responsible for correcting
violations, the code official may extend the time for correcting violations,
but not to exceed an additional 30 days.
   (D)   Whenever the code official finds that the operator of any rental unit
has failed to comply with a notice of violation or compliance order issued
pursuant to this Code, the certificate of compliance may be revoked.
   (E)   Upon revocation of a certificate of compliance and/or a determination
that a rental unit is unfit for human habitation, the owner or operator of the
unit shall immediately vacate the unit; and no person shall thereafter occupy
the unit for sleeping or living purposes until the unit is in compliance with
this article.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-66 FEES.
   (A)   Fees for registration, inspection and reinspection of rental units,
and penalties shall be established by resolution of the Council. The fee
schedule shall be available to the public from the City Clerk. Such fees may be
changed by resolution of Council.
   (B)   Reinspection fees for violations shall be assessed after the original
inspection and one reinspection. There will be no exceptions or extensions for
immediate health, safety and life-threatening violations. The following is a
list of reasons that a reinspection fee may be charged: failure to appear for
inspection; failure to comply with violation notices; and failure to permit
inspection.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 14-67 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any owner or owner’s representative of a rental dwelling unit
who violates any section of this article shall be responsible for a municipal
civil infraction as provided for in this Code with the fines as stated in
subsection (A)(2) below.
      (2)   The fines for municipal civil infractions for violating this
article shall be: $200 for the first offense; $400 for the second and any
subsequent offenses. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
   (B)   The Building Inspector, Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
fire inspector and any other person designated by the City Manager are
authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this
article.
   (C)   In addition to any penalties imposed by law, upon a finding of
responsibility by the court for a violation of this article the city shall be
entitled to immediately revoke any existing certificate of compliance and shall
entitle the city to seek a court order compelling the eviction of all persons
and property upon the premises until a certificate of compliance is issued by
the city.
   (D)   If the owner or owner's representative does not correct a violation of
any provision of this article, the code official may bring an action to seek
the enforcement of this article by any appropriate legal remedy.
   (E)   Any structure not in compliance with this article is deemed a
nuisance.
   (F)   When, in the opinion of the code official, an imminent danger exists,
the code official shall be authorized to order the occupants to vacate, or
temporarily close for use or occupancy, a building, the right-of-way,
sidewalks, streets, or adjacent buildings or nearby areas.
   (G)   The code official shall be authorized to employ the necessary
resources to perform the required work in order to mitigate the imminent
danger.
   (H)   Any costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be the
responsibility of the property owner or other responsible party creating such
imminent danger.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-68 APPEALS.
   Any person whose registration to rent or lease a dwelling or to operate a
rental unit has been denied, or whose certificate of compliance has been
revoked, noncompliance with the code, may appeal to the Circuit Court within 30
days of notice from a city official.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-16-2021; Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-24-2025)
§§ 14-69 -- 14-85 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 14-86 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   The houses and buildings in the streets of the city shall be numbered
by the block system.
   (B)   The streets to be used as the basis for such numbering shall be North
and South Cochran Avenue, East and West Lawrence Avenue, Lansing Street and the
Battle Creek State Road. Beginning at the base, the blocks shall be numbered by
the decimal system in units of 100, and where a street crosses a baseline they
shall be designated as north, east, south, west or combinations thereof for
angling streets, and when the blocks in any street are not of equal number on
both sides of the street, the blocks shall be divided so that the opposite
block numbers shall correspond.
   (C)   One number shall be assigned for each 30 feet as nearly as may be. The
houses or buildings in each block shall be numbered commencing with the number
of the block and thereafter by adding to the number of the block the number of
the house or building. Even numbers shall be on the right side and odd numbers
on the left side from the baseline or point of origin.
   (D)   In streets which do not intersect with the base, the blocks shall be
numbered to correspond with the blocks in the base parallel thereto.
(1993 Code, § 14-86)
§ 14-87 STREET MAPS.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to number all the blocks, houses
and buildings in accordance with the provisions of this article as near as may
be, and the numbers given by it shall be the official numbers. The Fire
Department shall make and keep on file the location and official number of all
blocks, houses and buildings.
(1993 Code, § 14-87) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-88 ASSIGNED NUMBERS.
   If numbers cannot be designated according to the system stated in this
article, the Fire Department shall assign official numbers corresponding to
this system as near as possible.
(1993 Code, § 14-88) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-89 DISPLAY OF OFFICIAL NUMBERS.
   The code official shall designate the official numbers to be placed on all
houses and buildings. The numbers shall be displayed in a conspicuous location
approved by the Fire Department on the house or building in accordance with the
applicable fire code and building code. The figures to be used for such purpose
shall be not less than six inches in height. It shall be unlawful for any
person to display any street number or street name other than the official
number upon any house or building.
(1993 Code, § 14-89) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 2-24-2025)
§ 14-90 CHANGE OF ADDRESS REQUEST.
   A change of address may be requested at any time by the property owner by
completing a change of address application with the City of Charlotte, Clerk’s
Office. The Fire Department may deny the address change request if the
requested address is not in compliance with city ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 2-24-2025)
§§ 14-91 -- 14-110 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. OVERSIZE STRUCTURE OR EQUIPMENT MOVING
§ 14-111 PERMIT; FEE AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   No person shall move, transport or convey any building, machinery,
truck or trailer more than eight feet, eight inches wide or higher than 13
feet, six inches above the surface of the roadway into, across or along any
street or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from
the City of Charlotte.
   (B)   The applicant shall pay a fee as determined by the City Council from
time to time and shall file an insurance certificate with the City Clerk at the
time of the permit application.
(1993 Code, § 14-111) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 2-24-2025)
§§ 14-112 -- 14-119 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI. BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 14-120 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; RULES.
   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations
made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this code, there shall be, and is hereby created, a Board of Appeals,
consisting of three members who are qualified by experience and training to
pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The Building Official
shall be an ex officio nonvoting member and shall act as Secretary of the
Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor at or before the
first Council meeting of December of each year to serve from and after January
1 of each year. With the first appointments made prior to December, 2015, one
member shall be appointed every year thereafter and each member appointed shall
serve for a term of three years. A person may not serve on the Board of Appeals
if he or she serves on a Board of Appeals of another governmental subdivision.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and may recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is
consistent therewith. Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the business of the Board.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-121 HEARINGS.
   The business which the Board of Appeals may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Board of Appeals held in compliance with Act No. 267 of
the Public Acts of 1976. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the
meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts
of 1976. A record of decisions made by the Board of Appeals, properly indexed,
and any other writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained
by the Board of Appeals in the performance of an official function shall be
made available to the public, in compliance with Act No. 442 of the Public Acts
of 1976.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-122 DECISIONS.
   The Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal within 60 days after submission,
and upon the concurring vote of two members, render and file its decision with
a written statement of its finding of relevant fact and reasons therefor with
the Building Official not later than 30 days after the hearing of the appeal.
Failure of the Board to hear an appeal and file its decision within the time
limit is deemed a denial. A copy of the decision and statement of the facts and
reasons shall be delivered or mailed to the appellant on or before the date of
filing.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-123 SPECIFIC VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals may grant a specific variance to a substantive
requirement of this chapter if the literal application of the substantive
requirement would result in an exceptional, practical difficulty to the
applicant, and if both of the following requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   The performance of the particular item or part of the building or
structure with respect to which the variance is granted shall not substantially
deviate from intended use and shall not substantially deviate from performance
required by the code of that particular item or part for the health, safety,
and welfare of the people of this state; and
      (2)   The specific conditions justifying the variance shall be neither so
general nor recurrent in nature so as to make an amendment of the code with
respect to the conditions reasonable, practical, or desirable.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals may attach in writing any condition in connection
with the granting of a variance that in its judgment is necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the State of Michigan. The
breach of a condition shall automatically invalidate the variance and any
permit, license, and certificate granted on the basis of it. In no case shall
more than a minimum variance from the code be granted than is necessary to
alleviate the exceptional, practical difficulty.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-124 FEES.
   A fee established by the City Council by resolution shall be paid at the
time of filing each appeal.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-125 EFFECT OF APPEAL ON ORDERS, DETERMINATIONS, DECISIONS AND ACTION.
   An appeal to a Board of Appeals or to a court of competent jurisdiction
pursuant to Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, as amended, does not stay a
stop construction order issued by an enforcing agency or prevent an enforcing
agency from seeking an order in a court of competent jurisdiction enjoining the
violation of the stop construction order. In other cases, an appeal to a Board
of Appeals to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to Act No. 306 of the
Public Acts of 1969, as amended, shall act as a stay upon an order,
determination, decision, or action appealed from, unless the enforcing agency
establishes that immediate enforcement of the order, determination, decision,
or action if necessary to avoid substantial peril to life or property.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-126 VIOLATIONS OF THE CONSTRUCTION CODE AS CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority given to governmental subdivisions that have
the responsibility of administering and enforcing the Stille-DeRossett-Hale
Single State Construction Code Act by M.C.L.A. § 125.1523, violations described
in subsection (1) or (2) thereof are hereby designated as civil infractions and
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in §
1-17 of the code of the city.
   (B)   The Chief Code Official as designated by the City Manager to direct
and supervise code officials and any city employees or agents of the city that
are registered under the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act,
1986 P.A. 54, M.C.L.A. §§ 338.2301 to 338.2313, or any subsequent version of
that act, is authorized to issue and serve municipal civil infraction citations
for violations of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act
and the code as defined by § 4 of the act, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1504.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 14-127 SUNSET.
   Article VI codified herein will sunset after four years.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 10-26-2015)
CHAPTER 15: BUSINESSES
Section
Article I. In General
   15-1 -- 15-25 Reserved
Article II. Adult Entertainment Establishment Licensing
   
15-26   Definitions
   
15-27   License
   
15-28   Application for license
   
15-29   Standards for issuance of license
   
15-30   Fees
   
15-31   Display of license or permit
   
15-32   Renewal of license or permit
   
15-33   Revocation or suspension of license
   
15-34   Physical layout of adult entertainment establishment
   
15-35   Responsibilities of the operator
   
15-36   Penalty
Article III. Manufactured Homes
   
15-50   Construction codes and definitions
   
15-51   Operation of a community
   
15-52   Design and layout
   
15-53   Disaster, severe weather
   
15-54   Fire
   
15-55   Flood areas
   
15-56   General safety and maintenance
   
15-57   Pest and animal control
   
15-58   Swimming pools
   
15-59   Garbage and rubbish disposal; sanitation
   
15-60   Penalty
Article IV. Marihuana Establishments
   
15-75   Prohibition of marihuana establishments
   
15-76   Medical marihuana caregiver regulations
Commercial Cannabis
   
15-77   Title
   
15-78   Commercial cannabis/marihuana
   
15-79   Legislative findings
   
15-80   Purposes and intent
   
15-81   Definitions
   
15-82   Federal and state law
   
15-83   Municipal cannabis license required
   
15-84   General license application requirements
   
15-85   Denial of application
   
15-86   Issuance of municipal cannabis operating license
   
15-87   License forfeiture
   
15-88   License renewal
   
15-89   Transfer, sale or purchase of license
   
15-90   License as revocable privilege
   
15-91   Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license
   
15-92   Compliance with rules; inspections
   
15-93   Signage and advertising
   
15-94   Cannabis operations security requirements
   
15-95   Limits on cannabis operations licenses and locations; other
requirements
   
15-96   Odor control
   
15-97   Prohibited acts
   
15-98   Reports of crime
   
15-99   Compliance with law, environmental; other laws remain applicable
   
15-100   Grant of administrative authority
   
15-101   Violations and penalties
   
15-102   Additional provisions
Article V. Mobile Food Vending
   
15-115   Definitions
   
15-116   Permit required
   
15-117   Fees
   
15-118   Requirements
   
15-119   Application requirements
   
15-120   Review
   
15-121   Impoundment
   
15-122   Other licenses
   
15-123   Fire inspections
   
15-124   Violations; civil infraction; suspension or revocation of permit
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 15-1 -- 15-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING
§ 15-26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall mean.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that has as a substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any 1 or
more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, movies, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use as part of,
or in connection with, specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. Any place that features 1 or more topless dancers, go-go
dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, wait staff or
other persons, any of whom reveal or show specific anatomical areas of their
bodies, or who engage in, perform or simulate specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment, where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic
reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual devices.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means and includes any 1 or more of the
following:
      (1)   Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Means and includes any 1 or more of the
following:
      (1)   The fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy;
      (3)   Human masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human excretory functions, as part of or as related to, any of the
activities described above; and
      (5)   Physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape, actual or
simulated, as part of or as related to, any of the activities described above.
   SUBSTANTIAL PORTION. A use or activity accounting for more than 20% of any 1
or more of the  following: stock-in-trade, display space, usable floor are, or
viewing time, movie display time, or entertainment time measured per month.
(1993 Code, § 15-26) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998; Ord. passed 12-8-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
82-4
§ 15-27 LICENSE.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of the ordinance set forth in this
article, no adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or massage parlor,
hereinafter referred to as adult entertainment establishments, shall be
operated or maintained in the city without first obtaining a license to operate
issued by the city.
   (B)   A license may be issued only for 1 adult entertainment establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation
which desires to operate more than 1 adult entertainment establishment must
have a license for each.
   (C)   No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
   (D)   All private schools and public schools located within the city are
exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing pupils in sex
education as part of its curriculum.
(1993 Code, § 15-27) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-28 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license
shall make application to the City Clerk. The application shall be dated by the
City Clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the City
Clerk to the Charlotte Police Department and to the applicant.
   (B)   The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
City Clerk. An application for a license, which shall include all partners or
limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers and directors of
a corporate applicant and all stockholders including more than 5% of the stock
of a corporate applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the
ownership or operation of the business, shall furnish the following information
under oath:
      (1)   Name and address, including all aliases;
      (2)   Date of birth;
      (3)   Social security number;
      (4)   Michigan vehicle operator's license number;
      (5)   Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
      (6)   All residential addresses of the applicant for the past 3 years;
      (7)   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
      (8)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for 5 years
immediately preceding the date of application;
      (9)   Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
county, city, or state under an adult entertainment establishment license or
similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade
name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or
revocation;
      (10)   All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or city ordinance
violation convictions, forfeiture of bond or pleadings of nolo contendere on
all criminal charges, except minor traffic violations;
      (11)   Fingerprints and 2 portrait photographs at least 2 inches by 2
inches of the applicant;
      (12)   The address of the adult entertainment establishment to be
operated by the applicant;
      (13)   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify
the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and
address of the registered agent and the name and address of all shareholders
owning more than 5% of the stock in said corporation and all officers and
directors of the corporation.
   (C)   Within 21 days of receiving an application for a license the City
Clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied.
   (D)   Whenever an application is denied, the City Clerk shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests
a hearing within 10 days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing
shall be held within 30 days thereafter before the Council, as hereinafter
provided.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding
the application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
investigation required by this article shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds
for denial thereof by the City Clerk.
(1993 Code, § 15-28) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-29 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   To receive a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment,
an applicant must meet the following standards.
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual:
         (a)   The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   The applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo
contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within 5 years
immediately preceding the date of the application;
         (c)   The applicant shall not have been found to have previously
violated this article or a substantially similar ordinance within 5 years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
      (2)   If the applicant is a corporation:
         (a)   All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named
under §
15-28(B) shall be at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under §
15-28(B) shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or
any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of
a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within 5 years immediately preceding the
date of the application;
         (c)   No officer, director, or stockholder required to be named under
§
15-28(B) shall have been found to have previously violated this article or a
substantially similar ordinance within 5 years immediately preceding the date
of the application.
      (3)   If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type
of organization where 2 or more persons have a financial interest:
         (a)   All persons having a financial interest in the partnership,
joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction
within 5 years immediately preceding the date of the application;
         (c)   No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated
any provision of this article or a substantially similar ordinance within 5
years immediately preceding the date of the application.
   (B)   No license shall be issued unless the Charlotte Police Department has
investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that
investigation shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk no later than 14
days after the date of the application.
(1993 Code, § 15-29) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-30 FEES.
   A license fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application for a license.
If the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned.
(1993 Code, § 15-30) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-31 DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult
entertainment establishment.
(1993 Code, § 15-31) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-32 RENEWAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the
expiration of 1 year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must
be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator
desiring to renew a license shall make application to the City Clerk. The
application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license
expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate and dated by
the City Clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed
promptly by the City Clerk to the Charlotte Police Department and to the
business operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by
the City Clerk and shall contain such information and date, given under oath or
affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license.
   (B)   A license renewal fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application
for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100 shall be
assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before
the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of that fee
collected shall be returned.
   (C)   If the Charlotte Police Department is aware of any information bearing
on the operator's qualification, that information shall be filed in writing
with the City Clerk.
(1993 Code, § 15-32) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-33 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council can revoke or suspend a license or permit for any of
the following reasons:
      (1)   Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any application;
      (2)   The operator or any employee of the operator has violated any
provision of this article or any other ordinance of the city or rule or
regulation adopted by the City Council pursuant to this article; provided,
however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator, where the conduct
was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30
days, if the Council shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive
knowledge of such violation, and could not by the exercise of due diligence
have had such actual or constructive knowledge;
      (3)   The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit or
the operator is convicted of, or pleads nolo contendere to, any felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a
sexual nature;
      (4)   Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment;
      (5)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed
premises, including but not limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes;
         (b)   A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed
premises that is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order, and
tranquility of the neighborhood;
         (c)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being deposited upon
adjoining premises;
         (d)   Entertainment on the licensed premises without a permit and/or
entertainment that disturbs the peace, order and tranquility in the
neighborhood of the licensed premises;
         (e)   Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the
licensed premises that by its nature causes, creates or contributes to
disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the
disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed
premises;
      (6)   The failure to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by
the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of city code;
      (7)   The failure to comply with all standards and plans established and
approved by the City Council at the time of original approval or transfer of
the license;
      (8)   The failure to timely pay its taxes or other monies due the city;
      (9)   Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid;
      (10)   The operator fails to maintain a special use permit for the site
as required by the zoning ordinance, or fails to comply with the conditions of
the special use permit.
   (B)   The Council, before revoking or suspending any license or permit,
shall give the operator at least 10 days written notice of the charges against
him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the City Council, as
hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Before the City Council revokes or suspends a license issued
herein, the City Council shall cause written notice to be sent by certified
mail to the licensee or applicant affected, at the address stated in the
license or application, informing such person of the right to a hearing upon
request.
      (2)   If the licensee does not request a hearing within 14 days of the
date the notice was sent, the license may be forthwith revoked or suspended. If
the licensee requests a hearing before the City Council regarding said proposed
revocation or suspension, said hearing shall be held within 21 days after the
date of the written request.
      (3)   Both the city and the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to present evidence on the issue at the hearing. Action taken by
the City Council shall be final, and any fees hereunder shall not be refunded
to the applicant or licensee.
   (C)   Any license issued by the city may be immediately suspended by the
City Manager or duly appointed city official, if it is determined that the
licensee has violated, or someone at or upon the licensed location has
violated, a city ordinance or state law, and that continued operation under the
license is contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. A licensee shall
have the right to a hearing before the City Council on any license suspension
by the City Manager, and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with this
article.
   (D)   The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall
automatically and immediately revoke the license.
   (E)   Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive
a license for 1 year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for
which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult entertainment
establishment for 6 months from the date of revocation of the license.
(1993 Code, § 15-33) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998; Ord. passed 12-8-2008)
§ 15-34 PHYSICAL LAYOUT OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
   Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers,
patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any
adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the adult entertainment establishment and shall
be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type device.
   (B)   Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet with the
following construction requirements.
      (1)   Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
      (2)   Have at least 1 side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same.
      (3)   All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from
the floor to a height of not less than 6 feet and be light colored, non-
absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
      (4)   The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and
easily cleaned.
      (5)   The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use
shall be a minimum of 10 foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor.
   (C)   Occupants. Only 1 individual shall occupy a both, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity,
cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall
damage or deface any portion of the booth.
(1993 Code, § 15-34) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-35 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR.
   (A)   The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the
names and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, date of birth, sex,
height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social security numbers,
date of employment and termination, and duties of each employee. The above
information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the
premises for a period of 3 years following termination.
   (B)   Daily hours of operation of any adult entertainment establishment
shall be limited to the period of time from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
   (C)   The operator shall make the register of employees available
immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the Charlotte
Police Department at all reasonable times.
   (D)   No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the
premises shall be displayed in window areas or any areas where they can be
viewed from a public sidewalk adjacent to the establishment.
   (E)   Any individual viewing booths, entertainment rooms, or similar
cubicles designed or used for individuals to view specified anatomical areas or
to view specified sexual activities shall not be completely enclosed from
common areas, hallways, or other areas of the adult entertainment
establishment.
   (F)   Reserved.
   (G)   No intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage shall be served or
consumed on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (H)   The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
   (I)   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to
supervise the employee's conduct and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
   (J)   Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked,
suspended or renewed.
   (K)   No employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall allow any
minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult entertainment establishment or
to allow any minor to view adult entertainment as defined herein.
   (L)   The operator shall maintain at least 10 foot candles of light in the
public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times encased
from the floor. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall
be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth,
room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be
maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less
than 1 foot candle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor.
   (M)   The operator shall insure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this article.
(1993 Code, § 15-35) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§ 15-36 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person convicted under this chapter shall be subject to a
maximum penalty of 90 days in jail, or an equal amount of time of community
service, or any combination thereof not exceeding 90 days, plus $500 fine, plus
actual costs of prosecution, plus mandatory restitution to victims.
   (B)   Continuing violations. In addition to the penalty provided in division
(A) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
the provisions of this Code, or any ordinance, shall be deemed a new and
separate offense for each day that such condition continues to exist.
(1993 Code, § 15-36) (Ord. passed 4-27-1998)
§§ 15-37 -- 15-49 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. MANUFACTURED HOMES
§ 15-50 CONSTRUCTION CODES AND DEFINITIONS.
   Minimum specifications for manufactured home construction (including the
home plumbing, heating, and electrical systems) shall be those established in
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)'s
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (24 C.F.R. 3280), if the
home was built on or after June 15, 1976, the effective date of these
standards, per 24 C.F.R. 3282.1(a). Section A119.1 of the ANSI (American
National Standards Institute) code shall be the minimum construction standard
for manufactured homes built before June 15, 1976. A manufactured home whose
construction is altered may be required to comply with codes established under
1972 PA 230, the Stille-De-Rossetti-Hale Single State Construction Code Act.
   The following definitions shall apply:
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which
is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in
the structure.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY. A parcel or tract of land under the control
of a person, upon which 3 or more manufactured homes are located on a
continual, nonrecreational basis, and which is offered to the public for that
purpose, regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any
building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended
for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured home. A PERSON, as used in
this definition, means an individual, partnership, association, trust,
corporation, or any other legal entity or combination of legal entities.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-51 OPERATION OF A COMMUNITY.
   A manufactured housing community owner shall operate the community according
to the standards established and referenced in the Act and Manufactured Housing
Commission Rules.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-52 DESIGN AND LAYOUT.
   The design, layout, construction, and use of a manufactured housing
community shall comply with the regulations set forth in this article, pursuant
to the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-53 DISASTER, SEVERE WEATHER.
   A manufactured housing community shall provide each community resident
immediately upon occupancy with written information indicating whether the
local government provides a severe weather warning system or designated
shelters. If a warning system or shelter is provided, the information shall
describe the system and the nearest shelter location.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-54 FIRE.
   1974 PA 133, being M.C.L.A. 125.771 et seq., which provides for home fire
protection, requires that all manufactured homes built, sold, or brought into
this state shall be equipped with at least 1 fire extinguisher approved by the
National Fire Protection Association, and 1 smoke detector approved by the
Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes. The homeowner of a manufactured home
brought into this state for use as a dwelling shall have 90 days to comply with
this requirement, under 1974 PA 133, as amended. The manufactured housing
community shall provide its residents with written notification of this
requirement, which may be published in the community rules.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-55 FLOOD AREAS.
   A manufactured home shall not be placed in a designated floodway, as
determined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), per Rule
R125.1602(4).
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-56 GENERAL SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE. 
   The operator of a manufactured housing community shall maintain community
equipment and facilities in a safe, sanitary condition, as required under MDEQ
Rules R325.3371 and R325.3374.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-57 PEST AND ANIMAL CONTROL.
   A manufactured housing community operator shall maintain the community in a
condition reasonably free of health and safety hazards resulting from insects,
rodents and other animals in the care of residents. Accordingly, the
manufactured housing community shall comply with the provisions of MDEQ Rules
R325.3361, R325.3363 and R325.3372.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-58 SWIMMING POOLS. 
   Swimming pools in manufactured housing communities shall comply with
Michigan Administrative Code Rules R325.2111 et seq., 1978 PA 368, as amended,
and Rule Rl25.1941 (l)(f).
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-59 GARAGE AND RUBBISH DISPOSAL; SANITATION.
   Each manufactured home site shall use approved garbage/rubbish containers
that meet the requirements of Part 5 of the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality Health Standards, Rules R325.3351 through R325.3354. The
containers shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. It shall be the
responsibility of the community operator to ensure that all garbage/rubbish
containers do not overflow, and that all areas within the community are free of
garbage/rubbish.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
§ 15-60 PENALTY.
   Any person owning or operating a manufactured home community who violates
any of the sections in this article, or causes, permits or suffers any such
violation to be committed, shall be punished as prescribed in §
1-17(b) of this Code.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2008)
ARTICLE IV. MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 15-75 PROHIBITION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of § 6.1 on the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act (the “Act’), Marihuana establishments, as defined by
the Act, are completely prohibited with the boundaries of the City of
Charlotte.
   (B)   Any applicant for a state or local license to establish a marihuana
establishment, as defined by the Act, within the boundaries of the city shall
be deemed to be not in compliance with this subchapter or with the Code of
Ordinances amended by this subchapter.
   (C)   This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to
the transportation of marihuana through the city to the extent provided by the
Act, and does not supersede rights and obligations under the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, the Medical Marihuana Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, or any other
law of the State of Michigan allowing for or regulating marihuana for medical
use.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 15-76 MEDICAL MARIHUANA CAREGIVER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to give effect to the intent
of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421
et seq. (hereinafter "Act") as approved by the electors. These provisions are
designed to recognize the fundamental intent of the Act to allow the creation
and maintenance of a private and confidential patient-caregiver relationship to
facilitate the statutory authorization for the limited cultivation, storage,
distribution and use of marihuana for medical purposes; and to regulate this
fundamental intent in a manner that does not conflict with the Act. By
permitting the operations of registered primary caregivers as a home
occupation, rather than in a commercial setting, this promotes the Act's
purpose of ensuring that a registered primary caregiver is not assisting more
than the five qualifying patients permitted in the Act with their medical use
of marihuana, and a registered primary caregiver does not unlawfully expand its
operations beyond five qualified patients, so as to become an illegal
commercial operation in the nature of a marihuana collective, cooperative, or
dispensary.
   (B)   Remainder of article; effect of permit approval. In recognition of the
unique nature of the medical marihuana caregiver as a home occupation provided
for hereunder, the conditions and requirements set forth in Chapter 82, §
82-107 for home occupations shall not be applicable to medical marihuana home
occupations.
   (C)   Regulations. The following standards and requirements shall apply to
the location at which the medical use of marihuana is conducted by a primary
caregiver.
      (1)   The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times with the
MMMA and the MMMA General Rules, as amended.
      (2)   A registered primary caregiver shall not possess marihuana, or
otherwise engage in the medical use of marihuana, in a school bus, on the
grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, or in any correctional
facility.
      (3)   Not more than two registered primary caregivers, who shall also be
full-time residents of the dwelling, shall be permitted to operate at any one
property.
      (4)   The medical use of marihuana shall be conducted entirely within a
dwelling or attached garage, except that a registered primary caregiver may
keep and cultivate, in an "enclosed, locked facility" (as that phrase is
defined by the MMMA), up to 12 marihuana plants for each registered qualifying
patient with whom the registered primary caregiver is connected through the
registration process established by the Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs, and up to 12 additional marihuana plants for personal use, if the
primary caregiver is also registered as a qualifying patient under the MMMA.
      (5)   A sign identifying the home occupation by word, image or otherwise,
or indicating that the medical use of marihuana is taking place on the
premises, shall not be permitted; nor shall any vehicle having such a sign be
parked anywhere on the premises.
      (6)   Except for lighting, heating, watering, drying or other equipment,
or fertilizers, herbicides or other chemicals directly related to the medical
use of marihuana, no other materials or equipment not generally associated with
normal ownership, use, and maintenance of a dwelling shall be permitted.
      (7)   Distribution of marihuana or use of items in the administration of
marihuana shall not occur at or on the premises of the primary caregiver. A
qualifying patient shall not visit, come to, or be present at the residence of
the primary caregiver to purchase, smoke, consume, obtain or receive possession
of any marihuana.
      (8)   Except for the primary caregiver, no other person shall deliver
marihuana to the qualifying patient.
      (9)   No one under the age of 18 years shall have access to medical
marihuana.
      (10)   No on-site consumption or smoking of marihuana shall be permitted
within the dwelling (or on the property) of a primary caregiver, except for
lawful medical marihuana consumption by the primary caregiver if registered as
a qualifying patient under the MMMA.
      (11)   Medical marihuana shall not be grown, processed, handled or
possessed at the dwelling of the primary caregiver beyond that which is
permitted by law.
      (12)   All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical
permits shall be obtained for any portion of a building or structure in which
equipment and devices that support the cultivation, growing or harvesting of
marihuana are located or used.
      (13)   If marihuana is grown or located in a room with windows, all
interior lighting shall be shielded to prevent ambient light from creating a
distraction for adjacent properties.
      (14)   Related merchandise or products shall not be sold or distributed
from the dwelling or property of the primary caregiver, apart from the
permitted quantity of medical marihuana.
      (15)   To ensure compliance with all applicable requirements and laws,
the portion of a building or other structure, such as a cultivation room, where
energy use and heating requirements exceed typical residential limits and
chemical storage occurs, are subject to inspection and approval by the zoning
administrator or other authorized official.
      (16)   The property, dwelling and all enclosed, locked facilities shall
be available for inspection upon request by the zoning administrator, building
official or law enforcement official.
   (D)   Permit required. The operations of a registered primary caregiver, as
a home occupation, shall be permitted only with the prior issuance of a City of
Charlotte permit.
      (1)   A complete and accurate application shall be submitted on a form
provided by the city and an application fee in an amount determined by
resolution of the City Council shall be paid.
      (2)   The permit application shall include the name and address of the
applicant; the address of the property; proof, such as a driver's license,
voter registration card or similar record showing that the dwelling is the
applicant's full-time residence; a current state registration card issued to
the primary caregiver; a full description of the nature and types of equipment
which will be used in marihuana cultivation and processing; and a description
of the location at which the use will take place. The zoning administrator may
require additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance with all
requirements. The zoning administrator shall review the application to
determine compliance with this section, the MMMA and the MMMA General Rules. A
permit shall be granted if the application demonstrates compliance with this
section, the MMMA and the MMMA General Rules.
      (3)   The use shall be maintained in compliance with the requirements of
this section, the MMMA and the MMMA General Rules. Any departure shall be
grounds to revoke the permit and take other lawful action. If a permit is
revoked, the applicant shall not engage in the activity unless and until a new
permit is granted.
      (4)   Information treated as confidential under the MMMA, including the
primary caregiver registry identification card and any information about
qualifying patients associated with the primary caregiver, which is received by
the city, shall be maintained separately from public information submitted in
support of the application. It shall not be distributed or otherwise made
available to the public and shall not be subject to disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act.
      (5)   It is unlawful to establish or operate a for-profit or nonprofit
marihuana dispensary, collective or cooperative within the city, even if such
use is intended for the medical use of marihuana.
      (6)   The use of the dwelling or other permitted facility of a qualifying
patient to cultivate medical marihuana in accordance with the MMMA, solely for
personal use, does not require a permit under this subsection; however, all
applicable state and city ordinance requirements must be met.
      (7)   The provisions of this subsection do not apply to the personal use
and/or internal possession of marihuana by a qualifying patient in accordance
with the MMMA, for which a permit is not required.
   (E)   Enforcement. Any violation of this section shall be considered a civil
infraction.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 8-1-2022)
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS
§ 15-77 TITLE.
   This subarticle shall be known as the “City of Charlotte Commercial Cannabis
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-78 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS/MARIHUANA.
   The processing, retail sale, testing, and secure transportation of cannabis/
marihuana products are permitted within certain districts within the city
limits under The Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016
(“MMFLA”) as amended, and the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana
Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018 (“MRTMA”), as amended. The term CANNABIS shall
have the same meaning as MARIHUANA as defined in the MRTMA, M.C.L. § 333.27953
(e), MMFLA, and the MMMA. The term MARIHUANA and CANNABIS used herein are
interchangeable, and the term CANNABIS shall be used.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-79 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   Whereas, the City of Charlotte (hereinafter referred to as the
“city”), through its elected City Council, recognizes that on November 6, 2018,
Michigan voters, including the residents of the city, approved Proposal 18-1,
creating the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (hereinafter
referred to as the “MRTMA” being M.C.L. §§ 333.27951 et seq.) and provided for
the licensing and regulation of recreational marihuana establishments under the
MRTMA.
   (B)   Whereas, the MRTMA provides that a municipal ordinance may completely
prohibit or limit the number of marihuana establishments within its boundaries.
   (C)   Whereas, the city desires to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the city by permitting specific MMFLA and MRTMA
state-licensed marihuana establishments as: processor, retail, safety
compliance facility and secure transporter licenses within the boundaries and
jurisdiction of the city subject to this subarticle.
   (D)   Whereas, the city desires to prohibit all other cannabis operations,
licenses, establishments, and business not expressly permitted under this
subarticle, including those licenses under the MRTMA and the MMFLA, except
those activities expressly permitted under the Michigan Marihuana Act (“MMMA”),
as amended.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-80 PURPOSES AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subarticle is to exercise the police, regulatory,
and land use powers of the city by licensing and regulating cannabis operations
to the extent permissible under state law and regulations and to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and those
within the city boundaries.
   (B)   The city finds that the activities described in this subarticle are
significantly connected to the public health, safety, security, and welfare of
its residents and therefore necessary to regulate and enforce safety, security,
fire, police, health, and sanitation practices related to such activities and
also to provide a method to defray administrative costs incurred by such
regulation and enforcement.
   (C)   The city further finds and declares that economic development,
including job creation and training, increase and productive land use, and the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of city neighborhoods and
residents are public purposes.
It is not the intent of this subarticle, except as may be required or permitted
by law or regulation, to diminish, abrogate, or restrict the protections for
medical use of cannabis found in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act (“MMMA”).
   (D)   The city adopts this subarticle:
      (1)   To implement certain provisions of the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, and certain provisions of the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018, to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city by setting
forth the manner in which specific cannabis operations may be operated within
the jurisdiction of the city.
      (2)   To establish this subarticle pertaining to the regulation of
cannabis operations consistent with state law and regulations. Nothing in this
subarticle purports to permit activities that are otherwise illegal under state
or local law or expressly prohibited by this subarticle.
      (3)   Further, this subarticle:
         (a)   Prohibits within the jurisdiction of the city all cannabis
activities, operations, licenses, facilities, establishments, and business not
expressly permitted under this subarticle, including those licenses under the
MRTMA and the MMFLA, except those activities expressly permitted under the
Michigan Marihuana Act (“MMMA”), as amended.
         (b)   Provides for and limits the location and type of cannabis
operations, facilities, and establishments licensed under the MMFLA and MRTMA
and Department licensees within the jurisdiction of the city.
         (c)   Provides for and regulates and controls cannabis operations,
Department licensees, for the commercial retail sale, processing, secure
transportation, and safety compliance testing of cannabis, as set forth herein,
and for purposes of implementing specific licensure provided under the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, where such activities will have minimal detrimental impact.
         (d)   To protect public health and safety through reasonable
limitations on cannabis operations, Department licensees, and commercial
operations, and limitations upon other cannabis related activities provided
under the MMFLA and MRTMA, as they relate to noise, odor, and water quality,
neighborhood safety, security for the cannabis operation and its personnel, and
other health and safety concerns.
         (e)   To provide fees to defray and recover the costs to the city of
the administrative, fire, and police costs associated with cannabis operations,
and permitted cannabis activities as provided under the MMFLA and MRTMA, as
permitted under this subarticle.
      (4)   This subarticle authorizes the establishment of specific cannabis
operations, facilities and establishments within the city, consistent with the
provisions of the MMFLA and MRTMA, and with regulations enacted by the
Department, and subject to the following:
         (a)   Nothing in this subarticle is intended to promote or condone the
commercial cannabis cultivation and grow, processing, transportation, testing,
production, distribution, sale, or possession of cannabis in violation of any
applicable law.
         (b)   This subarticle is to be construed to protect the public over
cannabis operations and licensee interests. The operation of cannabis
operations is a revocable privilege and not a right in the city. There is no
property right for a person or establishment to engage in or obtain a license
to engage in cannabis as a cannabis facility, establishment, or cannabis
operation or enterprise within the jurisdiction of the city.
         (c)   All licensees and their employees and agents are assumed to be
fully aware of the law; the city shall not therefore be required to issue
warnings before issuing citations or other enforcement measures for violations
of this subarticle or any applicable city ordinance, regulation, or state law
or regulation.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-81 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The words, terms, and phrases as related to marihuana and cannabis,
and marihuana and cannabis establishments, as used and identified in this
subarticle shall be defined and have the meanings ascribed to them, as defined
under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, and the Michigan Regulation
and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018, unless the term is
otherwise defined in this subarticle or the context requires a different
meaning.
   (B)   The term CANNABIS shall have the same meaning as MARIHUANA as defined
in the MRTMA, M.C.L. § 333.27953(e), MMFLA, and the MMMA. The term MARIHUANA
and CANNABIS used herein are interchangeable, and the term CANNABIS shall be
used.
      APPLICANT. A person who applies for a municipal cannabis operator’s
license under this subarticle.
      CANNABIS ACCESSORIES. Any equipment, product, material, or combination of
equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
      CANNABIS REGULATORY AGENCY (CRA). The Cannabis Licensing Agency created
within LARA to regulate and administer state licenses.
      CHURCH or RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. An entire space set apart primarily for
purposes of public worship, and which is tax exempt under the laws of this
state, and in which religious services are held, and the entire building
structure of which is kept for that use and not put to any other use
inconsistent with that use.
      CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Charlotte, Michigan.
      CO-LOCATION. The aggregation of multiple types of licenses, additional
licenses, or equivalent licenses permitted under the MRTMA and state rules and
located on one, or more, lot of record owned by an existing MRTMA and/or MMFLA
licensee, approved for operation in the city.
      COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE. A permanent structure that is constructed
primarily of glass, glass-like or translucent material which is devoted to the
protection or cultivation of plants, food or ornamental crops.
      COMMON OWNERSHIP. Two or more state licenses or two or more equivalent
licenses held by one person.
      CULTIVATE or CULTIVATION. To propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure,
or separate parts of the cannabis plant by manual or mechanical means.
      DEPARTMENT. The Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs
(LARA), including the Cannabis Regulatory Agency.
      DESIGNATED CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial space that is licensed
by the agency and authorized to permit adults 21 years of age and older to
consume cannabis products at the location indicated on the state license.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual who is employed by an employer in return for the
payment of direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, under contract, and any
individual who volunteers his or her services to an employer for no monetary
compensation, or any individual who performs work or renders services, for any
period of time, at the direction of an owner, lessee, or other person in charge
of a place. EMPLOYEE does not mean individuals providing trade services who are
not normally engaged in the operation of a cannabis establishment.
      ESTABLISHMENTS. ESTABLISHMENTS and FACILITIES are used interchangeably
and refer to any cannabis related locations at which a licensee is licensed to
operate under either MMFLA, MRTMA, or both.
      INDUSTRIAL HEMP. As defined under MRTMA.
      LICENSEE. A person holding a state operating license.
      MARIHUANA. As defined under MRTMA.
      MARIHUANA CONCENTRATE. The resin extracted from any part of the plant of
the genus cannabis.
      MARIHUANA [CANNABIS] ESTABLISHMENT. As defined under MRTMA.
      MARIHUANA FACILITIES LICENSING ACT (MMFLA). Public Act 281 of 2016,
M.C.L. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as may be amended.
      MARIHUANA [CANNABIS] PROCESSOR. As defined under MRTMA.
      MARIHUANA [CANNABIS] RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. As defined under MRTMA.
      MARIHUANA [CANNABIS]-INFUSED PRODUCT. A topical formulation, tincture,
beverage, edible substance, or similar product containing marihuana and other
ingredients and that is intended for human consumption.
      MICHIGAN MEDICAL MARIHUANA ACT (MMMA). Initiated Law 1 of 2008, M.C.L. §§
333.26421 et seq., as may be amended.
      MICHIGAN REGULATION AND TAXATION OF MARIHUANA ACT (MRTMA). Initiated Law
1 of 2018, M.C.L. §§ 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
      MUNICIPAL [CANNABIS] MARIHUANA LICENSE or LICENSE. A required cannabis
related municipal license issued pursuant to this subarticle that allows the
licensee to operate within the city as one of the following, as specified in
the license:
         (a)   Processor.
         (b)   Provisioning center.
         (c)   Retailer.
         (d)   Secure transporter.
         (e)   Safety compliance facility.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Charlotte, Michigan.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership of any type, trust, or other legal entity.
      PLANT. That term as defined in § 102 of the MMFLA, M.C.L. § 333.27102.
      PROPOSED MARIHUANA [CANNABIS] ESTABLISHMENT. A location at which an
applicant plans to operate a marihuana establishment under the MRTMA and
Department rules if the applicant is issued a state license.
      RULES. Rules promulgated by the Department in consultation with the CRA
to implement the MRTMA.
      SECURITY PLAN. A plan for preventing unauthorized access to, or theft and
pilferage from, a marihuana [cannabis] licensee establishment, approved for
operation in the city. A SECURITY PLAN must be approved by the City Manager
with the advice of the Chief of Police and City Attorney. The PLAN shall be
subject to review and reasonable approval by city staff, but shall include, at
a minimum, the following components:
         (a)   Perimeter fence as necessary.
         (b)   An exterior lighting system.
         (c)   A building security system.
         (d)   An on-site security guard program.
         (e)   An off-site official contact list.
         (f)   Established hours of operation.
         (g)   Appropriate signage.
         (h)   A plan for facility inspection by the city, which shall include
no less than an annual comprehensive fire and security inspection.
         (i)   Such other conditions required by this subarticle, the MMFLA,
MRTMA, LARA rules and regulations, city ordinance and resolution, city
administration, Police and Fire Departments.
      SAFETY COMPLIANCE ESTABLISHMENT. A person licensed to test cannabis,
including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.
      SCHOOL. Any building, playing field, or property used for school purposes
to impart instruction to children in grades kindergarten through 12, including
an intermediate school district, when provided by a public, private,
denominational, or parochial school, except those buildings used primarily for
adult education or college extension courses.
      SECURE TRANSPORTER. A person licensed to obtain cannabis from cannabis
establishments in order to transport cannabis to cannabis establishments.
      SPECIAL LICENSE. A state license for special events described under § 8
of the MRTMA and issued pursuant to § 9 of the MRTMA.
      STACKED LICENSE. More than one state license issued to a single licensee
to operate as a class C marihuana grower as specified in each state license at
a marihuana establishment. (Commercial grow licenses are not permitted under
this subarticle.)
      STATE OPERATING LICENSE. A license issued by the Department that allows a
person to operate a cannabis establishment.
      TEMPORARY MARIHUANA [CANNABIS] EVENT LICENSE. A state license held by a
cannabis event organizer for an event where the onsite sale or consumption of
cannabis products, or both, are authorized at the location indicated on the
state license during the dates indicated on the state license. (Not permitted
under this subarticle.)
      UNREASONABLY IMPRACTICABLE. The measures necessary to comply with the
rules or  ordinances adopted pursuant to the Act subject licensees to
unreasonable risk or require such a high investment of money, time, or any
other resource or asset that a reasonably prudent businessperson would not
operate the cannabis establishment.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The City of Charlotte zoning ordinance, as amended.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-82 FEDERAL AND STATE LAW.
   (A)   Nothing in this subarticle, city ordinance or codes, is intended to
grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal
prosecution for growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of
cannabis not in strict compliance with federal law and applicable rules.
   (B)   Relationship to state law.
      (1)   Nothing in this subarticle is intended to grant immunity from
criminal or civil prosecution, penalty or sanction for the cultivation,
manufacture, possession, use, sale, distribution or transport of marihuana,
cannabis, or hemp in any form, that is not in strict compliance with the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, the Marihuana
Tracking Act, and all applicable rules promulgated by the State of Michigan
regarding cannabis. Strict compliance with any applicable state law or
regulation and this subarticle shall be a requirement for the issuance or
renewal of any license issued under this subarticle. Noncompliance with any
applicable state law or regulation or this subarticle shall be grounds for
revocation or nonrenewal of any license issued under the terms of this
subarticle.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by the MMFLA, MRTMA and this
subarticle, a person who owns or leases real property upon which a cannabis
facility or establishment is located and who has noknowledge that the licensee
is violating or violated the MMFLA, MRTMA or a provision of this subarticle, is
not subject to criminal or civil prosecution under any applicable city
ordinance regulating cannabis.
      (3)   This subarticle does not apply to, or regulate, any patient or
caregiver conduct protected by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, 2008 IL 1,
M.C.L. §§ 333.26421 et seq. (MMMA), as amended.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-83 MUNICIPAL CANNABIS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall establish or operate a cannabis operation in the city
without a valid municipal license issued by the city and a state license for
each such facility to be operated. License certificates shall be kept current
and publicly displayed within the cannabis operations facility.
   (B)   City licenses are required as follows:
      (1)   Annual fee. A licensee must pay a nonrefundable registration fee of
$5,000 for each license used within the city to help defray administrative,
compliance monitoring, enforcement costs, and professional services, as
necessary. The holder of stacked or co-located licenses must pay a separate fee
in the amount of $5,000 for each license. The initial annual registration fee
(s) must be paid when the application for city approval is submitted. In each
subsequent year, license fees are due on the date of the city license approval.
Fees assessed for cannabis land use approvals or licensing are in addition to,
not in lieu of, any licensing, land use or other permitting requirements of any
law, state regulatory agency, or by city ordinance.
      (2)   The application fee requirement set forth in this section shall be
in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting
requirements imposed by any other federal, state, or city law or ordinance,
including, by way of example, any applicable zoning or building permits.
      (3)   The issuance of any license pursuant to this section does not
create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any
potential criminal liability the person may have for the production,
distribution, or possession of cannabis under federal law.
      (4)   Licenses may be allowed to be stacked for multiple uses per
premise, subject to the city's determination that such uses are compatible
together at that location, are consistent on a shared basis with all the
provisions of the MRTMA, the MMFLA, and applicable Department rules, and each
use is consistent with provisions of city ordinances. If those conditions are
met, more than one different cannabis operations licensee may be located on one
parcel, as permitted under this subarticle.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-84 GENERAL LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Cannabis operations license application. A person seeking a municipal
license pursuant to the MRTMA or the MMFLA, and the provisions of this
subarticle, shall submit a license application (in addition to the zoning
application), to the city on city-approved forms. At the time of license
application, each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable license application fee
as provided in this subarticle to defray the costs incurred by the city for
background investigations, inspection of the proposed premises, as well as any
other costs associated with the processing and review of the application. In
addition, the applicant shall present a suitable form of government-issued
identification.
   (B)   The license application shall also provide the following information
in this division (B), under the penalty of perjury, on the city-approved forms.
Such information is required for the applicant, the proposed manager of the
cannabis operations, and all persons involved in the cannabis operations that
is the subject of the application:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the applicant’s name, date of
birth, social security number, physical address, including residential and any
business address; copy of government-issued photo identification, email
address, one or more phone numbers, including emergency contact information;
and, if applicable, federal tax identification number of the applicant;
      (2)   If the applicant is a business entity, information regarding the
entity, including, without limitation, the name and address of the entity, its
legal status, and proof of registration with, or a certificate of good standing
from, the State of Michigan, as applicable;
      (3)   The identity of every applicant and person having any ownership
interest in the cannabis operation with respect to which the municipal license
is sought;
      (4)   If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed licensed
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a cannabis operation;
      (5)   A copy of any deed reflecting the applicant’s ownership of, or
lease reflecting the right of the applicant to possess, or an option reflecting
the applicant’s right to purchase or lease, the proposed licensed premises;
      (6)   In addition to the site plan, three stamped or sealed 24 inch by 36
inch drawings of the proposed licensed premises showing, without limitation,
building layout, all entryways and exits, ingress and egress to the proposed
licensed premises, loading zones and all areas in which cannabis will be,
manufactured, processed, stored, or dispensed. All plans and drawings shall be
submitted in an electronic format as well;
      (7)   A comprehensive operation plan incorporating the requirements of
the zoning application to include the security plan;
      (8)   Prior criminal history will be addressed/considered consistent with
the provisions of the MRTMA, including but not limited to M.C.L. § 333.27958(1)
(c) and/or the MMFLA, including but not limited to M.C.L. § 333.27401(1)(d),
Department rules and regulations;
      (9)   Whether an applicant has ever applied for or has been granted any
commercial license or certificate issued by a licensing authority in Michigan
or any other jurisdiction that has been denied, restricted, suspended, revoked,
or not renewed and a statement describing the facts and circumstances
concerning the application, denial, restriction, suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal, including the licensing authority, the date each action was taken,
and the reason for each action;
      (10)   Whether an applicant has filed, or been served with, a complaint
or other notice filed with any public body, regarding the delinquency in the
payment of, or a dispute over the filings concerning the payment of, any tax
required under federal, state, or local law, including the amount, type of tax,
taxing agency, and time periods involved;
      (11)   A description of the type of cannabis operations; and the
anticipated or actual number of employees;
      (12)   An acknowledgment and consent that the city may conduct a
background investigation, including a criminal history check, and that the city
will be entitled to full and complete disclosure of all financial records of
the cannabis commercial entity, including records of deposit, withdrawals,
balances and loans; and
      (13)   Any additional information that the city reasonably determines to
be necessary in connection with the investigation and review of the
application.
   (C)   Consistent with the MRTMA, including but not limited to M.C.L. §
333.27959(7), the MMFLA, including but not limited to M.C.L. § 333.27205(4),
and the Freedom of Information Act, PA 442 of 1976,M.C.L. §§ 15.231 et seq.,
the information provided to the city and City Clerk pursuant to this section
relative to licensure is exempt from disclosure.
   (D)   All cannabis operations shall obtain all other required permits or
licenses related to the operation of the cannabis commercial entity, including,
without limitation, any development approvals or building permits required by
any applicable code or ordinance.
   (E)   If a deficiency is identified in an application, the applicant shall
have ten business days to correct the deficiency after notification, or as
determined by the City Manager.
   (F)   Upon an applicant’s completion of the above-provided form and
furnishing of all required information and documentation, the City Clerk shall
accept the application and assign it an application number by cannabis
operations type.
   (G)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall
circulate the application to the City Manager, City Attorney, Community
Development, Fire, and Police Departments, Assessing, and Public Works (as well
as any other city department that the city may determine is pertinent to review
of such applications) to determine whether the application is in full
compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
   (H)   License evaluation criteria.
      (1)   Section 9 of the MRTMA requires that the city establish a
competitive process to select applicants who are best suited to operate in
compliance with the MRTMA and this subarticle when a municipality limits the
number of cannabis establishments that may be licensed in the municipality.
      (2)   Under this subarticle, the city is restricting cannabis licensees
to the Cannabis Overlay Districts as identified in this subarticle and the city
zoning ordinance. In the event that the city allows more licenses categories
and limits the number of those cannabis licensees, and the city will establish
requirements for granting cannabis licenses under a City Council approved
resolution.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-85 DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk’s office, following recommendations from the above-
referenced Departments, shall reject any application that does not meet the
requirements of the MRTMA, the MMFLA, the rules promulgated by LARA, this
subarticle, applicable city ordinances, or other applicable law or regulations.
The City Clerk shall reject any application that contains any false, misleading
or incomplete information.
   (B)   Subject to the provisions of the MRTMA, and/or the MMFLA, an applicant
is ineligible to receive a license under this subarticle if any of the
following circumstances exist regarding the applicant:
      (1)   Conviction that involved distribution of a controlled substance to
a minor.
      (2)   The applicant knowingly submitted an application for a license that
contains false, misleading or fraudulent information, or has intentionally
omitted pertinent information on the application for a license.
      (3)   The applicant is an employee, advisor, or consultant of the agency
involved in the implementation, administration, or enforcement of the act or
these rules pursuant to section 7 of the MRTMA, M.C.L. § 333.27957, and M.C.L.
§ 333.27402(2)(g) of the MMFLA.
      (4)   The applicant holds an elective office of a governmental unit of
this state, another state, or the federal government; is a member of or
employed by a regulatory body of a governmental unit in this state, another
state, or the federal government; or is employed by a governmental unit of this
state. This division (B)(4) does not apply to an elected officer of or employee
of a federally recognized Native American tribe or to an elected precinct
delegate.
      (5)   Conviction of or release from incarceration for a felony under the
laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past ten
years, except that, consistent with M.C.L. § 333.27958(1)(c), a prior
conviction solely for a marihuana-related offense does not disqualify an
individual or otherwise affect eligibility for licensure, unless the offense
involved distribution of marihuana to a minor.
      (6)   Other than as set forth in M.C.L. § 333.27958(1)(c), within the
past five years, conviction of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance,
theft, dishonesty, or fraud in any state or having been found responsible for
violating a local ordinance in any state involving a controlled substance,
dishonesty, theft, or fraud that substantially corresponds to a misdemeanor in
that state. This division (B)(6) does not apply to a misdemeanor or ordinance
violation for the possession or use of marijuana.
      (7)   The applicant fails to provide and maintain adequate premises
liability and casualty insurance for its proposed cannabis operations.
      (8)   The applicant is an owner of, or has an interest in, such business
or entity which, pursuant to the provisions of M.C.L. § 333.27959(3)(d), would
make the applicant ineligible for the license for which the applicant has
applied, or the applicant otherwise fails to meet other criteria established by
state law.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-86 ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL CANNABIS OPERATING LICENSE.
   (A)   Inspection. An inspection of the proposed cannabis operations facility
by the city shall be required prior to issuance of the city operating license.
Such inspection shall occur after the premises are ready for operation, but
prior to the stocking of the business with any cannabis, and prior to the
opening of the business to the public. The inspection is to verify that the
facilities are constructed and can be operated in accordance with the
application submitted and the applicable requirements of this subarticle and
any other applicable law, rule, or regulation.
   (B)   After verification that the cannabis operations facility is
constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application submitted
and the applicable requirements of this subarticle and any other applicable
law, rule, or regulation, the City Clerk shall issue a city operating license
whose term shall run concurrent with the state operating license for the
facility or establishment.
   (C)   Maintaining a valid cannabis facility or establishment license issued
by the state is a condition for the issuance and maintenance of the city
operating license issued under this subarticle and the continued operation of
any cannabis facility and establishment.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-87 LICENSE FORFEITURE.
   In the event that a cannabis operations facility does not commence
operations within one year of issuance of a city cannabis operation license,
the license shall be deemed forfeited; the business may not commence
operations; notwithstanding, the license may be reviewed by the City Council
for renewal.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-88 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   A cannabis operation license shall run concurrently with the state
operating cannabis license issued for the cannabis operation, unless revoked as
provided by law.
   (B)   An annual nonrefundable cannabis operating license fee must be paid to
defray the administrative and enforcement costs associated with the operating
license for a cannabis operation located in the city. A nonrefundable operating
license fee will be in an amount as permitted by the MRTMA, the MMFLA, and
subsequent regulations, as established by city resolution. An application to
renew a cannabis operations facility or establishment operating license shall
be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of its expiration.
   (C)   Prior to the issuance of a renewed cannabis facility or establishment
license by the city, the premises shall be inspected to assure that it and its
systems are in compliance with the requirements of this subarticle and any
other city ordinances.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-89 TRANSFER, SALE OR PURCHASE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A cannabis operation license is valid only for the owner named
thereon, the type of business disclosed on the application for the license, and
the location for which the license is issued. The licensees of a cannabis
operation license are only those persons disclosed in the application or
subsequently disclosed to the city in accordance with this subarticle.
   (B)   A cannabis operating license is exclusive to the licensee. Licensees
shall report material changes to the Department and the City Clerk before
making material changes that may require prior authorization by the Department.
Material changes include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Change in owners, officers, members, or managers.
      (2)   Change of location. Upon notification of a change in location the
Department may determine that a new license and new inspection are required for
the change of location.
      (3)   The addition or removal of persons disclosed in the application.
      (4)   Change in entity name.
      (5)   Any attempted transfer, sale, or other conveyance of an interest in
a license.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-90 LICENSE AS REVOCABLE PRIVILEGE.
   An operation license granted by this subarticle is a revocable privilege
granted by the city and is not a property right. Granting a license does not
create or vest any right, title, franchise, or other property interest. Each
license is exclusive to the licensee, and a licensee or any other person must
apply for and receive the city’s approval before a license is transferred,
sold, or purchased. A licensee or any other person shall not lease, pledge, or
borrow or loan money against a license. The attempted transfer, sale, or other
conveyance of an interest in a license without prior agency approval is grounds
for suspension or revocation of the license or for other sanction considered
appropriate by the city.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-91 NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council shall, after 30 days’ notice and hearing, suspend,
revoke or refuse to renew a license or special land use permit for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant or licensee, or his or her agent, manager, or
employee, has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with, any of the
terms, requirements, conditions or provisions of this subarticle or with any
applicable state or local law or regulation;
      (2)   The applicant or licensee, or his or her agent, manager, or
employee, has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions of its
license pursuant to an order of the state or local licensing authority,
including those terms and conditions that were established at the time of
issuance of the license and those imposed as a result of any disciplinary
proceedings held subsequent to the date of issuance of the license; or
      (3)   The cannabis operations facility has been operated in a manner that
adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Evidence to support a finding under this section is based upon the
preponderance of the evidence and may include, without limitation, a continuing
pattern of conduct, a continuing pattern of drug-related criminal conduct
within the premises ofthe cannabis operations or in the immediate area
surrounding such business, a continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly
related to or arising from the operation of the cannabis facility,
establishment or cannabis commercial entity, or an ongoing nuisance condition
emanating from or caused by the cannabis facility. Criminal conduct shall be
limited to the violation of a state law or regulation or city ordinance.
   (C)   Questions that arise in the administration of this subarticle,
including appeals of suspension and revocations of city operating licenses,
shall be determined by the City Council or appointed person.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-92 COMPLIANCE WITH RULES; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   A licensee shall strictly comply with the rules and emergency rules
related to cannabis that may from time to time be promulgated by the
Department.
   (B)   If it is determined that the Marihuana Tracking Act applies, or the
Department promulgates rules or regulations which require such, a licensee
shall adopt and use the statewide monitoring system of inventory control and
tracking authorized by the Marihuana Tracking Act so as to provide the
capability for the licensee to comply with the state requirements applicable to
the type of license held by the licensee.
   (C)   Cannabis operations facilities and all articles of property within the
licensed premises are subject to inspection, search and examination at any time
by a member of the Charlotte Police Department, the Michigan State Police, or
other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction.
   (D)   Any failure by a licensee to comply with Department rules or the
provisions of this subarticle and any infraction or violation, however slight,
is sufficient grounds for suspension and revocation of licensure under this
subarticle.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-93 SIGNAGE AND ADVERTISING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to:
      (1)   Use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive or false or
that, as evidenced by the content of the advertising material or by the medium
or the manner in which the advertising material is disseminated, is designed to
appeal to minors; and
      (2)   Advertise in a manner that is inconsistent with the provisions of
this subarticle, the MRTMA, the MMFLA, LARA rules and regulation, or is
profane.
   (B)   All signage must be in compliance with city ordinance and city zoning
ordinance, as amended.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-94 CANNABIS OPERATIONS SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Security measures at all licensed premises shall comply with the
requirements of this subarticle, its definitions, and the MMFLA and MRTMA, and
including but not limited to MRTMA marihuana establishments, requirements, and
limitations, M.C.L. § 333.27961, and all applicable rules and regulations
promulgated by the Department.
   (B)   A description of the security plan shall be submitted with the license
application. The security system shall be maintained in good working order and
provide 24-hour per day coverage. A separate security system is required for
each operation location.
   (C)   The security plan must include, in addition to the security plan
definition, at a minimum, the following security measures:
      (1)   Cameras. The cannabis operations facility shall install and use
security cameras to monitor and record all areas of the premises (except in
restrooms and locker rooms) where persons may gain or attempt to gain access to
cannabis or cashmaintained by the cannabis operations. Cameras shall record the
operations of the business to an off-site location, as well as all potential
areas of ingress or egress to the business with sufficient detail to identify
facial features and clothing. Recordings from security cameras shall be
maintained for a minimum of 30 days in a secure off-site location in the city
or through a service over a network that provides on-demand access, commonly
referred to as a “cloud.” The off-site location shall be included in the
security plan submitted to the city and video provided to the Police Department
upon request and updated within 72 hours of any change of such location.
      (2)   Use of a safe or secure room for storage. The cannabis operations
facility shall install and use a safe or secure room for safe storage of any
processed cannabis and cash on the premises when the business is closed to the
public. The safe or secure room shall be incorporated into the building
structure or securely attached thereto. For cannabis-infused products that must
be kept refrigerated or frozen, the business may lock the refrigerated
container or freezer in a manner authorized by the city in place of the use of
a safe or secure room so long as the container is affixed to the building
structure.
      (3)   Alarm system. The cannabis operations facility shall install and
use an alarm system that is monitored by a company that is staffed 24 hours a
day, seven days a week. The security plan submitted to the city shall identify
the company monitoring the alarm, including contact information, and updated
within 72 hours of any change of monitoring company.
      (4)   Security fencing. Processing operations facility shall install and
maintain eight-foot metal security fences around the perimeter of the property.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-95 LIMITS ON CANNABIS OPERATIONS LICENSES AND LOCATIONS; OTHER
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The concentration of any specific use within a smaller geographic area
can be burdensome for reasons of noise, odor, vehicle traffic congestion,
excessive parking needs, security, fire, and police response. It the intent of
these provisions to ensure that quality of life is not impaired, neighborhood
character is preserved, commercial activities developed and increased,
employment opportunities expanded, and positive planned land use developed.
   (B)   The City Council and Planning Commission are prohibited from waiving
any portion of this section, except where amended by city ordinance.
   (C)   Cannabis facilities are subject to city ordinances and the Charlotte
zoning ordinance, except where in conflict with the Cannabis Overlay Districts.
   (D)   The maximum number of each type of cannabis operation under the MMFLA
and MRTMA permitted in the city is governed by the applicable zoning district
and zoning regulations or as set forth in the table below and the zoning
ordinance. Cannabis operations not specifically authorized in the table are
prohibited. Provisions of this section do not apply to the medical use of
cannabis in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act (MMMA).
TABLE OF MARIHUANA/CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
Type of marihuana/cannabis operation and Unlimited number of permitted licenses
establishments                           within Cannabis Overlay Districts as
                                         designated below.
TABLE OF MARIHUANA/CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
Type of marihuana/cannabis operation   Unlimited number of permitted licenses
and establishments                     within Cannabis Overlay Districts as
                                       designated below.
Marihuana retailer/provisioning center Restricted to Cannabis Overlay Districts
                                       2-3 (North and South)
Marihuana safety compliance facility   Restricted to Cannabis Overlay District
                                       1
Marihuana secure transporter           Restricted to Cannabis Overlay Districts
                                       1-3
Marihuana processor                    Restricted to Cannabis Overlay Districts
                                       1-3 (North and South)
Marihuana grower                       Not permitted
Excess marihuana grower license        Not permitted
Marihuana microbusinesses              Not permitted
Designated consumption establishment   Not permitted
Marihuana related temporary event      Not permitted
No other marihuana/cannabis licenses   Not permitted
permitted
 
   (E)   Cannabis operations and establishment license designations permitted
under this subarticle are governed by type, under division (D), and additional
requirements, as follows:
      (1)   The operations at a licensed cannabis facility shall be conducted
in compliance with the MMFLA and the MRTMA, and any rules promulgated pursuant
to other laws, rules, and regulations of the State of Michigan and the city.
      (2)   All security measures required by the state and this subarticle
shall be maintained.
         (a)   Security devices and all components of those devices required by
the state, and this subarticle including but not limited to, video surveillance
systems, alarm systems, and locks, shall be in good working order.
         (b)   Licensees shall register their video surveillance systems with
the Charlotte Police Department.
      (3)   All cannabis in any form on the premises of a licensed cannabis
facility shall be cultivated, manufactured, tested, sold, and packaged in the
state.
      (4)   Access to the licensed cannabis establishment is restricted to the
licensee, employees of the licensee, and adult patrons aged 21 or older in
establishments licensed for recreational cannabis, and the Department, through
its investigators, agents, auditors, or the State Police or authorized city
employees acting within the scope of their employment.
      (5)   Recreational cannabis products must be separated from medical
cannabis products in accordance with state law.
      (6)   A licensee shall display all cannabis facility licenses issued
under this subarticle and state operating licenses in plain view clearly
visible to patrons, clients, city officials, and state authorized agents.
      (7)   A licensee shall not permit or allow the sale, consumption, or use
of alcohol or tobacco products on licensed premises unless it is licensed to do
so by the state and the city, and/or as otherwise permitted by law.
      (8)   A licensee shall not permit or otherwise allow the use, smoke,
inhalation, or consumption of cannabis, in any form, anywhere within a licensed
cannabis establishment or on the property of a licensed establishment unless it
is licensed to do so by the state and the city.
      (9)   A licensee shall comply with the Michigan Construction Code and
Americans with Disabilities Act Amendment Act of 2008 (ADAA) meeting ANSI
A117.1.
      (10)   Cannabis facilities shall be subject to city ordinance and the
city zoning ordinance where applicable.
      (11)   Marihuana [cannabis] retail establishment license and provisioning
center (collectively, “retail”). Cannabis retail establishments shall comply
with all of the provisions of the MMFLA and MRTMA and applicable LARA rules and
regulations. The city will restrict locations and only one cannabis retail
establishment licensee under the MMFLA and MRTMA shall be permitted on one
continuous property.
         (a)   All retail and sale operations must be within an enclosed,
secure structure.
         (b)   A retail licensee may occupy the same premises if holding a
processor license for the premises, and otherwise consistent with the MMFLA and
MRTMA, and any LARA rules.
         (c)   A retail license authorizes the purchase of cannabis only from
processors of cannabis-infused products or cannabis only to a marihuana
[cannabis] retailer/provisioning center, unless otherwise provided for under
LARA rules.
         (d)   An applicant and each investor in a retail license shall not
have an interest in a secure transporter, safety compliance establishment or
microbusiness.
      (12)   Marihuana [cannabis] processor license. Cannabis processor shall
comply with all of the provisions of the MMFLA and MRTMA and applicable LARA
rules and regulations. The city will restrict locations and only one cannabis
processor licensee under the MMFLA and MRTMA shall be permitted on one
continuous property.
         (a)   All processor operations must be within an enclosed, secured
structure.
         (b)   The location of this establishment shall be permitted up to, but
not beyond, any applicable lot coverage limitations set forth in the city of
zoning ordinance.
         (c)   An approved security plan.
         (d)   Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information
as required by the MRTMA, LARA rules, the Marihuana Tracking Act, and all other
applicable laws and regulations.
         (e)   Transfer cannabis and cannabis-infused products only by means of
a secure transporter, or in compliance with LARA rules.
         (f)   Processor shall not produce any products other than useable
cannabis products intended for human consumption.
         (g)   Odor control. Cannabis operations shall be subject to the
provisions of this subarticle and city resolution.
      (13)   Marihuana secure transporter license. Marihuana secure transporter
shall comply with all of the provisions of the MMFLA, MRTMA, and applicable
LARA rules and regulations. Secure transporter must meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   Secure transporter license is limited to the storage and
transport of cannabis, cannabis-infused products and money associated with the
purchase or sale of cannabis and cannabis-infused products between cannabis
establishments at the request of a person with legal custody of the cannabis,
cannabis-infused products, or money.
         (b)   An applicant and each investor with an interest in a secure
transporter license cannot have an interest in a grower, processor, marihuana
[cannabis] retailer, or safety compliance facility.
      (14)   Marihuana safety compliance facility license. Marihuana safety
compliance facility shall comply with all of the provisions of the MMFLA and
MRTMA and applicable LARA rules and regulations and must meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   All testing must be conducted within an enclosed, secured
structure.
         (b)   A safety compliance facility must be accredited by an entity
approved by the Cannabis Regulatory Agency by one year after the date the
license is issued or have previously provided drug testing services to this
state or this state’s court system and be a vendor in good standing in regard
to those services. The agency may grant a variance from this requirement upon a
finding that the variance is necessary to protect and preserve the public
health, safety, or welfare.
         (c)   An applicant and each investor with any interest in a safety
compliance facility cannot have an interest in a grower, secure transporter,
processor, or marihuana [cannabis] retailer.
      (15)   Social Equity Plan.
         (a)   All cannabis license applicants shall provide a copy of its
Social Equity Plan (“Plan”) submitted to the state. The Plan must detail any
practices, initiatives, or policies the applicant will implement to promote and
encourage participation in the cannabis industry by people from communities
that have been disproportionately impacted by cannabis prohibition and
enforcement and to positively impact those communities.
         (b)   All licensees shall make a good faith effort to meet the
objectives of the Social Equity Plan submitted with the application or license
renewal. GOOD FAITH EFFORT means efforts designed to implement the established
objectives of the licensee’s Social Equity Plan which by their scope,
intensity, and appropriateness to the objective, can reasonably be expected to
fulfill the Plan objective. License renewals shall require reporting on the
licensee’s good faith efforts under this division (E).
   (F)   Zoning districts permitted for cannabis operations and geographic
boundaries.
      (1)   Special regulations of cannabis operations have been deemed
necessary to limit the intensity and density of this use. Processor, retail
establishments, safety compliance facility, and secure transporter licensees,
shall be a special land use and restricted to and only permitted within the
following city cannabis zoning districts within the permitted geographic
boundaries, identified by legal descriptions and zoning maps, that may be
amended as necessary by city resolution:
         (a)   Cannabis Overlay District #1,
         (b)   Cannabis Overlay District #2,
         (c)   Cannabis Overlay District #3 (North),
         (d)   Cannabis Overlay District #3 (South).
      (2)   See Attachment A to Ord. 2023-06, Cannabis Overly District Maps,
sketches, and legal descriptions.
   (G)   Separation distance measurements. The distances described in this
section shall be computed by measuring a straight line from the nearest
property line of the parcel used for the purposes stated in this section to the
nearest property line of the parcel used as a cannabis operations facility.
   (H)   Applicability. The location and co-location of authorized cannabis
operations shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   The following minimum-distancing regulations shall apply to
cannabis operations. Processor and retail licensees shall not be located within
100 feet of a childcare center, or a school.
      (2)   Minimum distancing regulations do not include secure transporters
or safety compliance facilities.
      (3)   A cannabis operations licensee shall not operate at any place in
the city other than the address provided in the application on file with the
City Clerk.
      (4)   Co-location and stacked licenses. There may be only one state
operating license per parcel, except co-location of one retail license and one
processor license are permitted per parcel.
      (5)   Zoning application requirements. Each zoning application shall be
accompanied by a detailed site plan and any information necessary to describe
the proposed use or change of use. Each request shall be considered a new
application, including those for class change, stacking, expansion, transfers
or other modifications that require Planning Department review or special land
use approval. If more than one use is being requested for a parcel at the same
time (e.g., co-location) only one application shall be processed. Only one
application shall be processed per parcel at a time; once a zoning application
is submitted, any other zoning applications for the same parcel will be
rejected until the first zoning application is decided. All items must be
satisfactorily completed for a zoning application to be considered eligible for
review.
         (a)   Verification. A signed statement by the applicant indicating the
proposed cannabis operations type, including if the proposed type involves co-
location and the number of licenses.
         (b)   Consent. A notarized statement by the property owner that
acknowledges use of the property for a cannabis operations facility and
agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers,
elected officials, employees, and insurers, against all liability, claims or
demands arising out of, or in connection to, the operation of a cannabis
operations facility. Written consent shall also include approval of the owner
and operator for the city to inspect the facility at any time during normal
business hours to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
         (c)   LARA. A copy of official paperwork issued by LARA indicating
that the applicant has successfully completed the prequalification step of the
application for the state operating license associated with the proposed land
use, or proof that the applicant has filed such application for the
prequalification step with LARA, including all necessary application fees.
         (d)   Required LARA cannabis facility plans, and security plans shall
be submitted. Copies of all documents submitted to LARA in connection with the
initial license application, subsequent renewal applications, or investigations
conducted by LARA shall be made available upon request when such information is
necessary and reasonably related to the application review.
      (6)   A comprehensive operation plan for the cannabis establishment which
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   A security plan, consistent with the definition of security plan
within this subarticle, indicating how the applicant will comply with the
requirements of this subarticle and any other applicable law, rule, or
regulation.
         (b)   For processing establishments, a plan that specifies the methods
to be used to prevent the growth of harmful mold and compliance with
limitations on discharge into the wastewater system of the city.
         (c)   A lighting plan showing the lighting outside of the cannabis
establishment for security purposes and compliance with applicable city
requirements.
         (d)   A plan for disposal of any cannabis or cannabis-infused product
that is not sold to a customer, in a manner that protects any portion thereof
from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal.
         (e)   A plan for ventilation of the cannabis establishment that
describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any
objectionable odor of cannabis off the premises of the business. For cannabis
establishments that process cannabis plants and/or cannabis-infused products,
such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the
environment for the plants and describe how such systems operate with the
systems preventing any objectionable odors from leaving the premises. For
cannabis businesses that produce cannabis-infused products, such plan shall
also include all ventilation systems used to mitigate noxious gases or other
fumes used or created as part of the production process.
         (f)   A description of all toxic, flammable, or other materials
regulated by a federal, state, or local authority that will be used or kept at
the cannabis business, the location of such materials, and how such materials
will be stored.
         (g)   For processing establishments, an applicant must submit water
main plans including projected peak daily and seasonal 24-hour water usage
requirements to the city Water Department for a review of the city’s water
model. Applicants may be required to construct the needed water system to city
standards at their cost. Design will be required by the developer’s engineers
with reviews by city staff. Should this new water main be required to become
part of the city’s water system all required permits shall be submitted with
the required plans and profiles to city staff for submittal to the state. No
installation of water mains shall be completed prior to receipt of the proper
permits from the state. The associated costs may include, but are not limited
to:
            1.   Connection fees per city ordinances.
            2.   Costs for analysis and review of the city’s water model.
            3.   Costs for any required flow testing.
         (h)   The city Water Department reserves the right to deny or curtail
water service to any applicant based on the applicant’s failure to meet the
requirements of the city’s water system or any other use that causes a negative
impact to the city’s water system. Prior to making a modification to a
structure that would require a building permit or which would alter or change
items required by this division (H)(6)(h), the licensee shall submit to the
city detailed construction drawings showing at minimum, a full site plan,
interior and exterior lighting requirements, the full mechanical heating and
ventilation plan, a detailed security plan, before and after floor plans and
specifications, non-rated and rated separation details and locations,
accessible route from the public way to the accessible entrance, accessible
route to the primary function and within the facility and accessible bathrooms.
The licensee shall make an application for a plan review and a building permit
for the modifications to the premises, on forms provided by the city.
Additional specifications may be required. A building or structure hereafter
constructed or renovated for use as a cannabis establishment shall not be used
or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of use and occupancy has
been issued by the city. Wastewater compliance will be required and subject to
the city, federal, and state laws and applicable regulations.
      (7)   Proof of insurance. Evidence of a valid and effective policy for
general liability insurance within minimum limits of $1,000,000 per occurrence
and a $5,000,000 aggregate limit issued from a company licensed to do business
in Michigan having an AM Best rating of at least B++ shall be produced that
includes the name(s) of the insured, effective and expiration dates, and policy
number. The City Council, and its city officials, and employees shall be named
as additional insureds. The city shall be notified of any cancellation,
expiration, reduction in coverage, or other policy changes within five business
days of the event.
      (8)   Site plan. Existing and proposed site changes must be submitted
that demonstrate compliance with this subarticle and city ordinances and codes.
      (9)   Sign and lighting plan. A sign and lighting plan for the exterior
of the building and any interior signs that will be visible to the public from
the public right-of-way shall be submitted with sizes, lighting, and locations.
All lighting fixtures visible to the public shall be identified by location,
type, and intensity.
      (10)   Radius. A map, drawn to scale, containing all childcare centers,
schools.
   (I)   Marihuana [cannabis] operations. Cannabis operation facilities must be
operated in compliance with all applicable state laws, LARA rules, all
conditions of the cannabis operations state operating licenses, and all
applicable city ordinances.
      (1)   Security plan. A cannabis operator must have a city Police
Department approved security plan prior to operation.
      (2)   Facility exterior. The exterior appearance of a facility must be
compatible with surrounding businesses and any descriptions of desired future
character, as described in the master plan.
      (3)   No cannabis or equipment used in the retail, growing, production,
processing, or transport of cannabis can be placed or stored outside of an
enclosed code complaint building. This division (I)(3) does not prohibit the
placement or storage of motor vehicles outside of an enclosed building so long
as money or cannabis is not left in an unattended vehicle.
      (4)   Site and building lighting shall be sufficient for safety and
security, but not cause excessive glare or be designed so as to be construed as
advertising with the intent to attract attention.
      (5)   Neither cannabis nor cannabis-infused products may be directly
visible from the exterior of the cannabis operations facility/building(s).
      (6)   Interior lighting shall not be so bright so as to create a nuisance
to neighboring property owners or passersby.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
Cross-reference:
   See also §§ 82-517 through 82-529.
§ 15-96 ODOR CONTROL.
   (A)   No person, tenant, occupant, or property owner, who cultivates, grows,
processes, or uses cannabis for any purpose shall propagate or permit the
emission of objectionable odors that may cause or result in a nuisance to the
public or that endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public, to
emanate from any source on the property to result in such detectable odors that
leave the premises upon which they originated.
   (B)   An odor is per se objectionable if odor is detectable in the ambient
air that is greater than a 7/1 dilution threshold (D/T) for two samples not
less than 15 minutes apart during a one-hour period measured by a field
olfactometer device at the boundaries of the property as determined at the
street right-of-way, or property line.
   (C)   A processor shall install and maintain in operable condition a system
which precludes the emission of objectionable cannabis odor emanating from the
premises.
   (D)   Ventilation, by-product and waste disposal, and water management
(supply and disposal) for the facility shall not produce contamination of air,
water, or soil; or reduce the expected life of the building due to heat and
mold; or create other hazards that may negatively impact the structure and/or
surrounding properties.
   (E)   Air contaminants must be controlled and eliminated by the following
methods:
      (1)   The building must be equipped with an activated air scrubbing and
carbon filtration system that eliminates all air contaminants prior to leaving
the building.
      (2)   Fan(s) must be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to
the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height)
divided by three.
      (3)   The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM.
      (4)   An air scrubbing and filtration system must be maintained in
working order and must be in use at all times. Filters must be changed per
manufacturers’ recommendation to ensure optimal performance.
      (5)   Doors and windows must remain closed, except for the minimum time
length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building.
      (6)   A variance may be granted for an alternative odor control system,
in accordance with the Michigan Mechanical Code, if a mechanical engineer
licensed in the State of Michigan submits a report that sufficiently
demonstrates the alternative system will be equal to or better than the air
scrubbing and carbon filtration system otherwise required.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, AIR CONTAMINANTS means stationary local
sources producing air-borne particulates, heat, odors, fumes, spray, vapors,
smoke or gases in such quantities as to be irritating or injurious to health.
   (G)   A cannabis operation shall not be granted a municipal operating
license until the findings and approvals of this section are completed.
   (H)   Prosecution for violation; civil penalty.
      (1)   Any person or entity failing to comply with this subarticle shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction or district court citation and
shall be subject to a civil fine as follows: $100 initial violation, $250
second violation, and $500 third (or any subsequent) violation. Municipal civil
infraction violations are made payable at the city Municipal Ordinance
Violation Bureau. Repeat violations are determined based on the date of the
commission of the violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
      (2)   In addition to the remedies described above, the city may institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate
such violation, including injunctive relief.
      (3)   Jurisdiction for district court citations and legal action to
enforce this subarticle, the city code, and state law, vest in the state courts
of Eaton County.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-97 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any cannabis business, entity, or person, to
operate within the city’s jurisdiction in violation of this subarticle, MMMA,
MMFLA, MRTMA, LARA rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-98 REPORTS OF CRIME.
   Reports of all criminal activities or attempts of violation of any law at
the cannabis establishment or related thereto shall be reported to the
Charlotte Police Department upon discovery.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-99 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW, ENVIRONMENTAL; OTHER LAWS REMAIN APPLICABLE.
   (A)   The cannabis facility shall be compliant and subject to all relevant
state law and federal environmental laws and regulations, and city ordinances
and codes that may be adopted and enforced.
   (B)   To the extent the State of Michigan adopts in the future
recodification of the MMFLA and MRTMA, any additional or stricter law or
regulation governing the sale or distribution of marihuana, cannabis, the
recodification, additional or stricter regulation shall control the cannabis
operation of any cannabis commercial entity in the city. Compliance with any
applicable state law or regulation shall be deemed an additional requirement
for issuance or denial of any license under this subarticle, and noncompliance
with any applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or
suspension of any license issued hereunder.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-100 GRANT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The city is granted the power and duty to fully and effectively implement
and administer the license application process and issuance of licenses issued
by the city under this subarticle.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-101 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to the possible denial, suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal of a license under the provisions of this subarticle, any person or
cannabis operation, including, but not limited to, any licensee, manager or
employee of a cannabis commercial entity, who violates any of the provisions of
this subarticle, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and a
fine of $500, or as permitted by law, as established by resolution.
   (B)   In addition, any person, including any person, customer or member of
the public, who violates the provisions of section 4 of the MRTMA, M.C.L. §
333.27954, and who acts in a manner contrary to the acts prohibited therein,
except as may be otherwise provided in M.C.L. § 333.27965, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, to the extent any violation or penalty set
forth herein may be deemed inconsistent with any state law, or inconsistent
with any rule or penalty which is promulgated by the Department, now or
hereafter, including but not limited to those promulgated pursuant to M.C.L. §
333.27958, then the state law or Department rule or penalty shall govern over
the provisions of this subarticle, as determined by state preemption.
   (D)   A violation of this subarticle is deemed to be a nuisance, per se. In
addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an
injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate
any violation of this subarticle and such other relief as may be provided by
law.
   (E)   Each day on which any violation of this subarticle occurs or continues
constitutes a separate offense, subject to separate sanctions. The paying of a
fine or sanctions under this subarticle shall not exempt the offender from
meeting the requirements of this subarticle.
   (F)   This subarticle shall be administered and enforced by the city or by
such other person(s) as designated by the city.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 15-102 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision herein, to the extent it may be
determined that any provision in this subarticle is in conflict with either the
MRTMA, the MMFLA, the MMMA, or the rules and regulations of LARA, or other
provisions of law, then such provision of this subarticle as is in conflict
shall be subject to and preempted by the rule or provision of law of this
state.
   (B)   Consistent with the provisions of the MRTMA, the MMFLA, and the MMMA,
nothing herein shall prevent any employer from disciplining any employee for
violation of a workplace drug policy or for working while under the influence
of cannabis, nor does anything in this subarticle prevent an employer from
developing workplace policies, or from refusing to hire a person because of
that person’s violation of a workplace drug policy.
   (C)   Consistent with the MRTMA and the MMMA, nothing in this subarticle
prevents a landlord from prohibiting or otherwise regulating the consumption,
cultivation, distribution, processing, sale or display of cannabis and cannabis
accessories on leased property except that a lease agreement may not prohibit a
tenant from lawfully possessing and consuming marihuana by means other than
smoking as set forth in the MRTMA, the MMMA, and the LARA rules.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-21-2023)
ARTICLE V. MOBILE FOOD VENDING
§ 15-115 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context of
their usage clearly indicates a different meaning:
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING. Vending, serving, or offering for sale food and/or
beverages from a mobile food vending unit which meets the definition of a food
service establishment under Public Act 92 of 2000, which may include the
ancillary sales of branded items consistent with the food; for example, a t-
shirt that bears the name of the organization engaged in mobile food vending.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNIT(S) (MVFU). Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle,
trailer, or other means of conveyance designed to be portable and not
permanently affixed to the ground from which food is prepared, served, and/or
offered for sale.
   OPERATE. All activities associated with the conduct of business, including
but not limited to, setup and takedown, and/or time periods when the mobile
food vending unit is open for business.
   VENDOR(S). Any individual or legal entity engaged in the business of mobile
food vending.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-116 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or vendor shall engage in mobile food vending without a
permit from the City of Charlotte, except where exempted by this article or any
other city ordinance. The city shall prescribe the form of and application for
the MFVU permit. All permits shall be prominently displayed on the mobile food
vending unit and visible to the public. Permits are non-transferable. A permit
shall not be required for any vendor engaged by a private individual to serve
guests at a private event, such as a birthday or graduation party.
   (B)   Once approved, a permit is valid for the calendar year in which it is
issued (January 1 to midnight of December 31). Applicants may also apply for a
single-day or a 15-day permit.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-117 FEES.
   A fee shall accompany an application for an MFVU permit, as established by
City of Charlotte resolution fee schedule. No fee shall be charged for a permit
issued to a business on the City of Charlotte’s tax rolls and whose normal
business operations include the sale of food and/or beverages. No one shall
hire or subcontract such vendors in an attempt to evade the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-118 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applications for a mobile food vending permit shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and county laws and regulations,
as well as all applicable city codes and ordinances.
   (B)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   Vendors may only operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 9:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
      (2)   Within commercial areas, vendors may only operate between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
      (3)   Operating outside of the hours outlined in this section shall be
subject to approval from the City of Charlotte Council.
      (4)   No mobile food vending unit may be left unattended for more than
two hours; and any mobile food vending unit not in operation shall be removed
from the permitted site between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except
that this subsection shall not apply to city-authorized events.
   (C)   Lighting and noise.
      (1)   Vendors shall not use any flashing, blinking, or strobe lights; and
all exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque hood shields directing
the illumination downward while operating at a private event in a residential
area.
      (2)   Vendors shall not use loud music, horns, amplification devices,
“crying out,” or any other audible means of gaining attention which causes a
nuisance or safety hazard, as determined under the city noise ordinance per the
Charlotte Police Department.
      (3)   Special events approved by the City of Charlotte Council shall be
exempt from the lighting and noise requirements within this section.
   (D)   Locations.
      (1)   Mobile food vending shall be permitted on public property when
authorized by the city.
      (2)   Mobile food vending shall be permitted on private property when
authorized by the property owner.
      (3)   Vendors shall not operate on public property within 500 feet of any
city-approved street fair, public festival, farmers market, or other event
being conducted without the prior written authorization of the event sponsor
(s); such setback distance shall be measured horizontally in a straight line
between the nearest border of the event and the middle point of the mobile food
vending unit’s primary service window.
      (4)   Mobile food vending must maintain at least a 15-feet setback from a
fire hydrant; the Fire Chief or their designee may require a greater distance.
      (5)   Mobile food vending units shall be located and maintained on a
dust-free surface and shall not be placed on existing landscaped areas.
      (6)   MFVU shall not be located in sensitive environmental areas such as
wetlands or floodways.
      (7)   Location of the MFVU on a lot must be situated to minimize adverse
impacts to adjacent properties. Operations shall not obstruct the visibility of
motorists, parking lot circulation, emergency access, access to or along a
public street, alley, sidewalk, or trail. Customer queuing may be allowed on a
public sidewalk provided a minimum of six feet of unobstructed sidewalk around
the line of customers is maintained.
      (8)   MFVU shall not be permitted nor located in the 100 block or 200
block of S. Cochran Road.
      (9)   MFVU shall not be permitted nor located in the public parking lot
in the 100 block or 200 block of S. Bostwick Street nor in the public parking
lot in the 100 block or 200 block of S. Washington Street.
   (E)   Mobile food vending unit configuration. There shall be a minimum of
seven feet of vertical clearance between the ground level and lowest point of
any awning structure.
   (F)   Parking.
      (1)   If parked on public property, mobile food vendors shall comply with
all applicable parking regulations.
      (2)   If located within a public parking lot within a commercial area,
the area(s) used for mobile food vending unit operations shall not reduce the
required parking for the property.
   (G)   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation. A vendor shall not disrupt
pedestrian or vehicular circulation on the permitted property.
   (H)   Service.
      (1)   No food shall be prepared, sold, or displayed outside of the mobile
food vending unit.
      (2)   No outdoor cooking facilities, including but not limited to, grills
and other heating elements, or outdoor refrigeration or storage units which are
not contained in the mobile food vending unit are permitted.
      (3)   All materials and supplies, including but not limited to plates,
cups, napkins, eating or serving utensils, and condiments must be stored in the
mobile food vending unit, except for the waste receptacle required under this
section.
      (4)   Food and beverage service shall be provided only on the non-
driving-lane side of the mobile food vending unit.
   (I)   Signs. In addition to signs placed on the mobile food vending unit
itself, vendors may have one portable sign not greater than six square feet,
with no dimension greater than three feet, and no height (with legs) greater
than four feet, located within five feet of the unit; and under no
circumstances shall such a sign be placed upon a sidewalk or roadway or impede
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
   (J)   Utilities.
      (1)   No utilities shall be drawn from a public right-of-way.
      (2)   Vendors shall not utilize any electricity or other utilities
without the prior written authorization of the utility customer(s), and no
power cable or similar device shall be extended at or across any street, alley,
sidewalk, or path so as to cause a safety hazard, as determined by the City of
Charlotte code official or their designee.
   (K)   Trash and upkeep.
      (1)   MFVU and the area upon which they are temporarily located shall be
kept in good repair and free of refuse and debris. A trash receptacle shall be
provided by the mobile food unit and emptied daily, or more frequently to meet
demand. The trash or recycling receptacle must be removed from the site when
the mobile food unit departs. Use of city-owned or city-controlled refuse
containers is prohibited.
      (2)   Any garbage, waste, or spills shall be immediately cleaned up by
the vendor.
      (3)   The dumping of garbage, refuse, graywater, grease, or food waste is
prohibited.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-119 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The applicant shall truthfully provide, in full, all information requested
by the City of Charlotte. The applicant shall submit all of the following with
the completed and signed permit application form:
   (A)   A copy of the driver’s license(s) of the individual identified as
being the driver/operator of the mobile food vending unit;
   (B)   A copy of a valid vehicle registration and vehicle identification
numbers for the mobile food vending unit, including trailers, if a separate
registration is required;
   (C)   A copy of proof of valid auto insurance for the mobile food vending
unit, including trailers, if applicable;
   (D)   A copy of valid commercial liability insurance with minimum liability
coverage of $1,000,000. The city must be named as an additional insured;
   (E)   A copy of all required permits and/or licenses issued by the Eaton
County Health Department or other licensing agency, as applicable;
   (F)   A brief written description of the mobile food vending unit, which
shall include the following information:
      (1)   The length and width in feet of the mobile food vending unit to be
operated, including trailers, if applicable.
      (2)   The height from ground level to the lowest point of any awnings
attached to the mobile food vending unit to be operated, if applicable.
      (3)   A description of how electricity will be provided for the mobile
food vending unit.
   (G)   Written permission from the private property owner(s), event sponsor
(s), or utility customer(s), as applicable;
   (H)   Any other information requested by the City Clerk or their designee to
determine compliance with this article, and all applicable city codes and
ordinances; and
   (I)   Applications must be submitted 30 calendar days prior to the date
planned for vendor operation, except for operations within a city-approved
special event.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-120 REVIEW.
   The application shall be submitted to the Charlotte Fire Department, which
shall review the application and all material submitted under the requirements
of this article of city code or ordinance. The Fire Department shall make
contact with the applicant to schedule a fire inspection of the MFVU. An
application shall be approved, denied, or requires more information, within 15
business days of being submitted to the city and after a fire inspection has
been scheduled.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-121 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any equipment associated with mobile food vending left on public property
after the term of an approved permit may be impounded at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-122 OTHER LICENSES.
   A permit obtained under this article shall not relieve the vendor of the
responsibility for obtaining any other license, permit, or any other
authorization required by any other city ordinance, resolution, statute, or
administrative rule.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-123 FIRE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All MFVU shall comply with the City of Charlotte adopted fire code.
   (B)   MFVU shall be inspected on an annual basis. All inspections completed
shall expire on the same date of the expiration of the permit approved by the
City of Charlotte.
   (C)   The City of Charlotte code official may make frequent inspections
throughout the year.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 15-124 VIOLATIONS; CIVIL INFRACTION; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A vendor who violates this article is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction or district court civil infraction citation and shall be
subject to a civil fine subject to city resolution, or as provided herein.
Municipal civil infraction violations are made payable at the city Municipal
Ordinance Violation Bureau. Repeat violations are determined based on the date
of the commission of the violation. Each day that a violation continues beyond
the time specified for compliance shall be deemed to be a separate offense. If
the notice or civil infraction is not complied with, city officials may
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, or to require the removal of the MFVU in violation of
the provisions of this Code or article or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. Such legal or court action shall serve as notice.
   (B)   Jurisdiction for district court citations and legal action as
necessary to enforce city ordinance, this article, and state law, vest in the
state courts of Eaton County.
   (C)   Once a permit is issued, it may be suspended for a time as noticed or
revoked at any time for failure to comply with this Code or article. Appeals of
suspension or revocation shall be heard by the City Manager within a reasonable
time.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 6-23-2025)
CHAPTERS 16 - 17: RESERVED
CHAPTER 18: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Section
Article I. In General
   
18-1   Definitions
   
18-2   Necessity of franchise
   
18-3   Contravention of franchise
   
18-4   Term
   
18-5   Forfeiture of franchise
   
18-6   Compliance
   
18-7   Violations
   
18-8   Prosecution
   
18-9   Recourse against city
Article II. Application for Franchise
   
18-36   Application for franchise
   
18-37   Application fee
Article III. Franchise Provisions
   
18-61   Franchise agreement; rights reserved by city
   
18-62   Specific provisions required in franchise agreement
   
18-63   Insurance, bonds and indemnification
   
18-64   Number of channels
   
18-65   Upgrading technology
   
18-66   Subscriber equipment; switch
   
18-67   Public service installations
   
18-68   Other business activities
   
18-69   Construction standards and requirements
   
18-70   Apartment buildings
   
18-71   Repair
   
18-72   Removal of facilities upon request
   
18-73   Right of city to purchase system; transactions affecting ownership or
control of facilities
   
18-74   Termination
   
18-75   City's right to intervention
   
18-76   Discriminatory or preferential practices
   
18-77   Open access
   
18-78   Maintenance personnel
   
18-79   Emergency use of facilities
   
18-80   Copies of communications with regulatory agencies
   
18-81   Permits and authorizations
   
18-82   Reports
   
18-83   Emergency alert
   
18-84   Safety requirements
   
18-85   Effect of new technological developments
   
18-86   Operational standards
   
18-87   Advance charges
Article IV. Cable Access Committee
   
18-101   Purpose
   
18-102   Composition
   
18-103   Terms of office
   
18-104   Compensation
   
18-105   Time of meetings
   
18-106   Conduct of meetings
   
18-107   Administrative assistance
   
18-108   Duties
Article V. Governmental, Education and Noncommercial, Public Interest
Programming
   
18-121   Purpose and intent
   
18-122   Definitions
   
18-123   Who may use access channels
   
18-124   User indemnity
   
18-125   Schedule and procedures
   
18-126   Program content and ownership
   
18-127   Production facility and equipment
   
18-128   Enforcement
   
18-129   General
Statutory reference:
   Consent for construction in rights-of-way by cable television companies
required from municipalities, see M.C.L.A. § 247.183
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 18-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CABLE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV or SYSTEM. A system used or
to be used to originate or receive television or satellite signals directly or
indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscriber for a fixed
or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission and
distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital
signals, telemetry or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of
electrical impulses, whether or not directed to origination signals or
receiving signals off the air.
   CONSTRUCT.
      (1)   The installation of lines, fibers, or facilities that are in or
cross any of the streets, highways, or public rights-of-way within the city for
use as part of a multichannel video system; or
      (2)   The connection of other facilities directly or indirectly to
previously existing lines, fibers, or facilities that are in or cross any of
the streets, highways, or public rights-of-way within the city for use as part
of a multichannel video system.
   FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. The separate agreement by which a
franchise is granted to the franchisee, as required by this chapter.
   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROVIDER. A person who meets 1 or more of the following
tests:
      (1)   The person is a cable operator, as such term is defined in Federal
Communications Act of 1934, Title VI, 47 U.S.C. 521 et seq., or is otherwise
required to obtain a franchise, as such term is defined in such act.
      (2)   The person is an open video system operator, as such term is
defined under Federal Communications Act of 1934, Title VI and implementing
regulations.
      (3)   The person provides multichannel video service, where such service
is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross any
of the streets, highways or public rights-of-way within the city. The preceding
sentence shall apply whether the provider owns, leases or otherwise obtains the
right to use such wires or lines including wires or lines of a
telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such
purpose.
      (4)   The person provides multichannel video service and is otherwise
required to obtain a franchise or similar approval under the City Charter,
state law or federal law.
   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO SERVICE. Multiple channels of video programming where
some or all of the video programming is generally considered comparable to
programming provided by a television broadcast station. MULTICHANNEL CABLE
VIDEO SERVICE specifically includes, but is not limited to, cable service, as
such term is defined in Federal Communications Act of 1934, Title VI.
   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO SYSTEM. All of the following:
      (1)   A multichannel video system, as such term is defined in the Federal
Communications Act of 1934, Title VI;
      (2)   An open video system, as such term is defined under the Federal
Communications Act of 1934, Title VI and implementing regulations;
      (3)   A system which provides multichannel video service, where such
service is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or
cross any streets, highways or public rights-of-way within the city. The
preceding sentence shall apply whether the provider owns, leases or otherwise
obtains the right to use such wires or lines, including wires or lines of a
telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such
purpose; and
      (4)   Any other cable communication system providing multichannel video
service within the city where under applicable law a franchise or similar
permission or approval from the city is required.
   PERSON. Individuals, corporations, partnerships, limited liability
corporations, limited liability partnerships and any other form of legal
entity.
   PAY TV. An arrangement under which a charge is made to a television,
received for receiving a particular television program or satellite service.
   PRODUCER. A user providing input services to the cable system for receipt by
subscribers.
   PUBLIC CHANNELS. Channels which are designated to the public interest,
according to the following categories:
      (1)   Public access;
      (2)   Educational use; and
      (3)   Local government purposes.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person whose premises are physically wired to receive any
transmission from the system.
   SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP. Each extension wiring from the franchisee's
distribution lines to a subscriber's building.
   USER. A person or organization utilizing a system channel as a producer, for
purposes of production of transmission of material, or as a subscriber, for
purposes of receipt of material.
(1993 Code, § 18-1) (Ord. passed 5-29-2001)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 18-2 NECESSITY OF FRANCHISE.
   No person may construct a multichannel video system in the city to provide
multichannel video service in the city without first obtaining from the city a
consent agreement or franchise authorizing the construction of such a system.
No multichannel video provider may provide multichannel video service to any
person in the city unless a consent agreement or franchise from the city
authorizing the same is in full force and effect at all times while that
service is provided.
(1993 Code, § 19-2) (Ord. passed 5-29-2001)
§ 18-3 CONTRAVENTION OF FRANCHISE.
   Any breach by the franchisee of the cable system franchise agreement, in
addition to constituting a breach of contract, shall constitute a violation of
this chapter. The cost of any litigation, including attorney fees, incurred by
the city to enforce this chapter or a franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be reimbursed to the city by the franchisee, in respect of such
litigation or part thereof in which the city is the prevailing party.
(1992 Code, § 18-3)
§ 18-4 TERM.
   No franchise granted under this chapter nor any renewal thereof shall be for
a term of more than 10 years.
(1993 Code, § 18-4)
§ 18-5 FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by
virtue of the cable system franchise or this chapter, the city may terminate
and cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee
thereunder if the franchisee:
      (1)   Substantially violates any provision of the franchise or this
chapter or any rule, order or determination of the City Council made pursuant
thereto, where such violation shall remain uncured for a period of 30 days
subsequent to the receipt by the franchisee of written notice of the violation,
except where such violation is not the fault of the franchisee;
      (2)   Attempts to dispose of any of the facilities or property of its
CATV business operating under the terms of this chapter, except as provided for
in this chapter;
      (3)   Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city.
   (B)   Any termination and cancellation shall be made by resolution of the
City Council duly adopted after 60 days notice to the franchisee and shall in
no way affect any of the city's rights under the franchise or any provisions of
law. However, before the franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this
section, the franchisee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard
before the City Council, upon 30 days' written notice to the franchisee of the
time and place of the hearing, and such notice shall affirmatively recite the
reasons.
(1993 Code, § 18-5)
§ 18-6 COMPLIANCE.
   The cable system franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to
comply promptly with any of the provisions of the franchise by any failure of
the city to enforce prompt compliance.
(1993 Code, § 18-6)
§ 18-7 VIOLATIONS.
   All persons, including officers of any cable system franchisee, causing,
participating in or permitting any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be severally and jointly liable therefor and as such subject to the fines
and penalties provided in this Code for such violation.
(1993 Code, § 18-7)
§ 18-8 PROSECUTION.
   Prosecutions under this chapter shall be recommended by the City Council and
shall be prosecuted in the name of the city.
(1993 Code, § 18-8)
§ 18-9 RECOURSE AGAINST CITY.
   The cable system franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the
city or its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss,
cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the
franchise or because of its enforcement.
(1993 Code, § 18-9)
§§ 18-10 – 18-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE
§ 18-36 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.
   The application for a cable system franchise shall be in substantially the
following form:
   CITY OF CHARLOTTE
   APPLICATION FOR A CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISE
NAME:                                                            
ADDRESS:                                                      
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated
association, its application shall contain the names and addresses of all
persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in
and to the prospective franchisee's business operation and in and to the
prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term EQUITABLE INTEREST
shall include all assignments for value as well as all contingent assignments
of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise and shall also
include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant
of a franchise under this chapter.
      (2)   If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the applicant shall
furnish the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of
the corporation, together with the number of shares belonging to each
shareholder.
      (3)   If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the
rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the
application shall contain the states in which incorporated or qualified to do
business, the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
corporation, the names and addresses and number of shares owned of all
stockholders, both nominal and beneficial, owning 5% or more of the outstanding
stock of the applicant.
      (4)   A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in
rendering the service.
      (5)   The source of funds for operation of the system with respect to the
installation and maintenance of all cable facilities and demonstration of the
financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers.
      (6)   A description of the service to be offered, the facilities to be
employed and the general routes used in providing those services in the service
areas.
      (7)   A description of the number and indication of channels and type of
programming to be provided within each service tier.
      (8)   What bonds or other performance guarantees are proposed to assure
completion of construction of the cable system.
      (9)   Allocation of channels to schools, public access, and the like.
      (10)   Whether the system will include a switchover capability, so that
the customer may revert to the present antenna system in the event of
dissatisfaction with or malfunction of the cable system.
      (11)   Proposed terms of cancellation with customers.
      (12)   Any surveys or other market data concerning the viability of cable
TV in this area.
      (13)   All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept
on file a reasonable length of time, and any intentional misrepresentation in
an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the
franchise.
      (14)   A copy of the proposed sales or service contract utilized with
subscribers.
      (15)   All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city,
shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the
applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions
thereof.
      (16)   Identification of the proposed location of any receiving tower.
      (17)   Identification of the availability of service personnel (hours and
days).
                                                    
            Authorized Signature
(1993 Code, § 18-36) (Ord. passed 5-29-2001)
§ 18-37 APPLICATION FEE.
   The application for grant of a cable system franchise, as required under
this chapter, shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $500. This fee may
be changed by resolution of the City Council from time to time.
(1993 Code, § 18-37)
§§ 18-38 – 18-60 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. FRANCHISE PROVISIONS
§ 18-61 FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; RIGHTS RESERVED BY CITY.
   Every franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to and
shall expressly indicate that it is subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Communications Act of 1934, all
applicable provisions of city ordinances and the Charter and any amendments
thereto, whether made prior to or after the inception of the franchise.
      (2)   Any franchise or renewal granted under this chapter shall be
subject to the right of the city to:
         (a)   Repeal the franchise for misuse, nonuse or the failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or any other local, state or federal laws
or FCC rules and regulations;
         (b)   Require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
         (c)   Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
         (d)   Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
         (e)   Impose such other regulations as may be determined by the
Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public;
         (f)   Use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys,
bridges and public places and the space above and beneath them. Every
franchisee shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of
streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall arise from its use thereof
and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from such
use and may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and
appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and public places of the city by
the city and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably
practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of
agreement, upon application by any franchisee, the Council shall determine the
terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid
therefor, which award shall be final.
         (g)   Install and maintain without charge its own equipment upon the
condition that the equipment shall not interfere with the operations of the
city.
         (h)   Through its appropriately designated representatives, inspect
all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of
the franchise and this chapter and make such inspections as it shall find
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise, this chapter
and other pertinent provisions of law.
         (i)   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted
or upon the termination and cancellation as provided therein, require the
franchisee to remove at its own expense any and all portions of the CATV system
from the public ways within the city.
      (3)   No franchise shall be exclusive.
(1993 Code, § 18-61)
§ 18-62 SPECIFIC PROVISIONS REQUIRED IN FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this chapter to be
included in the franchise agreement, it must contain the following express
representations by the franchise:
      (1)   It accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter and
any supplementary specifications as to construction or operation of the system,
which the city may include in the franchise agreement;
      (2)   It has examined all of the provisions of this chapter and waives
any claims that any provisions of this chapter are unreasonable, arbitrary,
invalid or void;
      (3)   It recognizes the right of the city to make reasonable amendments
to the franchise chapter of the City Code during the term of the franchise upon
60 days prior notice to the franchisee or without notice with respect to
emergency amendments;
      (4)   It shall comply with all customer service standards promulgated by
the FCC from time to time.
   (B)   To provide residents and other persons in the city with competition
and choice in multichannel video service, multichannel video providers (other
than cable operators and open video system operators, as those terms are
defined in §
18-1) providing multichannel video service in the city shall make up to two-
thirds of the channels on their system available for the carriage of
programming from other video programming providers in accordance with the
principles and procedures established by the Federal Communications Commission
for the carriage of programming by open video system operators.
   (C)   The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or
provisions as may be negotiated between the city and the franchisee, except
that no such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any
provision of this chapter or other law. In case of such conflict or ambiguity
between any terms or provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter,
the terms of this chapter shall control.
(1993 Code, § 18-62) (Ord. passed 5-29-2001)
§ 18-63 INSURANCE, BONDS AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Liability and indemnification of city. The cable system franchisee
shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees at all
times during the term of the franchise and specifically agrees that it will pay
all damages and penalties which the city may be legally required to pay as a
result of granting the franchise. Such damages and penalties shall include, but
not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringements and other
damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV
system, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed
or prohibited by the franchise. If suit shall be filed against the city either
independently or jointly with the franchisee, upon notice to it by the city,
the franchisee shall defend the city against the action. If a final judgment
shall be obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the
franchisee solely by reason of the acts of the franchisee, the franchisee will
pay the judgment and all costs and hold the city harmless therefrom.
   (B)   Insurance. Insurance shall be required in such forms and in such
companies as shall be approved by the city, such approval not to be
unreasonably withheld, to protect the city and the franchisee from and against
any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any
aspect of the system. The amount of such insurance shall be not less than the
following:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with minimum limits of
$2,000,000 as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury,
personal injury and property damage. Automobile liability insurance with
personal protection insurance and property insurance in compliance with the
provisions of Michigan's No-Fault Insurance Law, including residual liability
insurance with minimum limits of $2,000,000 as the combined single limit for
each occurrence. Worker's compensation insurance meeting Michigan statutory
requirements and employer's liability insurance with minimum limits of
$1,000,000 for each accident.
      (2)   Broadcasters liability coverage for loss or damage arising out of
publications or utterances in the course of or related to advertising,
broadcasting, telecasting or other communication activities conducted by or on
behalf of franchisee with minimum limits of $1,000,000 as the combined single
limit for each occurrence.
      (3)   All insurance coverage shall provide a 60 day notice to the City
Clerk for material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in the
policies prior to the date the material alteration or cancellation shall become
effective and shall name the city and its officers and employees as additional
insureds.
      (4)   Copies of all policies required under this subsection shall be
furnished to and filed with the City Clerk, prior to the commencement of
operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be.
   (C)   Liability. Neither the provisions of this section nor any bonds
accepted by the city pursuant to this section nor any damage recovered by the
city thereunder shall be construed to excuse unfaithful performance by the
franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under this chapter or the
franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
(1993 Code, § 18-63) (Ord. passed 5-29-2001)
§ 18-64 NUMBER OF CHANNELS.
   The cable system franchisee's distribution system shall initially be capable
of carrying at least 20 channels of television breadth or dual cable
construction. The system shall also provide simultaneous reverse direction
signal capability for digital, audio and video signal transmission on all
elements of the system.
(1993 Code, § 18-64)
§ 18-65 UPGRADING TECHNOLOGY.
   Each cable system franchisee shall constantly upgrade its facilities,
equipment and service so that its system is as advanced as the current state of
technology will allow. Each franchisee shall install additional channel
capacity as required to keep channel capacity in excess of the demand therefor
by subscribers.
(1993 Code, § 18-65)
§ 18-66 SUBSCRIBER EQUIPMENT; SWITCH.
   The cable system franchisee shall provide every subscriber with all
equipment necessary for reception on the subscriber's set of all channels to
which he has subscribed. At the request of any subscriber, the franchisee shall
install and maintain, at cost, an adequate switching device to allow the
subscriber to choose between cable and noncable reception.
(1993 Code, § 18-66)
§ 18-67 PUBLIC SERVICE INSTALLATIONS.
   The cable system franchisee shall, without charge for installation,
maintenance or service, make single installations of its standard community
antenna service facilities at each fire and police station and public, private
and parochial school (K-12) within the city. The franchisee shall, without
charge for installation, maintenance or service, make single installations of
its standard community antenna services to the City Hall and the public
library. Such installations shall be made at such reasonable locations as shall
be requested by the respective units of government or educational institutions.
Any charge for relocation of such installations shall, however, be charged at
actual costs. Additional installations at the same location may be made at cost
plus 10%. No monthly service charges shall be made for distribution of the
franchisee's signals within such publicly owned buildings.
(1993 Code, § 18-67)
§ 18-68 OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter authorizes only the operation
of a system as provided for in this chapter and does not take the place of any
other franchise, license or permit required by law. Without limiting the
foregoing, a franchise granted under this chapter shall not be construed or
deemed to constitute a telecommunications permit as required to operate certain
enterprises within the city's rights-of- way pursuant to the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, being Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. §§
484.2101—484.2701.
(1993 Code, § 18-68) (Ord. passed 5-29-2001)
§ 18-69 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All of the cable system franchisee's plants and equipment, including
but not limited to the antenna site, head-end and distribution system, towers,
house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and
appurtenances, shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in
accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced poleline
construction crews and so as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of
any persons or property or to interfere with improvements the city may deem
proper to make or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property
owner or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on
city properties. Further, all such plant and equipment and all construction
shall meet all relevant specifications of the Federal Communications
Commission.
   (B)   Any opening or obstructions in or disturbances of the streets, public
ways or other city properties made by the franchisee in the exercise of its
rights under the franchise agreement shall be guarded and protected at all
times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boardings, the bounds of
which during periods of dusk and darkness shall be clearly designated by
adequate warning lights, all by the franchisee at its expense. In case of any
physical disturbance or damage to any streets, public ways or other city
properties occurring in the course of erection, installation, construction,
reconstruction, replacement, removal, repair, maintenance or operation, the
franchisee shall promptly repair such disturbance and damage at its own expense
and in a manner approved by the city.
   (C)   The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place or city property
or remove from the street or other public place or city property any property
of the franchisee when required by the City Council or its designee by reason
of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or any other type of
structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however that this
subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit reimbursement to the franchisee
for relocation expenses where reimbursement is required or authorized by state
or federal law.
   (D)   The franchisee shall, on the request of any private party holding an
appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its lines to
permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of
the work shall be paid by the party requesting the work.
   (E)   Upon failure of the franchisee to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by law or by the provisions of the franchise to be done in any
street or other public place or city property, within the time prescribed and
to the satisfaction of the City Council or its designee, the City Council or
its designee may, at its option, cause such work to be done, and the franchisee
shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the
City Council or its designee to the franchisee within 30 days after receipt of
such itemized report.
(1993 Code, § 18-69)
§ 18-70 APARTMENT BUILDINGS.
   Each cable system franchisee shall have the right and obligation to provide
cable television service to any member of the public in any publicly or
privately owned buildings which are in the franchisee's franchise area without
paying a charge to the building owners.
(1993 Code, § 18-70)
§ 18-71 REPAIR.
   Any damage caused to the property of building owners or users or any other
person by the cable system franchisee shall be repaired fully by the
franchisee.
(1993 Code, § 18-71)
§ 18-72 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES UPON REQUEST.
   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the cable system franchisee
shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of
such subscriber upon his written request.
(1993 Code, § 18-72)
§ 18-73 RIGHT OF CITY TO PURCHASE SYSTEM; TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING OWNERSHIP OR
CONTROL OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   If the cable system franchisee shall forfeit its franchise as set
forth in this chapter or upon receipt by the city of an application for prior
approval of acquisition or transfer as set forth in subsection (D) of this
section or by mutual agreement between the city and the franchisee, the city,
at its election and upon the payment to the franchisee of not less than the
fair market value in accordance with the Communication Act, Title VI, § 636(a)
(2) shall have the right to purchase and take over the system.
   (B)   In order that the city may exercise its option to take over the
facilities and property of the system as authorized in this section upon
expiration or forfeiture or revocation of the rights and privileges of the
franchisee, the franchisee shall not make, execute or enter into any deed, deed
of trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales contract or any loan, lease,
pledge, sale, gift, pole agreement or any other agreement concerning any of the
facilities or property, real or personal, of the system without prior approval
of the City Council upon its determination that the transaction proposed by the
franchisee will not be inimical to the rights of the city under the franchise.
However, this subsection shall not apply to the disposition of worn out or
obsolete facilities or personal property in the normal course of carrying on
the CATV business or to routine contractual relationships entered into in the
ordinary course of cable business.
   (C)   Prior approval of the City Council shall be required where ownership
or control of more than 25% of the right of control of the franchisee is
acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom
already own or control 25% or more of such right of control, singularly or
collectively.
   (D)   No franchise granted under this chapter may be transferred unless such
transaction is first approved by the City Council, by resolution or public
hearing, in accordance with the same procedures as are specified for grants or
of a franchise.
   (E)   By its acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee specifically
concedes and agrees that any acquisitions or transfers as set forth in
subsections (C) or (D) of this section, without prior approval of the City
Council, shall constitute a violation of the franchise and this chapter by the
franchisee.
(1993 Code, § 18-73)
§ 18-74 TERMINATION.
   (A)   The franchise granted in this chapter shall, at the option of the City
Council, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of the franchisee, whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless
such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of 120 days or unless:
      (1)   Such receiver or trustee shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of
this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and the
receiver or trustee within such 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under
the franchise; and
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee shall, within such 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted in this chapter.
   (B)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant,
property and equipment of the franchisee or any part thereof, including or
excluding the franchise, the City Council may serve notice of termination upon
the franchisee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the
franchise granted in this chapter and all rights and privileges of the
franchisee under this chapter shall cease and terminate 30 days after service
of such notice, unless:
      (1)   The City Council shall have approved the transfer of the franchise,
as and in the manner in this chapter provided; and
      (2)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise.
(1993 Code, § 18-74)
§ 18-75 CITY'S RIGHT TO INTERVENTION.
   The cable system franchisee shall not oppose intervention by the city in any
suit or proceeding to which the franchisee is a party.
(1993 Code, § 18-75)
§ 18-76 DISCRIMINATORY OR PREFERENTIAL PRACTICES.
   The cable system franchisee shall not, in its rates or charges or in making
available the services or facilities of its system or in its rules or
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant preference or advantages to
any subscriber or potential subscriber to the system or to any user or
potential user of the system and shall not subject any such persons to any
prejudice or disadvantage. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit
promotional campaigns nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a
graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer
coming within such classification shall be entitled.
(1993 Code, § 18-76)
§ 18-77 OPEN ACCESS.
   The entire cable system of the franchise shall be operated in a manner
consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its
facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens,
businesses, public agencies or other entities having a legitimate use for the
system, and no person shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of
use of the facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions of
regulatory agencies affecting the facilities.
(1993 Code, § 18-77)
§ 18-78 MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL.
   The cable system franchisee shall maintain a force of 1 or more resident
agents or employees and shall have sufficient employees to provide safe,
adequate and prompt service for its facilities.
(1993 Code, § 18-78)
§ 18-79 EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES.
   The cable system franchisee shall, in the case of an emergency or disaster,
make its entire system available without charge to the city or to any other
governmental or civil defense agency that the city shall designate.
(1993 Code, § 18-79)
§ 18-80 COPIES OF COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES.
   Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
cable system franchisee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities
and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting CATV operations
authorized pursuant to the franchise shall also be submitted simultaneously to
the city.
(1993 Code, § 18-80)
§ 18-81 PERMITS AND AUTHORIZATIONS.
   The cable system franchisee or the applicant for a franchise shall
diligently apply for all necessary permits and authorizations required in the
conduct of its business and shall diligently pursue the acquisition thereof,
including necessary pole attachment contracts and necessary authorizations from
the Federal Aviation Administration to construct such receiving antenna towers
as may be required and any necessary authorizations or waivers from the Federal
Communications Commission, and when any such permit, authorization, contract or
waiver is obtained, a copy thereof shall be promptly filed by the franchisee
with the city.
(1993 Code, § 18-81)
§ 18-82 REPORTS.
   (A)   Each cable system franchisee shall file with the city copies of
statements filed pursuant to this chapter. Each franchisee shall make available
all of its plans, contracts and engineering, statistical, customer and service
records relating to its system and to all other records required to be kept
under this chapter and at all times maintain complete and accurate books of
account, records of its business and operations and all other records required
by this chapter or the franchise.
   (B)   Each franchisee shall file with the city an ownership report,
indicating all persons who at any time did control or benefit from an interest
in the franchise of 1% or more.
   (C)   Each franchisee shall also file with the city copies of all rules,
regulations, terms and conditions which it has adopted for the conduct of its
business as well as any changes thereof within 30 days of such changes.
(1993 Code, § 18-82)
§ 18-83 EMERGENCY ALERT.
   The cable system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system,
override the "audio" signal on all channels and transmit and report emergency
information at the request of the city. For any such use by the city, the city
will hold harmless and indemnify the franchisee from any damages or penalties
resulting from the use of this service.
(1993 Code, § 18-83)
§ 18-84 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   The cable system franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and
shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or
nuisance to the public.
(1993 Code, § 18-84)
§ 18-85 EFFECT OF NEW TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   The City Council may amend this chapter or the franchise whenever necessary
to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the field of
transmission of communication signals which will afford it an opportunity to
more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its customers; provided,
however, that this section shall not be construed to require the city to make
any such amendment.
(1993 Code, § 18-85)
§ 18-86 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.
   The technical standards for operation of the cable system shall be in full
compliance with FCC regulations.
(1993 Code, § 18-86)
§ 18-87 ADVANCE CHARGES.
   The cable system franchisee shall be permitted to require advance payment
for installation fees and for one month's advance service fee.
(1993 Code, § 18-87)
§§ 18-88 – 18-100 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. CABLE ACCESS COMMITTEE
§ 18-101 PURPOSE.
   A Cable Access Committee is hereby created in accordance with Charter, §
5.5 and pursuant to authority conferred in City Charter §
6.15(A). The purpose of the Committee is implementation of Article V of this
chapter, which governs the governmental, educational, noncommercial, public
access channel. The Cable Access Committee shall set policy for the regulation
and administration of facilities, equipment and cablecasting materials. The
Committee shall also promote the public access channel within the city.
(1993 Code, § 18-101) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
Cross reference:
   Governmental, educational and noncommercial public interest programming, see
§§
18-121 et seq.
§ 18-102 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Cable Access Committee shall consist of 3 voting members.
   (B)   The 3 voting members shall be appointed by the City Council from the
general population of the city and shall have the qualifications required by
the City Charter for elective officers of the city.
   (C)   If the City Council determines that its cable casting interest extend
beyond the city limits, 1 of the 3 voting members may be a nonresident of the
city and is entitled to vote in Committee proceedings.
(1993 Code, § 18-102) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 2-14-2000)
§ 18-103 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office for members of the Cable Access Committee shall be 3
years. Initially, 1 of the members shall be appointed for 1 year, 1 member for
2 years, and 1 member for 3 years.
(1993 Code, § 18-103) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 2-14-2000)
§ 18-104 COMPENSATION.
   Members shall receive no compensation for service to the city but shall be
reimbursed, pursuant to City Charter, §
6.15(b), for reasonable and actual expenses incurred on behalf of the city when
approved by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 18-104) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-105 TIME OF MEETINGS.
   Cable Access Committee meetings shall be open to the public. The Committee
shall meet at least quarterly. The Committee shall meet more often, if
required, to conduct business. All notice, record keeping and conduct
requirements shall conform to requirements for public meetings.
(1993 Code, § 18-105) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-106 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   At its first regularly called meeting, the Cable Access Committee
shall appoint a Chairperson and Recording Secretary. The Chairperson shall
preside over all meetings. The Recording Secretary shall keep minutes of the
Committee proceedings.
   (B)   In order to conduct business, a quorum of the Cable Access Committee
is required. A quorum is established by the presence of at least 2 members.
   (C)   A decision by a majority of the Cable Access Committee comprising a
quorum is a decision of the Committee.
(1993 Code, § 18-106) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 2-14-2000)
§ 18-107 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE.
   The Cable Access Committee may request the City Manager to provide services
and information from city departments.
(1993 Code, § 18-107) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-108 DUTIES.
   The Cable Access Committee duties shall include:
      (1)   Supervising the implementation of Article V of this chapter, which
governs use of city videotaping equipment, facilities, and the governmental,
educational, noncommercial, public access channel;
      (2)   Exercising control and instituting enforcement actions for
violations of this article and Article V;
      (3)   Establishing policy for processing applications to prepare and
cablecast governmental, information, and educational programming on the public
access channel;
      (4)   Investigating complaints of violations of this article and Article
V;
      (5)   Issuing notices of compliance violations requiring corrective
action;
      (6)   Collecting and disseminating information on the public access
channel;
      (7)   Coordinating activities under this article and Article V;
      (8)   Performing any other actions authorized by this article or as
necessary or advisable for the management and operation of the public access
channel and the enforcement of this article and other applicable laws and
regulations.
(1993 Code, § 19-108) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§§ 18-109 – 18-120 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. GOVERNMENTAL, EDUCATION AND NONCOMMERCIAL, PUBLIC INTEREST
PROGRAMMING
§ 18-121 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this article is to establish an orderly system of rules
and procedures under which members of the general public, and educational and
governmental institutions, will have the opportunity to produce and present
local cable programming. The City of Charlotte's (hereinafter "city") goal,
acting through its Cable Access Committee, is to provide a means for residents
of our area to develop programming, receive information and communicate on
issues.
   (B)   This article is intended to extend all access programming regardless
of where the programming was produced. To assure compliance with this article,
each individual or group seeking to present programming on the system must sign
a statement indicating that this article has been read, understood, and will be
followed.
(1993 Code, § 18-121) (Ord. passed 8-22-1991)
Cross reference:
   Cable Access Committee, see §§
18-101 et seq.
§ 18-122 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   ACCESS CHANNELS. Channels available to the public and governmental and
educational institutions, for noncommercial, local cable programming.
   CABLECASTING. The distribution of programming over a cable system.
   FRANCHISE. A contractual agreement between a cable operator and a
governmental authority authorizing the operator to build and operate a cable
system within a given geographical area.
   PUBLIC ACCESS PROGRAMMING. Programming produced or supplied by individuals,
community groups, educational institutions, or governmental agencies residing
within the franchise area.
(1993 Code, § 18-122) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-123 WHO MAY USE ACCESS CHANNELS.
   (A)   City cablecasting equipment and facilities are available for public,
governmental, and educational programming to any individual or group residing
within the city. Any community group may designate an individual as the
representative of the group applying to use the equipment and facilities.
   (B)   Individuals or groups entitled to use the equipment must acknowledge
by the signature of the individual or group representative that the access
rules and regulations are understood and will be followed.
   (C)   There is no minimum age restriction for use of equipment or
facilities. However, residents under the age of 18 years who wish to use the
public access channel or equipment and facilities must file a parental/
guardian/adult supervisor consent form with the city accepting responsibility,
along with the minor applicant, and for the cost of damages to the equipment or
facilities (other than normal wear and tear).
(1993 Code, § 18-123) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-124 USER INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Any user of an access channel, equipment or facilities shall indemnify
and hold harmless the city, its Council, officials, officers, boards and
commissions, agents and employees, against any liability arising out of such
use. The user further acknowledges that the city, its Council, officials,
officers, boards and commissions, agents and employees assume no liability for
damages, or for errors or omissions resulting from the administration of the
rules for operating city access channels.
   (B)   Any user of an access channel, equipment or facilities shall be
responsible for the cost of repairs or replacement of equipment and facilities
resulting from damage, misuse, or theft which occurs while the equipment or
facilities are in the user's possession or control. A user group, and its
individual members, as well as the individual who completes a user application
form, are responsible for the costs of damages, misuse or theft.
   (C)   The city will maintain and make available for public inspection a
record of all requests for equipment and channel use.
(1993 Code, § 18-124) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-125 SCHEDULE AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The assignment of channel time, videotaping equipment and facilities
is on a first-come, first-serve basis, to ensure the greatest availability to
all access users.
   (B)   Pre-recorded (videotaped) programming may be cablecast on the access
channel. For technical reasons, advance schedule is necessary. Requests for a
specific time slot may be considered, but the city reserves the right to
schedule programming consistent with significant audience reach in local
programming.
   (C)   Applications for program time must be completed and returned to
Charlotte City Hall, 111 E. Lawrence Avenue, Charlotte, MI 48813 at least 2
weeks prior to the request date for cablecast. Applications must be complete
when filed. The determination of completeness is within the discretion of the
city.
   (D)   Pre-recorded programming must be delivered to the city at least 5
business days prior to the requested date for cablecast. Programming shall be
accompanied by a written description of the subject matter programming to
ensure compliance with this article and all applicable laws and government
regulations.
   (E)   Scheduling of regular time slots in a series of up to 13 weeks
duration is permitted, if time is available, provided that:
      (1)   The user demonstrates a commitment to the series by supplying the
initial 3 programs on videotape for a pre-recorded series, or supplying the
initial 3 scripts for a live series, prior to the scheduling of series time;
and
      (2)   The user relinquishes the right to the scheduled time slot if
subsequent programs are not provided as agreed.
   (F)   When requests for time slots exceed availability, the following
prioritization shall apply:
      (1)   First-time users may be granted priority over regular users;
      (2)   A user who has not previously been scheduled in prime time (6:00 to
11:00 p.m.) may be granted priority with respect to prime time scheduling; and
      (3)   Users with the least number of production hours may be granted
priority over users with greater numbers of production hours.
(1993 Code, § 18-125) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-126 PROGRAM CONTENT AND OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Access users are solely responsible for the content of programming and
for obtaining all rights necessary to cablecast any program material. The
following program material is prohibited and shall not be cablecast:
      (1)   Advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial
products or services, including advertising on behalf of candidates seeking
public office;
      (2)   Obscene or indecent material;
      (3)   Advertisements or information concerning any lottery, gift
enterprise, or similar scheme offering prizes dependent in whole or in part on
chance;
      (4)   Unauthorized presentation of copyrighted material;
      (5)   Direct solicitation of funds to directly or indirectly benefit the
user or persons and entities on the user's behalf;
      (6)   Material that defames any racial, ethnic, sexual, age or religious
group;
      (7)   Material that advocates violence or fighting words designed to
invoke violence;
      (8)   Material that does not comply with applicable federal, state and
local laws and regulations;
      (9)   Slanderous or libelous materials; and
      (10)   Deliberate misinformation.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to review all programs and materials at
any time to determine compliance with the standards set forth in §
18-126. In the event that any material is deemed by designated city staff to
violate the guidelines set forth herein, the city may in its discretion do any
or all of the following:
      (1)   Discuss with the producer the ramifications of cablecasting the
material for revision or withdrawal;
      (2)   Schedule the program at the time most appropriate for its content;
      (3)   Cablecast a content disclaimer to accompany the material;
      (4)   Reject the program for cablecast;
      (5)   Present upon appeal the program to the Cable Access Committee for
review;
      (6)   Present upon appeal, following the Cable Access Committee appeal
hearing, the program to the City Council for final resolution.
   (C)   Access programming shall include public educational and governmental,
noncommercial, public interest programming, and the access channel equipment
and facilities shall not be used by an access user for financial gain or other
commercial purposes, including the production of programming produced for sale
to commercial television stations or for which the producer or other parties
purchase time for such presentation on commercial television stations or cable
television systems. Advertising material includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Messages whose primary purpose is intended to promote a service,
product, trade, or business;
      (2)   Program material made available without charge by persons,
corporations, or institutions who have a commercial interest in the subject
matter. This provision shall not prevent the identification by name of persons
or institutions providing grants or contributions to under-write the cost of
programs unrelated to the commercial interests of the donor;
      (3)   Material which identifies any product, service, trademark or brand
name in a manner not reasonably related to the noncommercial use of such
product, service, trademark or brand name on the program.
   (D)   Any user providing access programming shall be required to inform the
city upon applying for use of equipment or facilities whether materials include
copyrighted material or material subject to other ownership or royalty rights.
If so, the user must show evidence that proper authorization has been obtained.
These authorizations include program owners, copyright owners of any performing
or royalty rights. Any violation of subsections (A), (B), (C) or (D) will
subject the applicant or user to immediate revocation of the privilege of using
the access channel, equipment and facilities.
   (E)   The city will notify producers of the nature of all viewer complaints.
The city reserves the right to review all programming for which a complaint has
been registered to determine whether the program in question is in violation of
the rules set forth herein. The city may exercise the options listed above
under subsection (A) or (C). Viewers wishing to file a complaint may do so in
writing. All written complaints will be presented to the Cable Access Committee
for review unless otherwise resolved to the satisfaction of all parties.
   (F)   All users of access time assume complete responsibility for the
content of the programming provided. Any disputes which arise concerning the
programming shall be resolved between the user, the objecting party and, where
applicable, the franchise- granting authority. The city undertakes no
responsibility to the user or any other party for any liabilities which may
arise as a consequence of presentation of access programming. Users shall
indemnify and hold the city harmless for all liability, including costs of
legal defense, arising from the presentation of programming provided by the
user.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to pre-empt any program for the
presentation of a "special" production. In such cases, the city will reschedule
the pre-empted program and notify the producer or sponsor of the schedule
change.
(1993 Code, § 18-126) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994(2))
§ 18-127 PRODUCTION FACILITY AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   (1)   An access user may schedule the city production facility and
equipment for the production for access programming. No person will be
permitted to operate the public access equipment without first completing an
application and any required parental/guardian/adult supervisor consent form.
Limits are placed on the total number of hours each facility may be used per
month to encourage use by as many individuals and organizations as possible.
These hourly restrictions are as follows:
 
Production Facility                      Hours Per Session Hours Per Month
Studio (Council chambers/community room) 4                 16
Portable equipment                       24                96
 
      (2)   The production facility and equipment may not be reserved for
consecutive sessions.
   (B)   An access user must submit an equipment request form to reserve
videotaping equipment.
   (C)   Users who fail to use reserved equipment without 24-hour notice of
cancellation may be prohibited from use of that equipment for 30 days. Users 30
minutes late for use of equipment without notification relinquish their
reservation and are also prohibited from use of that equipment for a period of
30 days.
   (D)   Users must sign an equipment request form agreeing to be financially
responsible for damage or loss of equipment. Lost or damaged equipment will be
repaired or replaced by the city and users must reimburse the city for all
repair and replacement costs within 7 business days of demand for payment.
Failure to comply within this time period will result in suspension from use of
all equipment until payment is received for the costs of repair and replacement
of equipment or facilities. The user will not be responsible for normal wear
and tear of equipment.
(1993 Code, § 18-127) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-128 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall supervise and control the implementation of this
article. The city may also designate additional persons to carry out this
article.
   (B)   The City Council shall:
      (1)   Supervise and review the actions and decisions of the Cable Access
Committee; and
      (2)   Decide appeals from the Cable Access Committee rejection of
applications for use of equipment or facilities.
   (C)   The Cable Access Committee's duties shall include:
      (1)   Supervising the implementation of this article;
      (2)   Exercise control and instituting actions against users violating
this article and Article IV;
      (3)   Establishing policy for processing applications to prepare and
cablecast governmental, informational and educational programming on the public
access channel;
      (4)   Investigating complaints of violations of this article;
      (5)   Issuing notices of violations requiring compliance;
      (6)   Collecting and disseminating information on the public access
channel;
      (7)   Coordinating activities under this article; and
      (8)   Performing any other actions authorized by this article or as
necessary or advisable for the management and operation of the public access
channel and the enforcement of this article and other applicable laws and
regulations.
   (D)   Whenever the Cable Access Committee finds that any user has violated
or is violating this article, it may summarily suspend the user's cablecasting
privilege. Within a reasonable time, (not to exceed 5 business days) the Cable
Access Committee shall serve upon such group or individual a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for a
satisfactory correction of the violation. The user shall within the period of
time stated in the notice cease all violations and notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place of a compliance hearing to be held by
the Cable Access Committee regarding the violation, the reasons why the action
is being taken, the proposed enforcement action, and direct the user, if so
desired, to show cause before the Cable Access Committee why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.
   (E)   An appeal from any action of the Cable Access Committee may be made to
the City Council, within 30 days from the date of the Cable Access Committee
action. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. The notice of
appeal shall specify the basis for the appeal. Failure to file a timely notice
of appeal shall be deemed to be a waive of appeal.
      (1)   Prior to the appeal hearing, the Cable Access Committee shall
transmit to the City Council a written record of all previous action taken in
connection with the current action.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall fix a reasonable time for the appeal hearing
and give notice of the hearing to the appellant, City Attorney and Cable Access
Committee.
      (3)   The City Council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time
not to exceed 30 days. The City Council may reverse or affirm, in whole or in
part, the action appealed from, or it may make any order, requirement, or
determination as it deems appropriate.
   (F)   The city reserves the right to suspend or revoke the privilege of
using the access channel, equipment and facilities for violations of this
article. The city may further refuse the use of its equipment or facilities to
any individual who interferes with the orderly conduct of its business, who
appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs, who refuses to cooperate
with or in any way abuses city agents and/or employees, or who misuses
equipment, fails to return it on time, or who has in any way abused the
privilege of the access channel equipment or facilities.
(1993 Code, § 18-128) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 18-129 GENERAL.
   (A)   The city will not be responsible in any way for the content or quality
of access programs produced by others. The city does, however, reserve the
right to reject any program not technically compatible with standard
cablecasting equipment or otherwise technically unsuitable for viewing on a
subscriber's set.
   (B)   The user acknowledges and agrees that the access service here provided
for is subject to many uncertainties of application under federal, state and
local law and that in light of these uncertainties and the experience gained by
the city in providing these services, this operating ordinance may be changed
by the city at any time upon reasonable notice.
   (C)   The user further acknowledges and agrees that the city, its Council,
officials, officers, Cable Access Committee, agents and employees, whether
jointly or severally, in their corporate or personal capacity, undertake no
liability for damages, direct, consequential, or of any kind for any good faith
acts or omissions taken in connection with the administration of this article.
Such acts or omissions, including, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Scheduling decisions made by the city, and the failure to present
programs at the dates and times here applied for;
      (2)   A decision by the city that any program provided by the user would
violate this operating ordinance or other applicable local, state, or federal
law; or
      (3)   Technical causes or problems of any nature beyond the control of
the city.
   (D)   All applicants must make their own arrangements to deliver their
proposed program materials to the city offices and to pick up that material if
and after it has been presented over the cable system. Any program material not
picked up within 60 days after its presentation on the cable system will be
considered to have been abandoned by the owner thereof. The city will not be
responsible for the delivery or return of any tapes, films or program materials
proposed for cable presentation. The city will not be responsible for the loss,
destruction, theft or damage due to acts of nature or to causes beyond the
city's control.
   (E)   An access user acts on his or her own behalf and not as an agent of
the city and shall not make any representation to the contrary to any third
party.
   (F)   In the event that the franchise agreement between the city and the
franchise operator fails to provide for the user access to equipment and
facilities denoted herein, the city assumes no independent responsibility for
the provision of such equipment and facilities to implement user access
privileges created herein.
(1993 Code, § 18-129) (Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
CHAPTERS 19 - 21: RESERVED
CHAPTER 22: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Section
Article I. In General
   22-1 - 22-25 Reserved
Article II. Downtown Development Authority
Division 1. Generally
   
22-26   Established; purposes; boundaries
   
22-27   Powers and duties
   
22-28   Organization
   
22-29   Meetings; quorum and officers
   
22-30   Removal of member
   
22-31   Fiscal year; adoption of budget
   
22-32   Termination
Division 2. Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan
   
22-46   Definitions
   
22-47   Determination of necessity; purpose
   
22-48   Adoption of plans
   
22-49   Determination of findings
Cross reference:
   Administration, see
Chapter 2;
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Chapter 14;
   Planning, see
Chapter 42;
   Utilities, see
Chapter 68;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Statutory reference:
   Housing and slum clearance projects, see M.C.L.A. § 125.692;
   Housing corporation law, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.601 et seq.;
   Rehabilitation of blighted areas, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.71 et seq.;
   Urban redevelopment corporation, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.901 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 22-1 – 22-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 22-26 ESTABLISHED; PURPOSES; BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   A Downtown Development Authority is established, the purpose of which
is to halt property value deterioration, increase property tax valuation,
eliminate the cause of deterioration and promote economic growth within the
downtown district in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1651 through 125.1680, as amended.
   (B)   The boundaries of the district shall be as follows:
   A parcel of land situated in the City of Charlotte, County of Eaton, State
of Michigan, more particularly described as follows:
   Beginning at the northwest corner of the Courthouse Block, O.P., Village
(now City) of Charlotte, Eaton County, Michigan; thence easterly along the
south right-of-way of Harris Avenue to the northeast corner of Lot 2, Block 19,
O.P. of Charlotte; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 2, 130.0 feet to
the northeast corner of Lot 11, Block 19; thence westerly along the north line
of Lot 11, 20.0 feet; thence southerly parallel with the east line of Lot 11,
230.0 feet to a point on the north line, Block 22, O.P. of Charlotte, said
point lying 60.0 feet easterly along said north line from the northwest corner
of Block 22; thence easterly along the north line of Block 22 to the northeast
corner of Lot 4; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 4 extended, 180.0
feet to the south line of Lot 7, Block 22; thence westerly along said south
line of Lot 7, 40.0 feet to the southwest corner of said lot; thence southerly
along the west line of Lot 7 extended, 200.0 feet to the northeast corner of
Lot 20, Block 22; thence westerly along the north line of Lot 20, 84.0 feet;
thence southerly parallel to the west line of Block 22, 180 feet to the south
right-of-way line of Lovett Street; thence easterly along said right-of-way
line to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Cummings Subdivision; thence southerly
along the east line of said Lot 1 to the north line of Lot 7, Cummings
Subdivision; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 7 to the northeast
corner of Lot 6, Cummings Subdivision; thence southerly along the east line of
Cummings Subdivision to the southeast corner of Lot 20; thence westerly along
the north right-of-way line of Seminary Street to a point on the south line of
Lot 23, Block 30, O.P. of Charlotte, said point 88.0 feet westerly from the
southeast corner of Lot 23; thence northerly parallel with the east line of Lot
23, 52.0 feet; thence westerly parallel with the north line of Lot 23 to the
west line of Lot 22, Block 30, O.P. of Charlotte; thence northerly along said
west line to the southeast corner of Lot 20; thence westerly along the south
line of Lot 20 to the southwest corner of said lot; thence northerly along the
west line of Block 0, O.P. of Charlotte to the northwest corner of Lot 12,
Block 30; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 12 to a point 35.0 feet
easterly of the northeast corner of Lot 12; thence northerly parallel with the
west line of Block 30, O.P. of Charlotte to the north line of Lot 2; thence
northwesterly to the southwest corner of Lot 23, Block 25, O.P. of Charlotte;
thence northerly along the west line of Lot 23 extended, Block 25, O.P. of
Charlotte, 140.0 feet; thence westerly parallel with the south line of Block
25, 15.0 feet; thence northerly parallel with the west line of Block 25, 60.0
feet to the south line of Lot 13, Block 25, O.P. of Charlotte; thence westerly
along said south line to the southwest corner of Lot 13; thence northerly along
the west line of Block 25, 60.0 feet; thence easterly parallel to the north
line of Lot 13 to the west line of Lot 11, Block 25, O.P. of Charlotte; thence
northerly along the west line of Lot 11 extended to the southeast corner of Lot
3, Block 25, O.P. of Charlotte; thence westerly along the south line of Lot 3
to the southwest corner of said lot; thence northerly along the west line of
Lot 3 to the northwest corner of said lot, said point being on the south right-
of-way of Lawrence Avenue; thence easterly along the south right of-way line of
Lawrence Avenue to the northwest corner of Block 24, O.P. of Charlotte; thence
northerly along the east right-of-way of Bostwick Street to the point of
beginning.
   Commencing 165'E of the NW corner of Lot 1 of Lawrences Subdivision of
Outlots, thence S to the SE corner Lot 2 of Krebs Subdivision, E 41.18', S to
the N line of Lot 13 of Lawrences Subdivision of Outlots, thence E to a point
that is 237.8'E of the NW corner of said Lot 13, S to S line of said Lot 13, W
29', S to a point 105.31'N of N line of E Henry St, W 57', S 5.31', W 58.8', S
100' to N line of W Henry St, thence W along N line of W Henry to a point 174';
W of SE corner of Lot y of Brooks Addition, N 159', W 90', N to S line of W
Seminary St, E to beginning.
   Lot 10 except the S 5 feet for street of Gales addition, also Lots 11, 12,
25, 26, 27 and N 14 feet of Lot 28. Also commencing at the SE corner of Lot 22,
Block 34 of the original plat of Charlotte, thence W on the N line of Seminary
Street 42 feet, N 97 feet, E 32 feet, S 19.5 feet, E 10 feet to E Line of Block
34, S 77.5 feet to beginning. Also commencing 50 feet N and 165 feet E of SW
corner of Block 34, N 97 feet, E 66 feet, S to N line of Seminary Street, W 66
feet to beginning. Also commencing 50 feet N of SW corner of Block 34 on N line
of Seminary Street, E 150 feet, N 50 feet, W 150 feet, S 50 feet to beginning.
Also commencing 100 feet N of SW corner of Block 34, N 47 feet, E to a point
128 feet W of E line of Block 34, S 47 feet, W to beginning. Also commencing at
the NE corner of Lot 8 of Lawrence's addition of out lots, thence S to the N
line of Henry Street, W to the SW corner of Lot 17, N to the NW corner of Lot
16, W 137.5 feet, N 60 feet, W 32 feet to the W line of Lot 15, N to the NW
corner of Lot 12, E to the SW corner of Lot 11, N to the N line of Krebs Court,
W along N line of Krebs Court to the W line of Lot 9, N to the NW corner of
said Lot 9, W to the E line of Lot 6, N along E line of Lot 6 to a point 120.75
feet S of the NW corner of Lot 6, W to the E line of alley which is adjacent to
the W line of Lot 4, N to the S line of Seminary Street, E along Seminary to
the point of beginning.
(1993 Code, § 22-26) (Ord. passed 12-8-1997; Ord. passed 5-12-2003)
§ 22-27 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Downtown Development Authority shall have all the powers and duties as
set forth in Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through
125.1680 and all amendments thereto.
(1993 Code, § 22-27)
§ 22-28 ORGANIZATION.
   The Downtown Development Authority shall consist of 9 members, consisting of
the City Manager or Mayor and 8 members appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval of the City Council. At least 5 members shall be persons having an
interest in property located in the Downtown District, and at least 1 member
should be a resident of the Downtown District. The members shall be appointed
for staggered 4 year terms. A member shall hold office until the member's
successor is appointed. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only. Members of the Authority shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The
Chairperson of the Authority shall be elected by the members. The Authority
may, subject to the approval of the City Council, appoint a Director who may
also serve as Secretary and such other employees or officers as shall be
necessary. The Authority shall prescribe the duties of all its officers and
employees and fix their compensation. All expense items of the Authority shall
be publicized monthly, and financial records shall be open to the public.
(1993 Code, § 22-28) (Ord. passed 7-8-2002)
§ 22-29 MEETINGS; QUORUM AND OFFICERS.
   The Downtown Development Authority shall adopt its own rules governing its
procedure and the holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the
City Council. Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided
in the rules of the Board. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public
and a record shall be kept of all proceedings. Five members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. A Chairperson and Vice- Chairperson
shall be elected by the Authority.
(1993 Code, § 22-29)
§ 22-30 REMOVAL OF MEMBER.
   Pursuant to notice and an opportunity to be heard, a member of the Downtown
Development Authority may be removed for cause by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 22-30)
§ 22-31 FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   The fiscal year of the Downtown Development Authority shall begin on
July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other
fiscal year as may be adopted by the city.
   (B)   The Authority shall annually prepare a budget by February 15 and shall
submit it to the City Manager for submission to the Council. The Board shall
not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been
approved by the Council.
(1993 Code, § 22-31)
§ 22-32 TERMINATION.
   Upon completion of its purposes, the Downtown Development Authority may be
dissolved by an ordinance duly adopted by the Council. The property and assets
of the Authority, after dissolution and satisfaction of its obligations, shall
revert to the city.
(1993 Code, § 22-32)
§§ 22-33 – 22-45 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN
§ 22-46 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this division shall have the same meaning as given to them
in Public Act of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, as amended,
unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
(1993 Code, § 22-46) (Ord. passed 4-23-1991)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 22-47 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY; PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary and in the best
interest of the public to adopt this section relating to the Downtown
Development Authority and its development plan and tax increment financing
plan, both constituting a public purpose, so that the Downtown Development
Authority can operate more effectively to halt property value deterioration,
eliminate the causes of that deterioration, increase property tax valuation
where possible in the business district of the city, and promote economic
growth, pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through
125.1680, as amended.
(1993 Code, § 22-47) (Ord. passed 4-23-1991)
§ 22-48 ADOPTION OF PLANS.
   The development plan and tax increment financing plan, incorporated in this
section and on file in the office of the City Clerk, as submitted by the
Downtown Development Authority, are hereby approved and adopted by the City
Council. Any amendments to the approved development plan and tax increment
financing plan must be submitted by the Authority to the City Council for
approval or rejection.
(1993 Code, § 22-48) (Ord. passed 4-23-1991)
§ 22-49 DETERMINATION OF FINDINGS.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   Because there were not 100 or more residents residing within the
development area, there was no development area citizens council formed.
      (2)   The plan meets the requirements set forth in the act.
      (3)   The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and
the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing.
      (4)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of the act.
      (5)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan
of the city.
      (6)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities,
are or will be adequate to service the project area.
      (7)   Any changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and the city.
   (B)   Public purpose. The City Council hereby determines that the plan
constitutes a public purpose.
   (C)   Best interest of the public. The City Council hereby determines that
it is in the best interests of the public to proceed with the plan in order to
halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to
eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values, and to promote
growth in the Downtown District.
   (D)   Approval and adoption of plan. The plan is hereby approved and
adopted. A copy of the plan, as amended, and all later amendments thereto shall
be maintained on file in the City Clerk's office.
   (E)   Amendment of article. This article is hereby amended to incorporate
the changes to the amended plan as amended by the plan amendments, and it
otherwise ratified and confirmed as being in full force and effect. All other
ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this section are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed,
and each section of the article and each subdivision of any section thereof is
hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or holding of any section or
subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not be deemed or held to affect
the validity of any other section or subdivision of the article.
   (F)   Paragraph headings. The paragraph headings in this section are
furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be a
part of the section.
   (G)   Effective date. This section is hereby determined by the City Council
to be immediately necessary for the interests of the city and shall be in full
force and effect 20 days after its passage.
(1993 Code, § 22-49) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000; Ord. passed 5-27-2003)
CHAPTERS 23 - 25: RESERVED
CHAPTER 26: RESERVED
CHAPTERS 27 - 29: RESERVED
CHAPTER 30: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Article I. In General
   30-1 – 30-25 Reserved
Article II. Fire Code  (National Fire Protection Association)
   
30-26   Repeal of existing Code and adoption of Code by reference
   
30-27   Changes in NFPA 2018 Edition
   
30-28   Violation of Fire Code
   
30-29   Fire inspections
   
30-30   Fire Insurance Escrow Act
   
30-31   Freestanding wood-burning furnace
Article III. Fire Control Measures
   
30-51   Authority at fires and other emergencies
   
30-52   Interference with Fire Department operations
   
30-53   Compliance with orders
   
30-54   Vehicles crossing fire hose
   
30-55   Authorized emergency vehicle defined
   
30-56   Emergency vehicle operation
   
30-57   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
30-58   Vehicles following fire apparatus
   
30-59   Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department emergency equipment
   
30-60   Damage or injury to Fire Department equipment and personnel
   
30-61   Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections
   
30-62   Approval for hydrant use
   
30-63   Location of fire hydrants and water mains
   
30-64   Private fire hydrants for certain hazardous occupations
   
30-65   Maintenance of fire suppression equipment
   
30-66   Sale of defective fire extinguishers
   
30-67   Street obstructions
   
30-68   False alarm of fire
   
30-69   Starting fires by smoking
Article IV. Hazardous Materials
   
30-91   Purpose
   
30-92   Hazardous material defined
   
30-93   Release defined
   
30-94   Responsible party defined
   
30-95   Charges imposed upon responsible party
   
30-96   Billing procedures
   
30-97   Other remedies
Cross reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Chapter 14;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Statutory reference:
   Crimes related to explosives and bombs, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.200 et seq.;
   Crimes related to fires, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.240 et seq.;
   Explosives Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.41 et seq.;
   Fire Prevention Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 30-1 – 30-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 30-26 REPEAL OF EXISTING CODE AND ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 279 of 1909, § 3(k), being M.C.L.A.
§ 117.3(k), as amended, and for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the
NFPA 2018 Edition including all documents listed in chapter 2 of NFPA 1 2018
Edition is hereby adopted by reference, as modified herein, and as so adopted
shall be known as the “Charlotte Fire Prevention Code” and shall replace the
existing “Charlotte Fire Prevention Code” previously adopted which is hereby
repealed. Whenever the words “authority having jurisdiction” are used in the
Fire Prevention Code, it shall mean the Fire Chief and his or her designees.
Whenever the words “governing authority” are used, it shall mean the City of
Charlotte.
(1993 Code, § 30-26) (Am. Ord. passed 9-22-2003; Am. Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-
2023)
§ 30-27 CHANGES IN NFPA 2018 EDITION.
   The following articles or sections of the NFPA 2018 Edition are hereby
added, amended, or deleted as hereinafter set forth. Subsequent article,
division, and section numbers used in this § 30-27 shall refer to the like
numbered articles, divisions, and sections of the NFPA 1 2018 Edition unless
specified otherwise.
   (A)   1.7.14 Certification of occupancy. Occupancy of any structure besides
one- and two-family dwellings is prohibited until a final certification of
occupancy is issued. A certification of occupancy shall be reviewed and
approved by the fire chief or his designated agent after meeting the
requirements of the code.
   (B)   1.12.8 Permits. Permits shall be required as outlined in the City of
Charlottes Fee Schedule.
   (C)   16.3.4.3 Access for Firefighters.
      Any structure besides a one- and two-family residence is required to have
an access box installed in an area designated by the fire chief or his
designee.
      All buildings that have an elevator are required to have an elevator key
lock box installed in an area designated by the fire chief or his designee.
      Access box order forms are available by contacting the Charlotte Fire
Department.
   (D)   10.10 Open Fires. Open burning should comply with sections 10.10
through 10.10.5.2 of the code. Open burning shall consist of only recreational
fires. Under certain conditions, the fire chief or his designee may allow the
burning of brush by permit.
   (E)   3.2 NFPA Official Definitions. 3.3.226 shall be amended to read as
follows:
      3.3.226 Recreational fire. Fuel used for a recreational fire shall be
untreated dry-season wood or charcoal. The total area for the fire shall not
exceed 3 FT in diameter and 2 FT in height.
   (F)   Board of Appeals. The City Council of the City of Charlotte is hereby
constituted as the Board of Appeals under this Fire Prevention Code.
(1993 Code, § 30-27) (Ord. passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 2015-04, passed 10-26-2015;
Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-15-2021; Am. Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-28 VIOLATION OF FIRE CODE.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or standard hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith; or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder; or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder; or fail
to operate in accordance with any certification or permit issued thereunder,
and form which no appeal has been taken; or who shall fail to comply with any
order as affirmed or modified by a court of competent jurisdiction within the
time frame fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violations and
noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of not less the $100 nor more the $500 or by imprisonment for not less than one
day nor more then 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Those fines
and or imprisonment shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue,
and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violation or
defects within a reasonable timeframe. Each day the violation continues and
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-29 FIRE INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Chief is empowered to enter at any and all reasonable times upon
and into any premises, building, or structure for the purpose of examining and
inspecting the same, to ascertain the conditions with regard to fire hazards,
and the condition, size, arrangement, and efficiency of any and all appliances
for detection, notification, or fire suppression. The Fire Chief is empowered
to appoint members of the regular personnel of the Fire Department to make the
inspection, who shall report in writing to the Fire Chief the results of the
inspection, and who are empowered to make any written orders for the correction
of any hazard or deficiency in detection, notification, or fire suppression
appliances as outlined in the code. Every order made by the Fire Chief or by
authorized members of the Fire Department shall be promptly complied with.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-30 FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW ACT.
   The city is hereby authorized to participate in the Fire Insurance
Withholding Program as set forth in Public Act 495 of the Michigan Public Acts
of 1980. The Fire Chief or his or her designee of the Fire Department is hereby
designated administrator of the Fire Insurance Withholding Program for the
city.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-31 FREESTANDING WOOD-BURNING FURNACE.
   (A)   Definition.
      (1)   FREESTANDING WOOD- BURNING FURNACE. Any device or structure that
is:
         (a)   Designed, intended, or used to provide heat and/or hot water to
any residence or any structure; and
         (b)   Operated by the burning of wood or other solid fuel; and
         (c)   Not located within the structure for which it is providing heat
or hot water.
      (2)   Excluded from the definition of a FREESTANDING WOOD-BURNING FURNACE
is any device which is not designed or used to heat a structure other than the
structure in which it is located.
   (B)   Prohibition. Except as provided below, it shall be unlawful to
install, use, maintain or operate a freestanding wood-burning furnace, and to
cause or permit the installation or operation of a freestanding wood-burning
furnace, within the city.
   (C)   Separation requirements. A freestanding wood-burning furnace shall be
permitted under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Where it is located no closer than 660 feet from any adjoining
residential or commercial structure (excluding in this calculation the
structure for which it is used to provide heat and/or hot water);
      (2)   That the unit be inspected and a boiler permit be obtained, as
required under the applicable mechanical code.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§§ 30-32 -- 30-50 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. FIRE CONTROL MEASURES
§ 30-51 AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee may be in charge at the scene of
a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or property, are
empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or
control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous
conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the
reasonable performance of their duty.
   (B)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee prohibits any person, vehicle,
or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from
the scene any person, vehicle, or object which may impede or interfere with the
operations of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief or his or her designee may
remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle, or object from hazardous
areas. All persons ordered to leave hazardous areas shall do so immediately and
shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Chief or his
or her designee.
(1993 Code, § 30-51) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-52 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire
to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of
travel of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere
with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper
any Fire Department operation.
(1993 Code, § 30-52)
§ 30-53 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of the Fire Chief or his or her designee or to interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual.
(1993 Code, §30-53) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-54 VEHICLES CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive, or
any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the Fire Chief or his or her
designee in command of the operation.
(1993 Code, § 30-54) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-55 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE DEFINED.
   Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined
and authorized under the laws of the state.
(1993 Code, § 30-55)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 30-56 EMERGENCY VEHICLE OPERATION.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in §
30-55, shall not sound the siren on such vehicle or have the front red lights
on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when such vehicle is
responding to an emergency call or when responding to but not upon returning
from a fire. Tactical strategies such as but not restricted to move-ups do not
constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limit, so long as the action does not
endanger life or property;
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (B)   The exemptions granted in this section to an emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least 1 lighted lamp displaying a red
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of such vehicle.
(1993 Code, § 30-56)
§ 30-57 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving an audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
vehicle to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge
or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have
passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Chief or his or her designee or a
police officer.
(1993 Code, § 30-57) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-58 VEHICLES FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus
traveling in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block
or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1993 Code, § 30-58)
§ 30-59 UNLAWFUL BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY
EQUIPMENT.
   A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire Chief or his
or her designee in charge of the Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to,
attach himself or herself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any Fire
Department emergency vehicle, whether the vehicle is in motion or at rest, or
sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing devices thereon, or
manipulate or tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers,
valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or
protective clothing on or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
(1993 Code, § 30-59) (Ord. 2024-03, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-60 DAMAGE OR INJURY TO FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt or
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle at any time
or to injure or attempt to injure or conspire to injure Fire Department
personnel while performing Departmental duties.
(1993 Code, § 30-60)
§ 30-61 BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct,
or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection
for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and
Fire Department connections that are located on public or private streets and
access lanes or on private property.
   (B)   If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation
of this section, the obstructions or enforcements are not removed, the Fire
Chief or his or her designee shall proceed to remove the obstruction. The cost
incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the City
Treasury on a certificate of the Fire Chief or his or her designee and with the
approval of the City Manager, and the City Attorney shall institute appropriate
action for the recovery of such costs.
(1993 Code, § 30-61) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-62 APPROVAL FOR HYDRANT USE.
   A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the
Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures
a permit for such use from the Fire Chief or his or her designee and the water
company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such
hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by the water
company having jurisdiction.
(1993 Code, § 30-62) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-63 LOCATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATER MAINS.
   The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall recommend to the City Manager
the location of new fire hydrants or relocation of existing fire hydrants and
the placement of water mains or replacement of inadequate water mains located
upon public property when deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(1993 Code, § 30-63) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-64 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS FOR CERTAIN HAZARDOUS OCCUPATIONS.
   All shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement or exhibition
parks and educational or institutional complexes, and similar occupancies and
uses involving high fire hazards or lifethreatening hazards and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of
water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be
provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be
capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall designate
and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire Chief or his or
her designee may require the installation of sufficient fire hoses and
equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such
measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service
until approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(1993 Code, § 30-64) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2024)
§ 30-65 MAINTENANCE OF FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT.
   A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with, or otherwise disturb any
fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted in this chapter, except for the
purpose of extinguishing fire, training, or testing purposes, recharging or
making necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted in this section, it
shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was
removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or
equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Chief or his or
her designee.
(1993 Code, § 30-65) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-66 SALE OF DEFECTIVE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   A person shall not sell, trade, loan, or give away any form, type, or kind
of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee or which is not in proper working order or the contents of which do
not meet the requirements of the Fire Chief or his or her designee. The
requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade, or exchange of
obsolete or damaged equipment or junk when such units are permanently
disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
(1993 Code, § 30-66) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 30-67 STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
   A person shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps, fences,
gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of
obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the city. The word
STREET, as used in this section, shall mean any roadway accessible to the
public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to private streets or
access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries
of the city.
(1993 Code, § 30-67)
§ 30-68 FALSE ALARM OF FIRE.
   No person shall willfully turn in, sound or cause to be communicated to the
Fire Department a false alarm of fire.
(1993 Code, § 30-68)
§ 30-69 STARTING FIRES BY SMOKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in smoking or attempting to light or to
smoke a cigarette, cigar or pipe to set fire to any bed, bedding, furniture,
curtains or draperies in any hotel, lodginghouse, tourist home, motel or any
other building.
(1993 Code, § 30-69)
§§ 30-70 – 30-90 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 30-91 PURPOSE.
   In order to protect the Charlotte Fire Department from incurring
extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of the Charlotte Fire
Department resources to respond to an incident involving hazardous material,
the city authorizes the imposition of charges to recover reasonable and actual
costs incurred by the Charlotte Fire Department in responding to calls for
assistance in connection with a hazardous materials release.
(1993 Code, § 30-91) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
§ 30-92 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DEFINED.
   For purposes of this article, a HAZARDOUS MATERIAL includes, but is not
limited to a combustible liquid, a flammable gas, an explosive, toxics and
corrosives. It also includes those materials declared to be hazardous by either
the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(1993 Code, § 30-92) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
§ 30-93 RELEASE DEFINED.
   Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging,
injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment.
(1993 Code, § 30-93) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
§ 30-94 RESPONSIBLE PARTY DEFINED.
   Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, government
entity or any other legal entity that is responsible for a release of a
hazardous material, either actual or threatened, or that is an owner, tenant,
occupant or party in control of property onto which or from which hazardous
materials release.
(1993 Code, § 30-94) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
§ 30-95 CHARGES IMPOSED UPON RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   Where the Fire Department responds to a call for assistance, in
connection with a hazardous materials release, all costs or expenses incurred
by the Fire Department, in responding to such a call, shall be imposed upon
responsible parties.
   (B)   Those costs and expenses include:
      (1)   All personnel-related costs incurred by the Fire Department as a
result of responding to the hazardous materials incident. Such costs may
include, but are not limited to, fire personnel wages and reimbursement costs
paid to volunteer firefighters;
      (2)   Other expenses incurred by the Fire Department in responding to the
hazardous materials incident, including, but not limited to the rental of
machinery and equipment, the purchase of water, and replacement costs related
to disposable personal protective equipment, extinguishing agents and other
supplies;
      (3)   Charges to the Fire Department imposed by any local, state or
federal government entities related to the hazardous materials incident;
      (4)   Costs incurred in accounting for all hazardous material incident-
related expenditures, including billing and collection costs;
      (5)   All other costs or expenses incurred by the Fire Department as a
result of responding to the hazardous materials incident.
(1993 Code, § 30-95) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
§ 30-96 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   Following the conclusion of the hazardous materials incident, the Fire Chief
shall submit a detailed listing of all known costs and expenses to the City
Clerk, who shall prepare an invoice to the responsible party for payment. The
Clerk's invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of receipt of the
bill. Any additional costs or expenses that become known to the Charlotte Fire
Department Fire Chief following the transmittal of the bill to the responsible
party shall be billed in the same manner on a subsequent bill to the
responsible party. For any amounts due that remain unpaid after 30 days, the
city shall impose a late charge of 1% per month, or fraction thereof.
(1993 Code, § 30-96) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
§ 30-97 OTHER REMEDIES.
   The city may pursue any other remedy, or may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding, in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect charges
imposed under this article. The recovery of charges imposed under this article
does not limit the liability of responsible parties under state or federal law,
rule or regulation.
(1993 Code, § 30-97) (Ord. passed 3-13-1995)
CHAPTER 31: RESERVED
CHAPTER 32: MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
Section
   
32-1   Definitions
   
32-2   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement
   
32-3   Municipal civil infraction citations – issuance and service
   
32-4   Same – contents
   
32-5   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
   
32-6   Schedule of civil fines established
   
32-7   Authorized city official
Editor's note:
   An ordinance adopted June 12, 1995 added provisions designated as Chapter
20, §§ 20-1 through 20-7, titled "Municipal Civil Infractions." In order to
maintain the alphabetical sequence of the code, said provisions have been
redesignated as
Chapter 32, §§
32-1 through
32-7, at the discretion of the editor.
§ 32-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended.
   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer or other personnel of the city
authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction
violation notices.
   BUREAU. The City of Charlotte Municipal Ordinance Violation Bureau as
established by this chapter.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the defendant is
alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint of notice prepared
by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding
the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the
person cited.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of Charlotte
Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any,
prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the
city, as authorized under Public Act 236 of 1961, §§ 8396 and 9707(6).
(1993 Code, § 32-1) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995)
§ 32-2 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION; COMMENCEMENT.
   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an
authorized city official of:
      (1)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court; or
      (2)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged
violator to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
(1993 Code, § 32-2) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995)
§ 32-3 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS – ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.
   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials as follows.
   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be district
court.
   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall be filed
with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city
and issued to the alleged violation as provided by Public Act 236 of 1961, §
8705, being M.C.L.A. § 600.8705.
   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and
if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and
signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and
belief."
   (E)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal
civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.
   (F)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or
      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnesses the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has
reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction
and if the prosecuting attorney or City Attorney approves in writing the
issuance of the citation.
   (G)   Municipal civil infraction shall be served by an authorized city
official as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (2), an authorized city official
shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator;
      (2)   If the municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of
land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be
personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or
occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the land or attaching
the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation
shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or
structure at the owner's last known address.
(1993 Code, § 32-3) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995)
§ 32-4 SAME – CONTENTS.
   (A)   A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of
the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
   (B)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance;
      (2)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in person, or by
representation;
      (3)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city;
         (b)   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
   (C)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the
following:
      (1)   That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with
explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to
the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the
time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an
appearance;
      (2)   That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or
by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is
specified on the citation;
      (3)   That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the city;
      (4)   That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney;
      (5)   That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
   (D)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure
of the alleged violation to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will
result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the
municipal civil infraction.
(1993 Code, § 32-4) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995)
§ 32-5 MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau ("Bureau") as authorized under Public Act 236 of 1961, §
8396, being M.C.L.A. § 600.8396, to accept admissions of responsibility for
municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation
notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and
retail civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance.
   (B)   Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The Bureau
shall be located at City Hall, and shall be under the supervision and control
of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall adopt rules and regulations for the
operation of the Bureau.
   (C)   Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of municipal
civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a
municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has
been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation
shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the Bureau. Nothing
in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal
civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation
in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of
a municipal civil infraction violation at the Bureau and may have the violation
processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any
person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice the person
or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded
by law.
   (D)   Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of
the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those having committed the offense or who
admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the Bureau
determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter
relating to an alleged violation.
   (E)   Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
for citations as provided in §
32-3(6) and (7)(a) of this chapter. In addition to any other information
required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall
indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau, the
hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the
alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the
required fine within the required time.
   (F)   Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving
a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and
pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in
the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by
mail, in person, or by representation.
   (G)   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid.
If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal civil infraction
notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and
costs, if any prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not
paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the
district court and a copy of the citation may be reserved by first-class mail
upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The
citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with
the requirements for citations as provided by Public Act 236 of 1961, §§ 8705
and 8709, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8705 and 8709, but shall consist of a sworn
complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil infraction
notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the
citation.
(1993 Code, § 32-5) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995)
§ 32-6 SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions or
responsibility by persons served with municipal civil infraction notices is
hereby established. The fines for the violations listed below shall be as
follows:
      First offense    $ 50
      First repeat offense    $150
      Second repeat offense    $300
      (1)   
Chapter 14 of the Charlotte City Code- Buildings and Building Regulations.
      (2)   §
26-26 of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code-Environment.
      (3)   § 26-27 of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code-Environment.
      (4)   §§ 26-41 through 26-47 of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code-Environment.
      (5)   §§
30-26 and
30-27 of
Chapter 30 of the Charlotte City Code-Fire Prevention and Protection.
      (6)   
Chapter 50 of the Charlotte City Code- Solid Waste.
      (7)   
Chapter 58 of the Charlotte City Code- Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public
Places.
      (8)   
Chapter 68 of the Charlotte City Code- Utilities.
      (9)   
Chapter 70 of the Charlotte City Code- Vegetation.
      (10)   
Chapter 82 of the Charlotte City Code - Zoning.
      (11)   §§
26-71 of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code - Environment.
      (12)   §§
26-72(1) of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code - Environment.
      (13)   §§
26-72(3) of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code - Environment.
      (14)   §§
26-72(5) through (11) of
Chapter 26 of the Charlotte City Code - Environment.
      (15)   §
34-8 of
Chapter 34 of the Charlotte City Code - Offenses.
      (16)   §§
34-10 and
34-11 of
Chapter 34 of the Charlotte City Code - Offenses.
      (17)   §
34-14 of
Chapter 34 of the Charlotte City Code - Offenses.
      (18)   §
34-322 of
Chapter 34 of the Charlotte City Code - Offenses.
      (19)   
Chapter 38 of the Charlotte City Code - Parks.
      (20)   
Chapter 74 of the Charlotte City Code - Vehicles for Hire.
      (21)   §
10-5 of the Charlotte City Code - Removal of Dog and Cat Droppings.
      (22)   §
10-6 of the Charlotte City Code - Dogs on Leashes.
      (23)   §
52-1, §§
52-26 through 52-99 of
Chapter 52 of the Charlotte City Code - Property Maintenance and Nuisance
Abatement.
   (B)   A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted
at the Bureau.
(1993 Code, § 32-6) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995; Ord. passed 8-28-1995; Ord.. passed
7-10-2006(3); Ord. passed 9-22-2008; Ord. 2019-07, passed 10-28-2019; Ord.
2022-08, passed 11-28-22)
§ 32-7 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL.
   Any city police officer, the building officials and all other individuals or
agencies authorized by Council are hereby designated as authorized city
officials to issue civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to
appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing
alleged violators to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) as
provided in this Code.
(1993 Code, § 32-7) (Ord. passed 6-12-1995)
CHAPTER 33: RESERVED
CHAPTER 34: OFFENSES
Section
Article I. In General
   
34-1   Statutory definitions
   
34-2   Definitions
   
34-3   Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal
   
34-4   Begging
   
34-5   Window peeping
   
34-6   Reserved
   
34-7   Loitering near place of illegal occupation or business
   
34-8   Loitering near public buildings to seek employment of legal services or
services of sureties
   
34-9   Attempts
   
34-10   Electric fences
   
34-11   Entering parks at night
   
34-12   Spitting
   
34-13   False information to police officer
Article II. Offenses Affecting Governmental Functions
   
34-36   Hindering officers and employees
   
34-37   Resisting officer
   
34-38   Impersonation of officers
   
34-39   Obstructing, disobeying firefighter
   
34-40   False alarm of fire
Article III. Offenses Against the Person
   
34-61   Assault and battery
   
34-62   Harassment
   
34-63   Malicious annoyance by writing
   
34-64   Malicious acts
   
34-65   Domestic assault
Article IV. Offenses Against Property
Division 1. Generally
   34-86 – 34-105 Reserved
Division 2. Theft
   
34-106   Larceny of goods valued up to $100
   
34-107   Larceny from vacant buildings
   
34-108   Larceny from public libraries
   
34-109   Breaking and entering coinbox
   
34-110   Breaking and entering outside showcases
   
34-111   Weights and measures
   
34-112   Frauds
   
34-113   False statements for welfare aid
   
34-114   Receiving, concealing stolen and the like property
   
34-115   Retail fraud
Division 3. Destruction of Property
   
34-136   Malicious destruction of property generally
   
34-137   Malicious destruction of public property
   
34-138   Tampering with utility appurtenances
   
34-139   Tampering with motor vehicle
Division 4. Trespass
   
34-161   Unlawfully entering lands or premises of another
   
34-162   Breaking and entering, entering without authority
   
34-163   Unauthorized entrance upon private parking area
Article V. Offenses Against Public Peace
   
34-186   Breach of peace
   
34-187   Permitting gathering of disorderly persons
   
34-188   Jostling
   
34-189   Fighting
   
34-190   Prowling
   
34-191   Disorderly intoxication
   
34-192   Gatherings and meetings
   
34-193   Loitering
   
34-194   Committing riot
   
34-195   Incitement to riot
   
34-196   Unlawful assembly
   
34-197   Urinating in public
Article VI. Offenses Against Public Morals
Division 1. Generally
   
34-216   Indecent exposure
   
34-217   Possession, use, sale, and the like of marijuana
   
34-218   Indecent or obscene conduct
   
34-219   Definitions
   
34-220   Use or possession of drug paraphernalia
   
34-221   Sale of drug paraphernalia
   
34-222   Exceptions
   
34-223   Civil forfeiture
   
34-224   Sale of tobacco
   
34-225   Use or possession of tobacco products by a minor in public
   
34-226   Definitions
   
34-227   Possession, attempt to possess and/or use of a vapor or alternative
nicotine product by persons under eighteen (18) years of age prohibited
   
34-228   False identification to obtain or attempt to obtain and/or purchase a
vapor or alternative nicotine product by persons under eighteen (18) years of
age
   
34-229   Furnishing a vapor or alternative nicotine product to persons under
eighteen (18) years of age
Division 2. Prostitution
   
34-241   Prostitution generally
   
34-242   Houses of ill fame – keeping, maintaining
   
34-243   Same – patronizing
   
34-244   Same – leasing premises
   
34-245   Soliciting and accosting
Division 3. Gambling
   
34-266   Keeping or occupying building for gambling
   
34-267   Gambling or frequenting gambling place
   
34-268   Cappers, steerers, loiterers
   
34-269   Keeping gaming room for hire, gain or reward
   
34-270   Gambling place and equipment
   
34-271   Policy or pool tickets and confiscation of articles of gaming
Article VII. Offenses Against Public Safety
Division 1. Generally
   
34-291   Abandonment of airtight containers
   
34-292   Throwing stones or missiles
   
34-293   Use and licensed display of fireworks
Division 2. Weapons
   
34-316   Definitions
   
34-317   Persons exempt
   
34-318   Aiming firearm
   
34-319   Aiming and discharging firearm
   
34-320   Injury by discharge of firearm
   
34-321   Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated
   
34-322   Reserved
   
34-323   Possession of knives and the like by minors
   
34-324   Confiscation of firearms
   
34-325   Transportation and possession
   
34-326   Sale or purchase
   
34-327   Air rifles; pistols; slingshots
Article VIII. Offenses on School Grounds
   
34-351   Definitions
   
34-352   Admission restricted
   
34-353   Disturbing schools
   
34-354   Duty of person creating disturbance to leave premises
   
34-355   Extortion
   
34-356   Unauthorized borrowing of money or things of value from students
   
34-357   Destruction of school property
Article IX. Offenses Involving Minors
Division 1. Generally
   
34-381   Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children
   
34-382   Parental neglect
   
34-383   Use of alcoholic beverages and drugs at open house parties
Division 2. Curfew
   
34-396   Minors under 17
   
34-397   Certain employment of minors under 12
   
34-398   Parental responsibility
   
34-399   Presumption against parents
Article X. Emergency Response Reimbursement
   
34-421   Purpose
   
34-422   Definitions
   
34-423   Liability for expense and charge of an emergency response
   
34-424   Billing logistics
   
34-425   Conflict with criminal laws
Cross reference:
   Nuisance, see §§
26-26 et seq.;
   Traffic and vehicles, see
Chapter 66
Statutory reference:
   Michigan Penal Code, see M.C.L.A. 750.01 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 34-1 STATUTORY DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever any words and phrases as used in this chapter are not defined, but
are defined in the State Penal Code, any such definition therein shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter.
(1993 Code, § 34-1)
§ 34-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, public building, any place of
business or assembly open to or frequented by the public and any other place
which is open to the public view or to which the public has access.
(1993 Code, § 34-2)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 34-3 ABOLITION OF DISTINCTION BETWEEN ACCESSORY AND PRINCIPAL.
   Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this Code,
whether he directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures,
counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may hereafter be prosecuted,
indicted and tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he had directly
committed such offense.
(1993 Code, § 34-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 767.39
§ 34-4 BEGGING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to beg in a public place
from passersby, either by words, gestures or by the exhibiting of a sign.
(1993 Code, § 34-4)
Statutory reference:
   Persons found begging in a public place defined as disorderly persons, see
M.C.L.A. § 750.167(1)(h)
§ 34-5 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into or be found
loitering around or within view of any window not on his own property, with the
intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to
interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy without the
occupant's express or implied consent.
(1993 Code, § 34-5)
Statutory reference:
   Such person defined as a disorderly person, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167(l)(c)
§ 34-6 RESERVED
§ 34-7 LOITERING NEAR PUBLIC BUILDINGS TO SEEK EMPLOYMENT OF LEGAL SERVICES OR
SERVICES OF SURETIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly loiter in
or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted.
(1993 Code, § 34-7)
Statutory reference:
   Such person deemed a disorderly person, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167(1)(j)
§ 34-8 LOITERING NEAR PUBLIC BUILDINGS TO SEEK EMPLOYMENT OF LEGAL SERVICES OR
SERVICES OF SURETIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter in or about
any police station, police headquarters building, jail, hospital, court
building or any other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting
employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal
recognizance.
(1993 Code, § 34-8)
Statutory reference:
   Such persons deemed disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167(1)(k)
§ 34-9 ATTEMPTS.
   Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this Code
and in such attempt shall do any act toward the commission of such offense but
shall fail in the perpetration or shall be intercepted or prevented in the
execution of the perpetration shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1993 Code, § 34-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.92
§ 34-10 ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or operate an
electric fence within the city limits on any parcel of land of less than 5
acres used exclusively for agricultural purposes.
(1993 Code, § 34-10)
§ 34-11 ENTERING PARKS AT NIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in any city park
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the permission of the
Police Department.
(1993 Code, § 34-11)
§ 34-12 SPITTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to spit on any sidewalk
or on the floor or seat of any public carrier or on any floor, wall, seat or
equipment of any place or public assemblage.
(1993 Code, § 34-14)
§ 34-13 FALSE INFORMATION TO POLICE OFFICER.
   No person shall furnish to a peace officer false, forged, fictitious, or
misleading verbal or written information either identifying the person as
another person or falsely misrepresenting a material fact about the person
including, but not limited to, the person’s date of birth or correct spelling
of their full name, if the person is detained for a violation of the law, is
temporarily detained for the purpose of the issuance of an appearance ticket or
civil infraction citation, or has an outstanding warrant for their arrest.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 8-28-2017)
§§ 34-14 – 34-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS
§ 34-36 HINDERING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall hinder, resist or oppose any city officer or employee,
including police officers and firefighters, in the performance of their duties.
(1993 Code, § 34-36)
Statutory reference:
   Obstruction of police officer, see M.C.L.A. § 750.479
§ 34-37 RESISTING OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer or other
law enforcement agent while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty
or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty.
(1993 Code, § 34-37)
Statutory reference:
   Resisting officer in discharge of duty, see M.C.L.A. § 750.479
§ 34-38 IMPERSONATION OF OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or pretend to be an
employee of the city, an employee of the county, an employee of the state or an
employee of any public utility for the purpose of gaining entry into any home
or business located in the city.
(1993 Code, § 34-38)
Statutory reference:
   False personation of officers, see M.C.L.A. § 750.215
§ 34-39 OBSTRUCTING, DISOBEYING FIREFIGHTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and
willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance
of his duties or, while in the vicinity of any fire, to willfully disobey or
disregard any order, rule or regulation of the officer commanding any Fire
Department at such fire.
(1993 Code, § 34-38)
§ 34-40 FALSE ALARM OF FIRE.
   Any person who shall knowingly and willfully commit any 1 or more of the
following actions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
      (1)   Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public
place;
      (2)   Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical
apparatus or combination thereof for the purpose of creating a false alarm of
fire;
      (3)   Raise a false alarm of fire by phone or in person.
(1993 Code, § 34-40)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.240
§§ 34-41 – 34-60 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
§ 34-61 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to attempt or offer,
with force and violence, to do a corporal hurt to another or assault or batter
any other person.
(1993 Code, § 34-61)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.81
§ 34-62 HARASSMENT.
   A person commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy
or alarm another person, he:
      (1)   Follows a person in or about a public place; or
      (2)   Engages in a course of conduct or repeatedly commits acts that
alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose.
(1993 Code, § 34-62)
§ 34-63 MALICIOUS ANNOYANCE BY WRITING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly send or
deliver or to make, for the purpose of being delivered or sent, or to part with
the possession of any letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene
language, with or without a name subscribed thereto or signed with a fictitious
name, or with any letter, mark or other designation with the intent thereby to
cause annoyance to any person, within the city, or with a view or intent to
extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another.
(1993 Code, § 34-63)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.390
§ 34-64 MALICIOUS ACTS.
   Any person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service
provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten,
intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person or to disturb
the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following:
      (1)   Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in
the course of a telephone conversation;
      (2)   Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph
message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered
death or has been the victim of a crime or of an accident;
      (3)   Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment
provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering
with any communications service;
      (4)   Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone
conversation.
(1993 Code, § 34-64)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.540e
§ 34-65 DOMESTIC ASSAULT.
   (A)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that an assault,
an assault and battery or an aggravated assault has taken place or is taking
place and that the person who committed or is committing the violation is a
spouse, a former spouse or a person residing or having resided in the same
household as the victim may arrest the violator without a warrant, irrespective
of whether the violation was committed in his presence.
   (B)   When a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that all of the
following exist, he may arrest and take into custody the violator:
      (1)   One of the following injunctive orders:
         (a)   An injunctive order issued pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 552.14
(annulment, divorce or separate maintenance);
         (b)   An injunctive order issued by a circuit court stating on its
face the period of time for which the order is valid and specifically
restraining or enjoining a spouse, a former spouse or a person residing or
having resided in the same household as the victim from entering onto premises,
from assaulting, beating, molesting or wounding a named person or removing
minor children from the person having legal custody of the children;
      (2)   A true copy and proof of service has been filed with the law
enforcement agency having jurisdiction where the moving party resides;
      (3)   The person named in the order has received notice of the injunctive
order;
      (4)   The person named is committing 1 of the following:
         (a)   Assaulting, beating, molesting or wounding a named person;
         (b)   Removing minor children from the custodial person in violation
of custody and visitation orders;
         (c)   Entering onto premises;
      (5)   The order states on its face that violation of its terms subjects
the person to criminal contempt of the court.
   (C)   A person arrested pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be
brought before the circuit court within 24 hours after arrest to answer a
charge of contempt for violation of the injunctive order. If the circuit judge
is not available within 24 hours after arrest, the person arrested shall be
taken before the district court.
(1993 Code, § 34-65)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 764.15a, 764.15b
§§ 34-66 – 34-85 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§§ 34-86 – 34-105 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. THEFT
§ 34-106 LARCENY OF GOODS VALUED UP TO $100.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or unlawfully
take any money, goods, chattels or property of any other person of the value of
$200 or less.
(1993 Code, § 34-106)
Statutory reference:
   Larceny, see M.C.L.A. § 750.356
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.356
§ 34-107 LARCENY FROM VACANT BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or unlawfully
remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment or other property
belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of any vacant
structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction, or to
break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully
removing, taking therefrom or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment or
other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of such
vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction.
(1993 Code, § 34-107)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.359
§ 34-108 LARCENY FROM PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to procure or take in
any way from the public library in the city any book, pamphlet, map, chart,
painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or
exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert such to his own use.
(1993 Code, § 34-108)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.364
§ 34-109 BREAKING AND ENTERING COINBOX.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously and
willfully, by and with the aid and use of any key, instrument, device or
explosive, blow or attempt to blow or force or attempt to force an entrance
into any coinbox, depository box, newspaper coinbox or other receptacle
established and maintained for the convenience of the public or for any person
to not make payment for any articles of merchandise or service or for any
person to extract or obtain or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom any such
money or thing of value so deposited or contained therein.
(1993 Code, § 34-109)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.113
§ 34-110 BREAKING AND ENTERING OUTSIDE SHOWCASES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to break and enter or to
attempt to break and enter or enter without breaking at any time any outside
showcase or other outside enclosed counter used for the display of goods, wares
or merchandise, with intent to steal or to commit the crime of larceny therein.
(1993 Code, § 34-110)
§ 34-111 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   Any person who shall offer or expose for sale, sell or use or retain in his
possession a false weight or measure or weighing or measuring device in the
buying or selling of any commodity or thing or for hire or reward; who shall
dispose of any condemned weight, measure or weighing or measuring device
contrary to law or remove any tags placed thereon by the sealer of weights and
measures; who shall sell or offer or expose for sale less than the quantity he
represents; who shall sell or offer or expose for sale any such commodity in
any manner contrary to law; or who shall sell or offer for sale or have in his
possession for the purpose of selling any device or instrument to be used to or
calculated to falsify any weight or measure shall be guilty of a violation of
this Code.
(1993 Code, § 34-111)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.561
§ 34-112 FRAUDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing or
to aid or abet or in any manner to be concerned therein.
(1993 Code, § 34-112)
Statutory reference:
   Frauds and cheats, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.271 et seq.
§ 34-113 FALSE STATEMENTS FOR WELFARE AID.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to obtain by means of a
willfully false statement or representation or by impersonation or other
fraudulent device:
      (1)   Aid, relief or welfare assistance to which he is not entitled;
      (2)   Aid, relief or welfare assistance greater than that to which he is
entitled; or
      (3)   Knowingly aid or abet in buying or in any way disposing of the
property of a recipient of aid, relief or welfare assistance.
(1993 Code, § 34-113)
Statutory reference:
   False statements to obtain public relief or assistance, maximum fines, see
M.C.L.A. § 400.60
§ 34-114 RECEIVING, CONCEALING STOLEN AND THE LIKE PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person who buys, receives, possesses, conceals or aids in the
concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property knowing
the money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted is guilty of
a misdemeanor, if the value of the stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods,
or property is $100 or less.
   (B)   A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal
property or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer or collector who
fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering the
stolen, embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal
right to do so or such dealer or collector who buys or receives stolen,
embezzled or converted property which has a registration, serial or other
identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the
property shall be presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the
property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may be rebutted
by proof.
(1993 Code, § 34-114)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.535
§ 34-115 RETAIL FRAUD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following in a store or
in its immediate vicinity:
      (1)   While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and
replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is
offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less
than the price at which the property is offered for sale;
      (2)   While a store is open to the public, steal property of the store
that is offered for sale;
      (3)   With intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store.
(1993 Code, § 34-115)
§§ 34-116 – 34-135 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
§ 34-136 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully and
maliciously destroy or injure the real or personal property of another or the
appurtenances thereof and where the damage done shall be $200 or less.
(1993 Code, § 34-136)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.377a
§ 34-137 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously destroy,
damage, injure, mar or deface any building, monument, sign or structure or
fence, tree, shrub, plant, park or public property of any kind which is owned,
controlled or managed by the state, county, city, any school district within
the city or by any other unit or agency of government, whose operating budget
is raised in whole or in part by public taxation, or to commit any act of
vandalism on or in any such property.
(1993 Code, § 34-137)
Statutory reference:
   Malicious mischief, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.377 et seq.
§ 34-138 TAMPERING WITH UTILITY APPURTENANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any
sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire hydrant, topographical survey
instrument, water meter, water stop box or any other personal property erected
or placed by the city or to make unauthorized taps into the water lines or any
unauthorized use of fire hydrants.
(1993 Code, § 34-138)
Statutory reference:
   Tampering with property of utility, see M.C.L.A. § 750.383a
§ 34-139 TAMPERING WITH MOTOR VEHICLE.
   Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this Code who shall:
      (1)   Intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause
to be started the motor of any motor vehicle or maliciously shift or change the
starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than
that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle;
      (2)   Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running
gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the
property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such
motor vehicle or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or
attachments thereof or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto
attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; or
      (3)   Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle,
with intent to injure such machine and cause the vehicle to be removed without
the consent of the owner, provided that this subsection shall not apply in case
of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local
ordinance or by members of Fire Departments in case of emergency in the
vicinity of a fire.
(1993 Code, § 34-138)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.416
§§ 34-140 – 34-160 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. TRESPASS
§ 34-161 UNLAWFULLY ENTERING LANDS OR PREMISES OF ANOTHER.
   Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another
without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do or after such
lands or premises have been previously posted with a conspicuous notice
forbidding any trespass thereon by the owner or occupant or agent or servant of
the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of
another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant or
agent or servant of either, who, without lawful authority neglects or refuses
to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1993 Code, § 34-161)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.552;
   Trespassing, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.546 et seq.
§ 34-162 BREAKING AND ENTERING, ENTERING WITHOUT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Any person who shall break and enter or shall enter without breaking
any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn,
granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure used
or kept for public or private use or any private apartment therein or any
cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the
outbuildings belonging thereto or any other structure, whether occupied or
unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or
occupant, agent or person having immediate control thereof shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To entering without breaking of any place which at the time of such
entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied;
      (2)   Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was
committed by a peace officer or other person authorized by law to break and
enter or otherwise enter without breaking, provided the breaking and entering
or entering without breaking was committed in the lawful performance of his
duties as a peace officer or other person authorized by law to break and enter
or otherwise enter without breaking;
      (3)   Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was
committed by someone under the direction of a person exempted from the
applicability of this section as noted in subsection (B)(2) of this section.
   (C)   Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner,
lessee or occupant of the structure, place or area as set out in subsection (A)
of this section or the agent thereof or the Police Department. The Police
Department shall enforce this section.
(1993 Code, § 34-162)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.115
§ 34-163 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRANCE UPON PRIVATE PARKING AREA.
   (A)   Any person who enters upon or loiters upon any private parking area,
either in a vehicle or on foot, without the express or implied permission of
the owner, lessee, occupant or agent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Before this section shall be effective in any parking area, suitable
signs must be first posted which would apprise the ordinarily observant person
of the restricted use of the parking area. For the purpose of this section,
implied permission shall be deemed granted to any person for the use designated
by such signs. Implied permission shall not be deemed granted to any person
found upon any private parking area after business hours of the owner, lessee,
occupant or agent of the parking area.
   (C)   The posting of signs upon a parking area pursuant to this section
shall constitute authority by the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the
property for the Police Department to enforce this section.
   (D)   Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner,
lessee or occupant of the parking area or the agent thereof or the Police
Department, and the Police Department shall enforce this section.
(1993 Code, § 34-163)
§§ 34-164 – 34-185 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
§ 34-186 BREACH OF PEACE.
   Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance,
trouble or improper diversion or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good
order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace and
disorderly conduct.
(1993 Code, § 34-186)
Statutory reference:
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 34-187 PERMITTING GATHERING OF DISORDERLY PERSONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to permit or suffer any
place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or
disorderly persons.
(1993 Code, § 34-187)
§ 34-188 JOSTLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be found jostling or
roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place.
(1993 Code, § 34-188)
Statutory reference:
   Such person defined as a disorderly person, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167(1)(l)
§ 34-189 FIGHTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any
disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place.
(1993 Code, § 34-189)
§ 34-190 PROWLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to prowl about any alley
or the private premises of any other person in the nighttime, without authority
or the permission of the owner of such premises.
(1993 Code, § 34-190)
§ 34-191 DISORDERLY INTOXICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a
public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of
property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance.
(1993 Code, § 34-191)
Statutory reference:
   Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167(1)
(e)
§ 34-192 GATHERINGS AND MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully interrupt
or disturb, on any day of the week, any assembly of people met for the worship
of God within the place of such meeting or out of it or to make or excite any
disturbance or contention in any tavern, dance hall, beer garden, store or
grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any
street, lane, alley, highway, public building, ground or park or at any
election or other public meeting in the city where any persons are peaceably
and lawfully assembled.
(1993 Code, § 34-192)
Statutory reference:
   Disturbance of religious worship, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.169, 752.525;
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 34-193 LOITERING.
   (A)   In this section the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them.
      LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially 1 location and shall include the
concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to saunter,
to delay, to stand around and also includes the colloquial expression HANGING
AROUND.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access and a
right of resort for business, entertainment or for lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter, loaf,
wander, stand or remain idle, either alone or in consort with others, in a
public place in such manner so as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians
after having been told to move on by a police officer;
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevent the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move
on by a police officer;
      (3)   Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner,
lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or
premises.
(1993 Code, § 34-193)
Statutory reference:
   Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
§ 34-194 COMMITTING RIOT.
   It is unlawful and constitutes the crime of riot for 5 or more persons
within the city acting in concert to wrongfully engage in violent conduct and
thereby intentionally or recklessly cause or create a serious risk of causing
public terror or alarm.
(1993 Code, § 34-194)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 752.541
§ 34-195 INCITEMENT TO RIOT.
   It is unlawful and constitutes incitement to riot for a person within the
city, intending to cause or to aid or abet the institution or maintenance of a
riot, to do an act or engage in conduct that urges other persons to commit acts
of unlawful force or violence, the unlawful burning or destroying of property
or the unlawful interference with a police officer, peace officer, firefighter
or a member of the state national guard or any unit of the armed services
officially assigned to riot duty in the lawful performance of his duty.
(1993 Code, § 34-195)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 752.542
§ 34-196 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an unlawful assembly for a person within the
city to assemble or act in concert with 4 or more persons for the purpose of
engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot or to be present at an
assembly that either has or develops such a purpose and to remain there with
intent to advance such purpose.
(1993 Code, § 34-196)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 752.543
§ 34-197 URINATING IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall urinate or defecate on any street, sidewalk, alley, park,
parkway, parking lot or structure, public carrier or upon any public building
or place of public assemblage or upon any other public or private property of
another open to public view, or upon any private property of another without
the consent of the owner except where a sanitary facility is provided and used.
(Ord. 2019-04, passed 6-10-2019)
§§ 34-198 – 34-215 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 34-216 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly make any
open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another.
(1993 Code, § 34-216)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.335a
§ 34-217 POSSESSION, USE, SALE, AND THE LIKE OF MARIJUANA.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conspire to possess, sell,
offer for sale, distribute or give away or to possess, use, sell, offer for
sale, distribute or give away cannabis, commonly called marijuana.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1993 Code, § 34-217) (Ord. 2010-04, passed 8-9-2010)
§ 34-218 INDECENT OR OBSCENE CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any
indecent or obscene conduct in any public place.
(1993 Code, § 34-218)
Statutory reference:
   Such person deemed a disorderly person, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167(1)(f)
§ 34-219 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in §§
34-220 through
34-223, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment, product, material, or
combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically
designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting;
manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing;
testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing;
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substantive; including, but not limited to, all of the following:
   (A)   An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance.
   (B)   Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
   (C)   A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or
measuring a controlled substance.
   (D)   A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed
for use with a controlled substance.
   (E)   A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing
twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
   (F)   An object specifically designed manufactured, adapted, or altered for
the use or suggested use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body.
   (G)   A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
   (H)   A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
   (I)   A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled
substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade or
other sharp cutting object and a mirror, tray, or similar portable flat
surface.
   (J)   A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to
deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user.
   (K)   A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed
to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose.
   (L)   A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically
designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile,
including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor
cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled
substances.
   (M)   A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter
bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body.
(Ord. passed 1-26-2004)
§ 34-220 USE OR POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to possess or to use drug paraphernalia
with the intent to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 1-26-2004)
§ 34-221 SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   A person shall not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing
that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 1-26-2004)
§ 34-222 EXCEPTIONS.
   Sections
34-220 and
34-221 of the Code of the City of Charlotte do not apply to any of the
following:
   (A)   An object used or possessed by, sold to or offered for sale to, a
person licensed under the Michigan Public Health Code or under the Occupational
Code, 1980 PA 299, MCL 339.101 to 339.2721, or any intern, trainee, apprentice,
or assistant in the profession licensed under the Michigan Public Health Code
or under 1908 PA 299 for use in that profession.
   (B)   An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, sanitarium,
clinical laboratory, or other health care institution including a penal,
correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that institution.
   (C)   An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in medical, dental,
surgical, or pharmaceutical supplies.
   (D)   Equipment, a product, or material which may be used in the preparation
or smoking of tobacco or smoking herbs other than a controlled substance.
   (E)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not specifically
designed for a use described in §
34-219.
   (F)   A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale for the
purpose of injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other animals.
   (G)   An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a state or local
governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by a state or local
governmental agency to prevent the transmission of infectious agents.
   (H)   Any person suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical
condition requiring self-injection.
(Ord. passed 1-26-2004)
§ 34-223 CIVIL FORFEITURE.
   Any drug paraphernalia used, possessed, or sold in violation of §§
34-220 or
34-221 shall be seized and forfeited to the City of Charlotte.
(Ord. passed 1-26-2004)
§ 34-224 SALE OF TOBACCO.
   (A)   A person shall not sell, give, or furnish any cigarette, cigar,
chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under
18 years of age.
   (B)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for each offense.
(Ord. passed 7-10-2006(4))
Statutory reference:
   Youth Tobacco Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 722.,641 et seq.
§ 34-225 USE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY A MINOR IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes
or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco
snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway,
street, alley, park, or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public
place or business or amusement.
   (B)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by the following fines and sanctions:
      (1)   For the first violation, a fine of not more than $50 for each
offense and, may be ordered, pursuant to a probation order, to participate in a
health promotion and risk reduction assessment program at his or her own
expense and may be required to perform not more than 16 hours of community
service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.
      (2)   For a second violation, in addition to the fine of $50 and
participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may
order the person to perform not more than 32 hours of community service in a
hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to a fine of $50
and participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court
may order the person to perform not more than 48 hours to community service in
a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.
(Ord. passed 6-25-2007)
§ 34-226 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in §§
34-227 through
34-229, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT. A noncombustible product containing nicotine
that is intended for human consumption in any form, including but not limited
to chewing, absorption, dissolving or ingesting by any other means.
   DILIGENT INQUIRY. A good faith effort to determine the age of the person,
which includes at least an examination of an official operator’s or chauffeur’s
license, an official personal identification card, a military identification
card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the
identity and age of the person.
   VAPOR PRODUCT. A noncombustible product containing nicotine that employs a
heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic,
chemical, or mechanical means, that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine
in a solution or other form. VAPOR PRODUCT includes, but is not limited to: an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product
or device and a  vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution
or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 34-227 POSSESSION, ATTEMPT TO POSSESS AND/OR USE OF A VAPOR OR ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCT BY PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not possess, attempt
to possess and/or use a vapor or alternative nicotine product.
   (B)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction with a fine of no more than $50.00.
   (C)   Subsection (A) does not apply to a person participating in any of the
following:
      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a
vapor or alternative nicotine product under the direction of the minor’s
employer and with the prior approval of the City of Charlotte Police Chief as
part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.
      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a
vapor or alternative vapor product under the direction of a local police agency
as part of an enforcement action, unless the initial or contemporaneous
purchase or receipt of the vapor or alternative vapor product by the minor was
not under the direction of a local police agency and was not part of the
undercover operation.
      (3)   The handling or transportation of a vapor or alternative vapor
product by a minor under the terms of that minor’s employment.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 34-228 FALSE IDENTIFICATION TO OBTAIN OR ATTEMPT TO OBTAIN AND/OR PURCHASE A
VAPOR OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT BY PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF
AGE.
   (A)   A person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not obtain, purchase,
or attempt to obtain or purchase a vapor or alternative vapor product from
another person or any agent or employee of an establishment which sells or
furnishes vapor or alternative nicotine products by furnishing or using any
false, fraudulent or misleading verbal or written information identifying the
person as another person or falsely misrepresenting a material fact about the
person, including but not limited to the person’s date of birth or correct
spelling of their full name.
   (B)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a maximum of 90 days in jail and up to a $500.00 fine.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 34-229 FURNISHING A VAPOR OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT TO PERSONS UNDER
EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   A vapor or alternative nicotine product shall not be sold, offered for
sale, offered, given or furnished to a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
A diligent inquiry as to whether a person buying or receiving a vapor or
alternative nicotine product is under eighteen (18) years of age shall be made
prior to the sale, offer of sale, offer of, giving or furnishing of such
product.
   (B)   A person who violates subsection (A) by knowingly selling, offering
for sale, offering, giving or furnishing a vapor or alternative nicotine
product to a person under eighteen (18) years of age, or by failing to make a
diligent inquiry as to whether the person is under eighteen (18) years of age
is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum of 90 days in jail and up
to a $500.00 fine.
   (C)   A person who sells a vapor product or alternative nicotine product at
retail shall post a sign in a conspicuous place in each room of the
establishment that includes the following statement: The purchase of a vapor
product or alternative nicotine product by a minor under eighteen (18) years of
age is prohibited by law. A minor unlawfully purchasing or using a vapor or
alternative nicotine product is subject to a fine.
   (D)   A person or establishment that is in violation of division (C) of this
section shall be responsible for a civil infraction with a fine of not more
than $250.00.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-8-2019)
§§ 34-230 – 34-240 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. PROSTITUTION
§ 34-241 PROSTITUTION GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer
or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to secure or offer
another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or
moral perversion.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in or near
any place frequented by the public or any public place for the purpose of
inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of
prostitution or moral perversion.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly
transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or
an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly
receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building
for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral
perversion or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building
for any such purpose.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to direct or offer
to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any
lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(1993 Code, § 34-241)
Statutory reference:
   Prostitution, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.
§ 34-242 HOUSES OF ILL FAME – KEEPING, MAINTAINING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain a
house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or
lewdness.
(1993 Code, § 34-242)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.452
§ 34-243 SAME – PATRONIZING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to patronize,
frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation
or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to accept the solicitation of or
solicit a prostitute for the practice of fornication, prostitution or lewdness.
(1993 Code, § 34-242)
Statutory reference:
   Admitting to place for purpose of prostitution, see M.C.L.A. § 750.449;
   Engaging or offering to engage services of female, see M.C.L.A. § 750.449a
§ 34-244 SAME – LEASING PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to lease to another any
house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any of the uses or
purposes set forth in §§
34-242 and
34-243 or to knowingly permit any house, room or other premises to be used or
occupied for such purposes.
(1993 Code, § 34-244)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.454
§ 34-245 SOLICITING AND ACCOSTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, male or female, 17
years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place
or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to
commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall
not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties
as an enforcement officer.
(1993 Code, § 34-245)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.448
§§ 34-246 – 34-265 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. GAMBLING
§ 34-266 KEEPING OR OCCUPYING BUILDING FOR GAMBLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or employee, within the
city, to directly or indirectly keep or occupy or assist in keeping or
occupying any common gambling house or any building or room therein or place
within the city where gaming is permitted or suffered or to suffer or permit on
any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him any apparatus used for gaming
or gambling or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within
the city.
(1993 Code, § 34-245)
Statutory reference:
   Gambling, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.301 et seq.;
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.302
§ 34-267 GAMBLING OR FREQUENTING GAMBLING PLACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deal in, play or engage in gaming
such as faro, roulette, dice, cards or other device or game of chance, hazard
or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise, for the
purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing or to knowingly attend or
be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is
taking place.
(1993 Code, § 34-267)
§ 34-268 CAPPERS, STEERERS, LOITERERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or occupation of a
roper, steerer, doorman or capper, so-called, for any gambling room, gaming
house or place where gaming is carried on or for any gambling, game of chance,
trick or device or for any place where gambling or games of chance may be
permitted or allowed or are being carried on. It shall be unlawful for persons
to knowingly frequent, attend or be found present in any of such places.
(1993 Code, § 34-268)
§ 34-269 KEEPING GAMING ROOM FOR HIRE, GAIN OR REWARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain for
hire, gain or reward a gaming room or gambling table or any game of skill or
chance or partly of skill and partly of chance used for gaming or to knowingly
suffer a gaming room or gaming table or any such game to be kept, maintained or
played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by him or for any
person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming
room, gaming table or game within the city.
(1993 Code, § 34-269)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.303
§ 34-270 GAMBLING PLACE AND EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or employee, within the
city, to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building
or room or any part thereof or any place with apparatus, hooks or any device
for registering bets or buying or selling pools upon the result of a game,
competition, political competition, appointment or election or any purported
event of like character or to register bets or to buy or sell pools or to be
concerned in buying or selling pools or to knowingly permit any grounds or
premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used for any of the
purposes stated in this section.
(1993 Code, § 34-270)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.304
§ 34-271 POLICY OR POOL TICKETS AND CONFISCATION OF ARTICLES OF GAMING.
   It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to be in possession of
any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda or any combination
thereof, bet slips, numbers slips or of any article associated or connected
with commercial gambling. Any and all such articles may be confiscated and
destroyed by the Police Department or used in evidence in any prosecution for
violation of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 34-271)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.306
§§ 34-272 – 34-290 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 34-291 ABANDONMENT OF AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or
dwelling or in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator, trunk or any other container of any kind which
has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the
inside of the icebox, refrigerator, trunk or other container, without first
removing the locks or doors therefrom.
(1993 Code, § 34-291)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.493d
§ 34-292 THROWING STONES OR MISSILES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to throw any stone,
brick or any other missile at any motorbus, automobile or other motor vehicle.
(1993 Code, § 34-292)
§ 34-293 USE AND LICENSED DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in the section, CONSUMER FIREWORKS, ARTICLES
PYROTECHNIC, DISPLAY FIREWORKS and SPECIAL EFFECTS have the same meaning as
those terms as defined in § 2 of the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, being
M.C.L.A. § 28.452.
   (B)   Use of fireworks.
      (1)   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks except
after 11:00 a.m. on the following days:
         (a)   December 31 until 1:00 a.m. January 1;
         (b)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until
11:45 p.m.;
         (c)   June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days;
         (d)   July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.;
and
         (e)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until
11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) is a civil infraction with a fine of
$1,000 for each violation. Each consumer firework discharged in violation of
this section shall constitute a separate offense. Five hundred dollars ($500)
of each fine collected pursuant to this section shall be remitted to the
Charlotte Police Department.
   (C)   Licensed displays.
      (1)   The City Council may, upon application in writing on forms provided
by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs and payment of
the required fees set by the city, if any, grant a permit for the use of
agricultural or wildlife fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks,
consumer fireworks, or special effects manufactured for outdoor pest control or
agricultural purposes, or for public or private display within the city by
other municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks, or other
organizations or individuals approved by the city, if the applicable provisions
of the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 et seq., are met.
After a permit has been granted, a permit holder may sell, possess, or
transport fireworks for only the purposes described in the permit. A permit
granted under this division is not transferable and shall not be issued to a
minor.
      (2)   Before a permit for articles pyrotechnic or a display fireworks
ignition is issued, the person applying for the permit shall furnish proof of
financial responsibility by a bond or insurance in an amount, character, and
form deemed necessary by the city to protect the public and to satisfy claims
for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission
on the part of the person or an agent or employee of the person.
      (3)   A permit shall not be issued under this division to a nonresident
person for ignition of articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks in this state
until the person has appointed in writing a resident member of the bar of this
state or a resident agent to be the legal representative upon whom all process
in an action or proceeding against the person may be served.
      (4)   Before granting of a permit under this division, the city shall
rule on the competency and qualifications of an articles pyrotechnic and
display fireworks operator, as furnished by the operator on the operator's
application form, in accordance with the requirements provided under NFPA 1123,
and on the time, place, and safety aspects of the display of articles
pyrotechnic or display fireworks.
      (5)   The city may charge and collect a fee to issue a permit under this
division and shall retain the collected fee.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 7-13-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.243a et seq.
§§ 34-294 – 34-315 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. WEAPONS
§ 34-316 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   FIREARM. Except as otherwise specifically defined in this division, includes
any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using
explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion.
(1993 Code, § 34-316)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
Statutory reference:
   Firearms and weapons, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.222 et seq.
§ 34-317 PERSONS EXEMPT.
   Police officers, peace officers and persons in the military service, in
pursuit of official duty, and persons duly authorized by federal or state law
to carry firearms are exempt from the provisions of this division.
(1993 Code, § 34-317)
§ 34-318 AIMING FIREARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally,
without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person.
(1993 Code, § 34-318)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.233
§ 34-319 AIMING AND DISCHARGING FIREARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to discharge without
injury to another person any firearm while intentionally, without malice,
aiming at or toward any person.
(1993 Code, § 34-319)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.234
§ 34-320 INJURY BY DISCHARGE OF FIREARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maim or injure any
other person by the discharge of any firearm pointed or aimed unintentionally,
without malice, at any such person.
(1993 Code, § 34-320)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.235
§ 34-321 POSSESSION OR CONTROL OF FIREARM WHILE INTOXICATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the
influence of an alcoholic liquor or any exhilarating or stupefying drug, to
carry, have in possession or control or use in any manner or discharge any
firearm.
(1993 Code, § 34-321)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.237
§ 34.322 RESERVED.
§ 34-323 POSSESSION OF KNIVES AND THE LIKE BY MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor under 18 years of age to have in his
possession or control, except within his own domicile, or carry or use in any
manner any knife with a blade in excess of 3 inches, dagger, dirk, razor,
stiletto or any other sharp-edged or pointed instrument or weapon used for
inflicting injury upon another; provided, however, that such person shall not
be in violation of this section if his possession of such knife with a blade in
excess of 3 inches, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp- edged or
pointed instrument is necessary for his employment, trade or occupation or if
he is engaged in or is proceeding to or returning from a place of hunting,
trapping or fishing and, whenever required, is also carrying a currently valid
license issued to him by the State Department of Conservation or if such person
is a duly enrolled member of the Boy Scouts of America or a similar
organization or society and such possession is necessary to participate in the
activities of such organization or society or if the knife with a blade in
excess of 3 inches, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged
pointed instrument is required under circumstances that tend to establish that
its possession is for a lawful purpose.
(1993 Code, § 34-323)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying firearm or dangerous weapon, see M.C.L.A. § 750.226
§ 34-324 CONFISCATION OF FIREARMS.
   All weapons, guns, pistols, firearms, knives, dirks, razors, stilettos or
any other sharp-edged or pointed instruments or weapons carried, possessed or
used contrary to this division are hereby declared forfeited to the city.
(1993 Code, § 34-324)
§ 34-325 TRANSPORTATION AND POSSESSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or to have in possession in
or upon any vehicle a firearm unless the firearm is unloaded in both barrel and
magazine and carried in the luggage compartment of the vehicle. It shall be
unlawful to carry a firearm on any public street or in any public place unless
it is unloaded and in a case.
(1993 Code, § 34-325)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed weapons without license, see M.C.L.A. § 750.227
§ 34-326 SALE OR PURCHASE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to purchase, carry
or transport a firearm on any public street or in any public place. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell a firearm to any person under 18 years of age.
(1993 Code, § 34-326)
§ 34-327 AIR RIFLES; PISTOLS; SLINGSHOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or discharge any BB gun,
air rifle, toy pistol, slingshot, bow and arrow, catapult or any other toy
shooting apparatus, gun or implement that might result in damage or destruction
of life or property in the limits of the city other than at a duly established
range.
(1993 Code, § 34-327)
§§ 34-328 – 34-350 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII. OFFENSES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
§ 34-351 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   PRINCIPAL. Any principal of any elementary or secondary school or the chief
administrative officer of any elementary or secondary school or college.
   SCHOOL. Any pre-elementary, elementary (grades K-6), secondary (grades 7-12)
school, any college or combination thereof.
(1993 Code, § 34-351)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 34-352 ADMISSION RESTRICTED.
   No person who is not a regularly enrolled student or parent or guardian
thereof or a school official, teacher or other public or school employee shall
enter or trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public, private or parochial
school building or school property in the city for any reason whatever, unless
such person has received written permission from the principal or other person
designated by the principal to be in or upon or to remain in or upon such
public, private or parochial school building or school property; provided,
however, that such written permission need not be secured by persons engaging
in or attending a school or recreation board authorized activity or by persons
using a school playground or playground equipment after school hours or when
school is not in session, unless such entry or use shall have been otherwise
prohibited by a rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or
other person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit such use or
entry.
(1993 Code, § 34-352)
Statutory reference:
   Trespassing, see M.C.L. §§ 750.546 et seq.
§ 34-353 DISTURBING SCHOOLS.
   No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise,
disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of
any public, private or parochial school is disturbed.
(1993 Code, § 34-353)
Statutory reference:
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 34-354 DUTY OF PERSON CREATING DISTURBANCE TO LEAVE PREMISES.
   Any person, whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon any public, private or
parochial school building or school property, who is found to be creating a
disturbance in or upon any such school building or property shall leave
immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated
by the principal.
(1993 Code, § 34-354)
Statutory reference:
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 34-355 EXTORTION.
   No person shall by violence, threats of violence or other form of coercion
force or attempt to force any public, private or parochial school student or
other person to give or to lend any money or other thing of value to any person
at any time.
(1993 Code, § 34-355)
Statutory reference:
   Extortion, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.213 et seq.
§ 34-356 UNAUTHORIZED BORROWING OF MONEY OR THINGS OF VALUE FROM STUDENTS.
   No person shall borrow or attempt to borrow any money or thing of value from
any student in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or
school property in the city or during any time when such student is engaging
in, going to or returning from any regularly scheduled session or activity of
any such school without first obtaining the written approval of the principal
of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such
written approval; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
college students who borrow money or things of value from other college
students or adults.
(1993 Code, § 34-356)
§ 34-357 DESTRUCTION OF SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial
school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other
appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto.
(1993 Code, § 34-357)
§§ 34-358 – 34-380 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX. OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 34-381 CONTRIBUTING TO NEGLECT OR DELINQUENCY OF CHILDREN.
   Any person who shall by any act or by any word encourage, contribute toward,
cause or tend to cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17
years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, whether or not such
child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty
of a violation of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 34-381)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.145
§ 34-382 PARENTAL NEGLECT.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      CRIMINAL ACTS. Those acts which violate the statutes of the state or the
ordinances of the city and shall include traffic violations.
      HABITUAL OFFENDER. A person who commits 2 or more criminal acts,
including 4 or more moving traffic violations, within a 12-month period.
      MINOR. Any juvenile under the age of 17 residing with the parent.
      PARENT. The mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having
the care or custody of a minor or such other adult with whom a minor may be
found residing.
   (B)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail
to exercise reasonable parental control which results in the minor committing
any criminal act or to allow or encourage any minor to commit any criminal act
or become delinquent in accordance with the probate code as it pertains to
juveniles.
   (C)   Notification.
      (1)   Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission
of any criminal act within the city, the parent of such minor shall be
immediately notified by the Police Department advising the parent of such
arrest or detention, the reason therefor and their responsibility under this
article.
      (2)   A record of such notifications shall be kept by the Police
Department.
(1993 Code, § 34-382)
§ 34-383 USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS AT OPEN HOUSE PARTIES.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      ADULT. A person 17 years of age or older.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing alcohol.
      CONTROL. Any form of regulation or dominion, including a possessory
right.
      DRUG. A controlled substance as defined by the public acts of the state.
      MINOR. A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess
alcoholic beverages pursuant to Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L.A. §§
436.1109 et seq., as amended.
      OPEN HOUSE PARTY. A social gathering of persons at a residence, other
than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family
members.
      RESIDENCE. A home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit and
includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit.
   (B)   Responsibility of adults. No adult having control of any residence
shall allow an open house party to take place at the residence if any alcoholic
beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at the residence by any minor where
the adult knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic beverage or
drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at the residence and
where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or
consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at the residence.
   (C)   Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally
protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities.
   (D)   Penalties. The penalties for violation of this section shall be as
prescribed in §
1-16 of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 34-383)
§§ 34-384 – 34-395 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. CURFEW
§ 34-396 MINORS UNDER 17.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to
loiter, idle, congregate or otherwise be in or on any public street, highway,
alley, park or any public place, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m. immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a parent
or guardian or some adult above 21 years of age delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany such child or where the presence of the minor in the
place is connected with and required by some legitimate work, trade, profession
or occupation in which the minor is upon an emergency errand or other
legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
state law.
(1993 Code, § 34-396)
Statutory reference:
   Curfew for minors, see M.C.L.A. §§ 722.751 et seq.
§ 34-397 CERTAIN EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS UNDER 12.
   No child under the age of 12 years shall be permitted, caused or suffered to
be engaged or employed as a bootblack or in the selling of magazines,
periodicals, newspapers, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or nature upon
the public streets or in any public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. or to accompany any person so engaged or employed.
(1993 Code, § 34-397)
§ 34-398 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The parent or guardian of a minor subject to the provisions of this division
shall be held responsible for the enforcement of §§
34-396 and
34-397.
(1993 Code, § 34-398)
§ 34-399 PRESUMPTION AGAINST PARENTS.
   Any person assisting, aiding, abetting or encouraging any minor under the
age of 17 years to violate the provisions of §
34-398 shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, and when any minor is found
violating the provisions of §
34-398, a presumption shall arise that the parent or legal guardian having the
care and custody of the minor assisted, aided, abetted and encouraged such
minor in so violating that section.
(1993 Code, § 34-399)
§§ 34-400 – 34-420 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X. EMERGENCY RESPONSE REIMBURSEMENT
§ 34-421 PURPOSE.
   The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrest and traffic
accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. In
addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/
or controlled substances there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and
property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and
financial burden is placed upon the city's police, firefighting and rescue
services and its City Attorney by persons who are operating a motor vehicle
while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances.
(1993 Code, § 34-421) (Ord. passed 10-9-1995)
§ 34-422 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. The same meaning given to it under Public Act 58 of 1998,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq., as amended.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The same meaning given to it under the Michigan Public
Health Code, Article 7, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq., as amended.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
      (1)   The providing, sending and/or utilizing of public services, police,
firefighting, and/or rescue services by the city for an accident involving a
motor vehicle where 1 or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle
while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance or
the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and any controlled substance; or
      (2)   The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer,
subsequent prosecution and all other related activities when the driver was
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or
any controlled substance.
(1993 Code, § 34-423) (Ord. passed 10-9-1995)
§ 34-423 LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE AND CHARGE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
   Any person who, while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any
controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and any
controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle which results in an emergency
response as defined in this article shall be responsible and/or liable for a
charge in the minimum amount of $250. Only 1 charge shall be incurred by a
person liable for a charge under this article for an emergency response,
regardless of how many departments or individuals respond in an emergency
response.
(1993 Code, § 34-423) (Ord. passed 10-9-1995)
§ 34-424 BILLING LOGISTICS.
   (A)   Presumptions. For the purposes of this article, a person is under the
influence of an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance, or the
combinedinfluence of an alcoholic liquor and any controlled substance, when his
or her physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he no longer
has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a
sober person of ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person
was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor
if a chemical analysis of his or her blood, urine or breath indicates that the
amount of alcohol in his or her blood was in excess of 0.07%.
   (B)   Charge against person. The expenses incurred by the city as a result
of an emergency response shall be charged to the person liable for the expenses
under the terms of this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person
and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an
obligation under a contract, expressed or implied.
   (C)   Billing. The Chief of Police, or their designee, shall within 10 days
of an emergency response submit a bill for the costs by first class mail or
personal service to the person liable for the amount of the charge as
enumerated in this article, as amended. The bill(s) shall require full payment
within 30 days from that date.
   (D)   Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure by the person
described in this article as liable for the expense of an emergency response to
pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered in default. In case
of default, the city may commence a civil suit to recover the expenses and any
costs allowed by law.
(1993 Code, § 34-424) (Ord. passed 10-9-1995)
§ 34-425 CONFLICT WITH CRIMINAL LAWS.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge
or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines imposed by
a judge under the State Vehicle Code on a driver for operating a motor vehicle
under the influence of an alcoholic liquor and/or a controlled substance.
(1993 Code, § 34-425) (Ord. passed 10-9-1995)
CHAPTERS 35 – 37: RESERVED
CHAPTER 38: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Article I. In General
   
38-1   Injury to park property
   
38-2   Alcoholic beverages
   
38-3   Use of waste containers
   
38-4   Ball games
   
38-5   Hours
   
38-6   Additional rules
Article II. Advisory Park Board
   
38-31   Created; purpose
   
38-32   Composition
   
38-33   Terms of office
   
38-34   Compensation
Charter reference:
   Power to provide and operate parks, see Charter, §
2.1(B)(5)(a)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to operate system of public recreation and playgrounds, see
M.C.L.A. §§ 123.51 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 38-1 INJURY TO PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground,
and no person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner any monument, ornament,
fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment,
fireplace, or other public property within or pertaining to such parks.
(1993 Code, § 38-1)
§ 38-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   No person shall bring into or drink in any city park, any alcoholic
beverage, except in areas designated as the city’s Social District Commons Area
and only during days and hours of operations as determined by City Council
resolution in accordance with state law or provided in subsection (B).
   (B)   City Council may permit the sale and consumption of alcohol in
designated areas of city parks in conjunction with events that are sponsored by
nonprofit organizations.
   (C)   A nonprofit organization that desires to sell and/or consume beer and
wine in a city park shall make written application to hold such an event to the
City Clerk. The application shall be on forms provided by the City Clerk and
shall include the following:
      (1)   Name, signature, phone number, email contact and address of the
applicant;
      (2)   Location of the event (i.e., Lincoln Park);
      (3)   Information regarding the type of the event, the dates and times of
the event, and the purpose of the event;
      (4)   Description of security measures proposed for the event, including
compliance with regulations of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission;
      (5)   Evidence of insurance coverage including the name of the insurance
carrier and policy number with a copy of the proof of insurance with minimum
liability of $300,000 for injury or death to one person or more than one
person, and $100,000 in property damage, and insurance coverage for liquor
liability under the Liquor Control Act;
      (6)   The application fee in the amount of $___. This application fee may
be revised, from time to time, upon resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   The application shall be accompanied by a copy of the special license
for such events obtained from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall forward the completed application form to the
Police Department and the Department of Public Works for review, prior to
submission to the City Council.
   (F)   The application shall be considered by the City Council within 30 days
of the date of its submission to the City Clerk. If the review is not completed
within that time frame, the application shall be considered granted.
(1993 Code, § 38-2) (Ord. 2017-07, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2024-01, passed 8-26-
2024)
§ 38-3 USE OF WASTE CONTAINERS.
   No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, paper or
miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers provided for
that purpose.
(1993 Code, § 38-3)
§ 38-4 BALL GAMES.
   No baseball, football or softball throwing or other violent or rough
exercises or play shall be engaged in in any public park or other public place,
except in areas designated therefor by the Director of Public Works.
(1993 Code, § 38-4)
§ 38-5 HOURS.
   City parks shall be open to the public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., prevailing time. No person shall enter a city park at any other
time, except by permission of the City Manager or the Police Department.
(1993 Code, § 38-5)
§ 38-6 ADDITIONAL RULES.
   The City Council shall adopt by resolution such additional rules and
regulations pertaining to the conduct and use of parks and public grounds as
are necessary to administer the parks and public grounds and to protect public
property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no
person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations.
(1993 Code, § 38-6)
§§ 38-7 – 38-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. ADVISORY PARK BOARD
§ 38-31 CREATED; PURPOSE.
   The Citizen Advisory Park Board shall be created for the purpose of
affording citizens a forum for the discussion of community park and
recreational needs and the means of meeting such needs. It shall report its
findings and suggestions to the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 38-31)
Cross reference:
   Boards and commissions, see §§
2-101 et seq.
§ 38-32 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Citizen Advisory Park Board shall consist of 5 voting members and
2 nonvoting members.
   (B)   The 5 voting members shall be appointed by the City Council from the
electorate at large.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall be a nonvoting member.
   (D)   A student in the community under the age of 18 shall be appointed a
nonvoting member.
(1993 Code, § 38-32)
§ 38-33 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office for the voting members of the Citizen Advisory Park
Board shall be 3 year staggered terms.
(1993 Code, § 38-33)
§ 38-34 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Citizen Advisory Park Board shall receive no compensation
for their services to the city, but shall be allowed reasonable and actual
expenses when incurred on behalf of the city and approved by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 38-34)
CHAPTERS 39 – 41: RESERVED
CHAPTER 42: PLANNING
Section
Article I. In General
   42-1 – 42-25   Reserved
Article II. Planning Commission
   
42-26   Commission continued
   
42-27   Composition; terms; compensation; removal; quorum
   
42-28   Officers; meetings; rules; records
   
42-29   Assistance; program
   
42-30   Master plan
   
42-31   Surveys and studies
   
42-32   Hearing, notice, adoption of plan
   
42-33   Other duties
Cross reference:
   Administration, see
Chapter 2;
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Chapter 14;
   Community development, see
Chapter 22;
   Streets, sidewalks and other public places, see
Chapter 58;
   Subdivision regulations, see
Chapter 62;
   Utilities, see
Chapter 68;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate land use, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 et seq.;
   Municipal planning, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 42-1 – 42-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 42-26 COMMISSION CONTINUED.
   The Planning Commission, created pursuant to Public Act 285 of 1931, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 through 125.45, as amended, is continued.
(1993 Code, § 42-26)
Cross reference:
   Boards and commissions, see §§
2-101 et seq.
§ 42-27 COMPOSITION; TERMS; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL; QUORUM.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of 11 members, each of whom
shall have the qualifications of an elector and a freeholder in the city. Of
the appointed members of the Commission, 9 members shall serve 3 year staggered
terms from April 10 of the year in which appointed. The remaining 2 members
shall be ex officio nonvoting members: 1 the City Manager or other appointed
city official as the Mayor shall direct with the consent and approval of the
City Council, and the final member shall be a member of the City Council as
appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the City Council.
   (B)   All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation.
   (C)   Any member may, upon recommendation to the City Council by a majority
of the Planning Commission, be removed from office by the City Council.
   (D)   A simple majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of any business.
(1993 Code, § 42-27)
§ 42-28 OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall choose from among its members a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary, each of whom shall hold office for
a term of 1 year or until a successor is chosen and takes office.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least 1 meeting a month if there
is business, which meetings shall be open to the public, and shall adopt its
own rules of procedure for the transaction of business.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall keep a full and complete record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. This record shall be
available to the City Council upon request.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall be responsible for the discipline of its
members.
(1993 Code, § 42-28)
§ 42-29 ASSISTANCE; PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Planning Commission, with the approval of the City Council, may
request the City Manager for such services and data by the various city
departments as it may deem necessary. The Commission may recommend to the City
Council the procurement of such professional and consulting services as it may
deem necessary; provided, however, that no expenditure of funds shall be made
nor contract entered into for providing such professional or consulting
services, unless the contract shall have been approved and authorized by the
City Council.
   (B)   Not later than February 15 in each year, the Planning Commission shall
prepare and submit to the City Manager a tentative outline of its program for
the ensuing city fiscal year, together with its estimate of its proposed
expenditures for such ensuing year, which outline and estimate shall serve as a
guide for appropriations in the city budget for such year. The filing of such
outline and estimate of expenditures shall in no way obligate the City Council
to provide the funds requested in the budget. No funds shall be expended by the
Planning Commission in excess of any amounts appropriated for its use.
(1993 Code, § 42-29)
§ 42-30 MASTER PLAN.
   It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to make and
adopt a Master Plan for the physical development of the city and to make such
revisions from time to time as conditions may require, including any areas
outside of its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to
the planning of such city. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts
and descriptive matter, shall show the Commission's recommendations for the
development of the territory, including among other things but not restricted
to the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, waterways,
parks and playgrounds; the proposed location of public buildings, other public
property, including parking lots, present and proposed location of all
utilities, including the sewage collection system, both storm and sanitary,
water distribution system, power distribution system, both public and privately
operated; telephone and telegraph systems; vacating, opening, widening and
relocation of streets, alleys, courts and other public places, together with
the improvement of such; location and improvement of airports and cemeteries;
rehabilitation of blighted areas or the eradication of such; and recommended
changes in the Zoning Plan and Building Code, including the fire limits
district. As the work of preparing the whole Master Plan progresses, the
Planning Commission may, from time to time, adopt and publish parts thereof,
any such part to cover 1 or more major sections of the city or 1 or more of the
functional parts included in the Master Plan.
(1993 Code, § 42-30)
§ 42-31 SURVEYS AND STUDIES.
   In the preparation of the Master Plan, the Planning Commission shall make
comprehensive surveys and studies of the present conditions and future growth
of the city, with due regard to its relations to the neighboring territory. The
plans shall be made with the general purpose of guidance in the orderly
development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present
and future needs, best promote health, safety, convenience and general welfare,
as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
(1993 Code, § 42-31)
§ 42-32 HEARING, NOTICE, ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   The Planning Commission may, after approval by the City Council, adopt a
Master Plan as a whole or in successive stages, corresponding by parts of a
whole plan with major geographical sections or divisions of the city or with
functional subdivisions of the whole plan. Before presenting the plan for
adoption or any substantial part thereof, the Planning Commission shall hold at
least 1 public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be
given not less than 15 days prior to such hearing, by publication once in a
newspaper of general local circulation in the city which is customarily used by
the City Council for legal advertisements. Notice of public meetings shall also
be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to each privately owned
public utility and to each railroad company owning or operating a railroad
within the geographical boundaries of the Master Plan. This notice shall be
mailed 15 days prior to date of public hearing. The Planning Commission shall
hold joint meetings with the City Council at a time to be designated by the
Mayor.
(1993 Code, § 42-32)
§ 42-33 OTHER DUTIES.
   In addition to the functions set forth in this article, it shall be the
function of the Planning Commission to pass upon such other matters as may be
referred to it by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 42-33)
CHAPTERS 43 – 45: RESERVED
CHAPTER 46: SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
   
46-1   Definitions
   
46-2   Solicitor's license – required; Police Chief certification
   
46-3   Same – application
   
46-4   Same – fees
   
46-5   Residential soliciting prohibited
   
46-6   Registration required
   
46-7   Fees for canvassers
Statutory reference:
   Charitable organizations and solicitations, see M.C.L.A. §§ 400.271 et seq.;
   Exceptions for a veteran's license, see M.C.L.A. § 35.441;
   Home solicitation sales, see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.111 et seq.;
   Transient merchants, see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.371 et seq.
§ 46-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CANVASSER. Any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling
either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, to solicit
votes, conduct a survey of public opinion, a discussion of a public issue or
solicit contributions or sales under the supervision of any school, church,
state licensed nonprofit charitable organization or citizen organization.
   SOLICITOR. Any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling
either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books,
or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for immediate or
future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales
or not. This definition includes any person who, for himself or for another
person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad
boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place
within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders
for immediate or future delivery.
(1993 Code, § 46-1)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 46-2 SOLICITOR'S LICENSE – REQUIRED; POLICE CHIEF CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of a solicitor within the city
without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted
except upon certification of the Chief of Police or his designee.
   (B)   In all cases where the certification of the Police Chief is required
prior to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such certification
shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such
license is of good moral character.
   (C)   The phrase GOOD MORAL CHARACTER, when used in this chapter for the
purpose of licensing, shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of
the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open
manner.
   (D)   A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil
action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of a person's lack of good
moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination, and when so
used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence
by showing that at the current time he has the ability and is likely to serve
the public in a fair, honest and open manner, that he is rehabilitated or that
the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation
or profession for which he seeks to be licensed.
   (E)   The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or
requested by the city in a determination of good moral character:
      (1)   Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction;
      (2)   Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated,
including the arrest records relevant to that conviction;
      (3)   Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony
unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and
open manner;
      (4)   Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the
conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison.
   (F)   When a person is found to be unqualified for a license because of a
lack of good moral character or similar criteria, the person shall be furnished
by the City Clerk with a statement to that effect. The statement shall contain
a complete record of the evidence upon which the determination was based. The
person shall be entitled, as of right, to a rehearing on the issue before the
Council if he has relevant evidence not previously considered regarding his
qualifications.
(1993 Code, § 46-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 338.41 et seq.
§ 46-3 SAME – APPLICATION.
   The solicitor's license application shall furnish the following information:
      (1)   Name and description of the applicant;
      (2)   Permanent home address and telephone number and full local address
of the applicant;
      (3)   Driver's license, automobile make and automobile license number;
      (4)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders
taken for the sale thereof are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery;
      (7)   A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be 2
inches by 2 inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear
and distinguishing manner.
(1993 Code, § 46-3)
§ 46-4 SAME – FEES.
   The fees for a solicitor's license shall be $5 per day, $10 per week, $25
per month, or $50 per year. This fee may be changed by resolution of the City
Council from time to time. No fee for a solicitor's license shall be so applied
as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a
license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an
undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the City Manager for an
adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or
unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within 6
months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by
affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the
City Manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of
such undue burden on such commerce. The City Manager shall then conduct an
investigation, comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like
nature, and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether
the fee fixed for the solicitor's license is unfair, unreasonable or
discriminatory as to the applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee
for the applicant an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory or,
if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and
above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the City Manager shall
have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales or any other
method which will ensure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that
assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not
exceed the fee as prescribed. Should the City Manager determine the gross sales
measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant to
submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the
city or at the end of each 3 month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales
and pay the amount of fee therefor, provided that no additional fee during any
1 license year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount
equal to the annual license fee.
(1993 Code, § 46-4)
§ 46-5 RESIDENTIAL SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants
of the residences in the city shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
   (B)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   "NO SOLICITORS INVITED"
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(1993 Code, § 46-5)
§ 46-6 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in canvassing within the city without first
registering with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The registration for a person engaged in canvassing shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name and description of the applicant;
      (2)   Permanent home address of the applicant and full local address of
the applicant;
      (3)   Name and a brief description of the organization the applicant
represents;
      (4)   The length of time for which the right to canvass is desired;
      (5)   Where the applicant is a representative of a school, church, state
licensed nonprofit charitable organization or citizen organization, it is not
necessary for each participant to register separately if the applicant
discloses the name and address of each applicant.
(1993 Code, § 46-6)
§ 46-7 FEES FOR CANVASSERS.
   No fees or bonds shall be required to canvass.
(1993 Code, § 46-7)
CHAPTERS 47 – 49: RESERVED
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
Article I. In General
   
50-1   Definitions
   
50-2   Rules and regulations
   
50-3   Enforcement
   
50-4   Littering and disposal of waste
   
50-5   Collection of waste
   
50-6   Unacceptable items for collection
   
50-7   Collection of yard waste
   
50-8   Responsibility of property owner or occupant
   
50-9   Composting of yard waste
   
50-10   Theft of waste receptacles
   
50-11   Household furniture
   
50-12   Household furnishings and clothing
Article II. Waste Haulers
Division 1. Generally
   
50-36   Noncompliance
   
50-37   Waste collection
   
50-38   Collection of recyclable materials
   
50-39   Weekly collection and disposal required
   
50-40   Hours of operation
   
50-41   Complaints
   
50-42   Vehicles and equipment
   
50-43   Insurance
   
50-44   Indemnification
Division 2. License and Registration
   
50-56   Required
   
50-57   Registration
   
50-58   License cancelled if city collection instituted; rebate of fees
Editor's note:
   An ordinance adopted Jan. 24, 1994, has been treated as superseding the
provisions of former Chapter 50, §§ 50-1 through 50-10, 50-36 through 50-46,
50-56 through 50-60, which pertained to similar subject matter. Said ordinance
added a new
Chapter 50, §§
50-1 through
50-10,
50-36 through
50-44,
50-56 through
50-58, to read as herein set out.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, see M.C.L.A. §§
123.361 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 50-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DISPOSAL SITE. A refuse depository, including but not limited to, sanitary
landfills, transfer stations, incinerators and waste processing/separation
centers, licensed, permitted or approved to receive for processing or final
disposal of refuse and dead animals by all governmental bodies and agencies
having jurisdiction, and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals.
   INCINERATOR AND GARBAGE GRINDER. Incinerators and garbage grinders,
respectively, which conform in all respects to the requirements for
incinerators and garbage grinders contained in the Building Code of the city.
   JUNK. All waste materials from normal household living conditions and
business operations that cannot be readily classified under other definitions
contained herein, which are abandoned, in disuse, and otherwise not being
utilized in accordance with their original design, intent and purpose. JUNK
shall include household furniture and furnishings, such as upholstered chairs
and sofas and mattresses and carpetings, that are not constructed or designed
for outdoor use, and are located in yards or other areas open to the elements
while not in actual use.
   LITTER. Rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash or junk, as hereinafter defined, and
all other waste material that, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a public nuisance, as defined by §
52-26(A) of the City Code, or that is detrimental to the public health, safety
and general welfare.
   NONRESIDENTIAL WASTE GENERATION. Any commercial or industrial site, any
modular house in a modular home park, any mobile home in a mobile home park, or
any multifamily dwelling containing 5 units or more.
   PREMISES. Any enclosed area used for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street address,
postal address or box, tax roll description or other similar identification has
been assigned to or is in use by a person having control of the area.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials that still have useful physical or chemical
properties after serving their original purpose and that can, therefore, be
reused or remanufactured into additional products. Specific recyclable
materials to be included for collection or excluded from collection shall be
determined as provided by the rules and regulations that may be established for
this chapter by the City Manager.
   RECYCLER. An approved business that by agreement will take recyclable
materials otherwise  destined for disposal and convert them into a useful
product.
   RECYCLING RECEPTACLES. The receptacles purchased and distributed by a waste
hauler to city residents for the intended use as a receptacle of recyclable
materials.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A dwelling or mobile home within the corporate limits of
the city. A RESIDENTIAL UNIT shall be deemed occupied when either water or
domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto, and shall include
any building or structure, whether freestanding or connected to any other
structure designed to be occupied, either totally or partially, as the
residence or living quarters of any person, whether permanently or temporarily.
This definition shall not include any residential unit otherwise falling within
this definition which is part of a larger structure wherein 5 or more such
residential units are connected by common walls,  ceilings or floors, and shall
not include licensed hotels or motels or mobile home parks.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. One of the following:
      (1)   The area between the sidewalk and the curb;
      (2)   The area within 3 feet from the curb, if no sidewalk is in place;
      (3)   The area within 4 feet from the edge of the road, if there is no
curb.
   SITE OF GENERATION. Any premises in or on which solid waste is generated.
   WASTE. One or more of the following:
      (1)   BULKY WASTE. Large items of refuse, including but not limited to,
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, junk vehicles, nonhazardous
construction and demolition materials, trees, branches and stumps which cannot
be handled by normal solid waste processing, collection and disposal methods.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL WASTE. Waste originating in wholesale, retail,
institutional or service establishments such as office buildings, stores,
markets, theaters, hotels and warehouses.
      (3)   COMPOST. The relatively stable decomposed organic material
resulting from the composting process; also referred to as HUMUS.
      (4)   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Waste materials resulting from alteration,
repair or construction of buildings or structures.
      (5)   DEAD ANIMALS. Animals, or portions thereof, equal to or greater
than 5 pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those
slaughtered or killed for human use.
      (6)   GARBAGE. Every accumulation of animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and all other
organic matter subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation
of noxious or offensive gases or odors which, during or after decay, may serve
as breeding material for flies, insects or animals. Included shall be windfall
fruit, meats, fish, fowl, vegetables or other matter which is in a state of
decomposition. Garbage does not include dead animals, human waste, stable waste
or manure.
      (7)   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or
article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous, as that term is
defined by or pursuant to federal and state law.
      (8)   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Garbage and trash generated from residential
units.
      (9)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Every waste accumulation of metal, metal
products, minerals, chemicals, rock, cement, asphalt, tar, oil, grease, glass,
crockery, rubber, tires, bottles, cans, lumber, sawdust, wastes from animal
packinghouses or  slaughterhouses or other materials usually created by
industrial enterprise, but not household waste or commercial waste. It does not
include hazardous waste, human body waste, liquid or other waste regulated by
statute, ferrous or nonferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal processor or to
a reuser of ferrous or nonferrous products, and slag or slag products directed
to a slag processor or to a reuser of slag or slag products.
      (10)   STABLE MATTER. All manure and other waste normally accumulated in
or about a stable or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
      (11)   TRASH. Materials considered worthless, unnecessary or offensive
that are usually thrown away. It is generally defined as dry waste material and
does not include garbage. It is a synonym for rubbish or refuse.
      (12)   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, garden debris, shrubs,
branches less than 4 feet in length and 2 inches in diameter, or noncombustible
materials that can be converted to compost humus. Expressly excluded are
stumps, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage, sludge or garbage.
   WASTE DUMPSTER. A bin or receptacle which is mechanically emptied into a
waste collection vehicle. A WASTE DUMPSTER shall either be designed,
constructed or modified so that it will not tip, when subjected to 191 pounds
hanging vertically from the leading edge thereof, or to a pull force of 70
pounds exerted horizontally from any edge thereof, or shall be secured to
prevent its tipping over, or shall be enclosed in a fence barrier at least 4
feet high, with a locked access gate to prevent unauthorized access. Excluded
from this definition are roll-off containers and manually handled cylindrical
containers or manually handled disposal bags.
   WASTE GENERATOR. A person generating solid waste.
   WASTE HAULER. Any person engaged, in whole or part, in the business of
collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of waste, including
recyclable materials and yard waste.
   WASTE RECEPTACLE. A watertight container, constructed of plastic, metal or
fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, and a tightfitting
lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. The mouth of
the container shall have a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base.
The weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed 30 pounds.
Watertight containers shall be no larger than 30-gallon capacity unless
authorized in writing by the City Manager.
(1993 Code, § 50-1) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord. passed
10-13-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 50-2 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager reserves the right to promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the collection of waste as he may deem proper, subject
to the approval of the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 50-2) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-3 ENFORCEMENT.
   All violations of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil
infraction.
      (1)   Fire Department and Building Department. The Fire Department and
Building Department shall investigate all complaints, write warnings and issue
citations for all property owner violators, including violation on city rights-
of-way.
      (2)   Police Department. The Police Department shall investigate all
complaints, write warnings and issue citations for all matters concerning
violation by waste haulers, including policing haulers operating without a
license. The Police Department shall also investigate and issue citations and
warrants for all alleged dumping violations.
      (3)   Public Works Department. The Public Works Department shall report
all violations observed to either the Building Official or police command
officer to initiate investigation.
(1993 Code, § 50-3) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord. passed
2-26-1996)
§ 50-4 LITTERING AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   No person shall place, dispose of, throw or deposit any litter, refuse or
waste materials upon or into any street, alley or other property, public or
private, except as specifically permitted in this chapter. It shall be the duty
of all waste generators, every occupant of property, and owners of unoccupied
property, at all times, to maintain the premises occupied or owned by him in a
clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of waste
upon such premises, unless stored or accumulated as permitted by this chapter.
If, after proper notice, a property owner fails to comply by correcting a
violation of this chapter, the property owner shall be guilty of a violation of
this Code, at which time the city will abate the problem. All expenses incurred
will be charged as a lien against the property and, if not paid, will be added
to the tax roll for collection. Violation of this section shall constitute a
municipal civil infraction.
(1993 Code, § 50-4) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord. passed
2-26-1996; Ord. passed 10-13-2008)
§ 50-5 COLLECTION OF WASTE.
   (A)   No person shall collect any waste materials from the curb, any street,
any street right-of-way, alley or other property, public or private, except as
specifically permitted in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm, or
corporation not licensed by Eaton County or registered by the city to collect
or remove any waste item which has been specifically placed for collection in
the recycling program, as provided by this chapter.
   (C)   It is not the intent of this section to prohibit any nonprofit
organization from soliciting newspapers, cans or bottles or Christmas trees for
the purpose of resource recovery and recycling.
(1993 Code, § 50-5) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-6 UNACCEPTABLE ITEMS FOR COLLECTION.
   Unacceptable items for collection at the city right- of-way or curb include
but are not limited to branches more than 4 feet in length and 2 inches in
diameter, logs, stumps, trees (except Christmas trees), bulky waste,
construction waste, commercial waste, industrial waste, stable matter,
hazardous waste, human body waste, liquid waste or other waste regulated by
statute.
(1993 Code, § 50-6) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-7 COLLECTION OF YARD WASTE.
   The city will collect yard waste at the curb or on city right-of-way twice a
year, once in the spring and once in the fall. During other times yard waste
from property within the city may be disposed of at a designated site by making
arrangements with the Public Works Department.
(1993 Code, § 50-7) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-8 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   (A)   Refuse storage. It shall be the duty of owners, proprietors or persons
in charge of every dwelling or other building in the city to place or cause to
be placed all waste accumulating on the premises in waste receptacles or waste
dumpsters provided by such owner or other person or waste hauler.
   (B)   Waste receptacles and waste dumpsters.
      (1)   Waste receptacles or waste dumpsters shall be kept and maintained
at all residences, apartments, hotels, business places and other places where
waste may be accumulated. Waste shall be placed and stored in the receptacle or
dumpster in order to be collected.
      (2)   All waste receptacles or waste dumpsters shall be covered with a
watertight cover at all times. The waste receptacle or dumpster shall be kept
in a place easily accessible, but never upon any street, city parking lot,
alley or sidewalk. Such waste receptacle or waste dumpster shall be thoroughly
cleaned by the owner after it has been emptied.
      (3)   Each apartment complex, modular house park, mobile home park or any
multifamily dwelling containing 5 units or more shall have at least 1 waste
dumpster for every 10 residential units.
   (C)   Arranging for collection.
      (1)   Every occupant of property within the city may arrange for the
collection and disposal of waste by transporting the waste to an authorized
transfer station or an approved disposal site, but only in accordance with the
rules and regulations pertaining thereto.
      (2)   In all other situations, if the occupant does not choose to do so
himself, he must arrange disposal of waste materials through the use of a
person engaged in the business of collecting and disposing of waste and
licensed by Eaton County and registered by the city. No person transporting any
refuse in accordance with this subsection shall fail to securely cover and
secure the load so that no part of the load shall be lost while being
transported.
   (D)   Moist waste. All moist waste shall be wrapped in paper or a plastic
bag before being placed in the waste receptacle.
   (E)   Placing receptacles beside street or sidewalk. If waste pickups are
made at the curb or from the city right-of-way (areas adjacent to the sidewalk
or street), receptacles for such purpose shall only remain at the curb or in
areas adjacent to the sidewalk or street from the preceding night to and during
the day of pickup. It is the responsibility of the property owner to clean up
any waste that may be spilled due to animals or vandalism.
(1993 Code, § 50-8) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-9 COMPOSTING OF YARD WASTE.
   Residential units may compost yard waste only on their premises if the
compostable material is kept in such a manner that it does not attract flies,
insects, pests or cause an unpleasant odor. Garbage or waste other than yard
waste shall not be composted.
(1993 Code, § 50-9) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-10 THEFT OF WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Theft of waste receptacles or unauthorized removal of materials from waste
receptacles shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. Each day of
violation is considered a separate offense.
(1993 Code, § 50-10) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-11 HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE.
   Furniture that is not intended or designated for outdoor use shall not be
placed outdoors or on exterior balconies, porches, decks, landings, or other
areas exposed to the weather. Violation of this section shall constitute a
municipal civil infraction.
(Ord. passed 10-13-2008)
§ 50-12 HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND CLOTHING.
   The outdoor storage of household furnishings, clothing, appliances and other
items commonly found in residential premises shall not be permitted to be
located between the street and the building, they shall be permitted in the
side yard or rear yard of premises, only if the items are enclosed in an
accessory building or garage. It is provided, however, that should such
household furnishings, clothing, appliances and other items be placed outdoors
as the result of a lawful eviction process which was commenced pursuant to the
laws of the State of Michigan, the materials may remain outdoors for no longer
than 24 hours from the time that they were placed there by the Sheriff, the
landlord, or the landlord’s representative.
(Ord. 2010-02, passed 8-9-2010)
§§ 50-13 – 50-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. WASTE HAULERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 50-36 NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Any material breach or failure to abide by this chapter by the waste hauler
shall be grounds for suspension of the license issued by Eaton County. Failure
to abide by this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. Each
day of violation is considered a separate offense.
(1993 Code, § 50-36) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord.
passed 2-26-1996)
§ 50-37 WASTE COLLECTION.
   (A)   A waste hauler granted a license by Eaton County and registered by the
city may collect from each customer in the city all waste which is placed in a
waste receptacle, recyclable receptacle or waste dumpster and dispose of the
waste at a disposal site or a handler of recyclable material.
   (B)   Waste haulers shall offer their customers options for selecting volume
based and priced service that provides financial incentives for recycling.
(1993 Code, § 50-37) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord.
passed 6-26-1995)
§ 50-38 COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   A waste hauler granted a license by Eaton County and registered by the
city to pick up residential waste shall develop, implement, maintain and
provide a comprehensive weekly curbside recycling program.
   (B)   All waste haulers who pick up residential waste shall pick up
recyclable materials from each residence and, at the hauler's option, haulers
shall either pick up recyclable material placed in clear or translucent plastic
bags or furnish to each residence separate recycling receptacles, clearly
marked as containers for recyclable products.
   (C)   Recyclable items may be segregated from all other solid waste material
at residential units. Recyclable items shall be placed in household recycling
receptacles or bags and placed out for collection only on the days designated
for collection of recyclable items.
   (D)   The collection point shall be either at the curb or if no curb at the
edge of the city right-of-way directly in front of the residential property or
at a place authorized by the Director of Public Works.
   (E)   A tag system shall be implemented to inform customers when
inappropriate items are set out for recycling. All such items shall be tagged
with a brief explanation of why the item was not picked up by the waste hauler.
(1993 Code, § 50-38) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord.
passed 6-26-1995)
§ 50-39 WEEKLY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   All waste shall be collected by a licensed and registered waste hauler
at least 1 time each week and disposed of outside of the limits of the city at
a disposal site or recycler. Waste will not be collected on holidays or Sunday.
If a collection date falls on a holiday, the very next day may become the
collection day for that collection route, and the other collection days may be
put forward by one day. Waste haulers must provide adequate notification of
their holiday week collection schedule to their customers. Except under unusual
circumstances or as necessitated by a holiday, collection days will be Monday
through Friday for residential customers and shall include Saturday for
commercial and industrial customers.
   (B)   The holidays, for purposes of this section, shall be New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
The waste hauler shall observe any or all of such holidays by suspension of
collection service on the holiday, but this in no manner relieves the waste
hauler of its obligation to provide collection service at least once per week
to each customer. All collection days will be on the days from Monday through
Friday, unless a holiday falls during the week and requires a collection day to
be held on a Saturday.
   (C)   When waste is removed from the city, it shall be done in a neat and
orderly manner so that the waste is not spilled or blown onto the streets or
private property. All refuse hauled by the waste hauler shall be so contained,
tied or enclosed that leaking, spilling or blowing is prevented.
(1993 Code, § 50-39) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord.
passed 6-26-1995)
§ 50-40 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Collection operations of the waste hauler shall not start before 7:00 a.m.
or continue after 5:00 p.m. on the same day. Exceptions to collection hours
shall be effected only upon the mutual agreement of the City Manager and the
waste hauler in writing or when the waste hauler reasonably determines that an
exception is necessary in order to complete collection on an existing
collection route due to weather or other circumstances that are beyond the
control of the waste hauler. In all cases, such exceptions shall be reported to
the office of the City Manager.
(1993 Code, § 50-40) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-41 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints will be directed to the waste hauler and shall be given
prompt and courteous attention. In the case of alleged misscheduled
collections, the waste hauler shall investigate and, if such allegations are
verified, shall arrange for the collection of the uncollected waste within 24
hours after the complaint is received. The waste hauler shall furnish a toll
free number or a 543 city extension number for the use of residents served.
   (B)   The waste hauler shall maintain an office or such other facilities at
which contact can be made by the general public. It shall be equipped with
sufficient telephones and shall have a responsible person in charge during
normal business hours.
   (C)   A permanent record of all complaints shall be maintained by the waste
hauler. The waste hauler shall supply to the city, upon request by the City
Manager, a list of all complaints from customers and the action taken to
correct the complaints. Failure to reply to this request may result in
suspension of the waste hauler's license.
(1993 Code, § 50-41) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-42 VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The waste hauler shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for
regular collection services. All vehicles and other equipment shall be kept in
good repair, appearance and in a sanitary condition at all times.
   (B)   All vehicles used to collect waste shall be subject to the rules,
regulations and ordinances of the city governing the collection and disposal of
waste.
   (C)   All such vehicles, except while in use collecting waste, shall be
parked outside the city limits.
(1993 Code, § 50-42) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-43 INSURANCE.
   The waste hauler shall at all times during operation in the city maintain in
full force and effect employer's liability, worker's compensation, public
liability and property damage insurance. All insurance shall be by insurers and
for policy limits acceptable to the city, and before commencement of work the
waste hauler agrees to furnish the city certificates of insurance or other
evidence satisfactory to the city to the effect that such insurance has been
procured and is in force. Each certificate shall contain the following express
obligation:
"This is to certify that the policies of insurance described herein have been
issued to the insured for whom the certificate is executed and are in force at
this time. In the event of cancellation or material change in a policy
affecting this certificate holder, 30 days' prior written notice will be given
the certificate holder."
(1993 Code, § 50-43) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-44 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The waste hauler shall indemnify the city by agreeing in writing to the
following:
      (1)   If the city incurs liabilities or costs defending claims or suits
against it as a result of granting a license, the waste hauler agrees to hold
harmless and indemnify the city from and against any costs, judgments or claims
required to defend or settle the actions;
      (2)   The city reserves the right to alter or amend the insurance
required in this division and the hold harmless agreement as the need arises,
except the amount of coverage required shall not be increased during the
license period.
(1993 Code, § 50-44) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§§ 50-47 – 50-55 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE AND REGISTRATION
§ 50-56 REQUIRED.
   Every person engaged in the business of collecting and disposing of waste in
the city shall be required to be licensed by Eaton County and registered by the
city.
(1993 Code, § 50-56) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994; Ord.
passed 6-26-1995)
§ 50-57 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to register for the collection, removal and
disposal of waste shall make application for such registration to the City
Clerk, who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as the City Clerk
may consider necessary in order to determine whether or not the waste hauler
meets the qualifications to haul and collect waste in the city.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business;
      (3)   The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate and proof
that drivers have valid licenses to operate them;
      (4)   The class, size and design of each vehicle;
      (5)   The nature and character of the service the applicant proposes to
render;
      (6)   Proof of valid license issued by Eaton County;
      (7)   Such other information as may be required.
   (C)   The applicant shall, as proof of ability to respond for damage to
person or property, further file with his application the following:
      (1)   Certificates of paid-up liability insurance in the amount specified
in this article, and worker's compensation insurance, covering at least the
period to be covered by such license;
      (2)   Certificates of ownership in the name of the applicant of vehicles
to be licensed;
      (3)   Current state registration certificates in the name of the
applicant of the vehicles to be licensed;
      (4)   Copies of all state and federal licenses required to haul waste in
the state.
(1993 Code, § 50-57) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
§ 50-58 LICENSE CANCELLED IF CITY COLLECTION INSTITUTED; REBATE OF FEES.
   If the city desires to enter into the business of collecting and disposing
of solid waste within the city, it may ask Eaton County to cancel any license
in effect for the collection of waste within the city, provided it gives a 6
month notice of its intent to cancel all licenses to each holder of a license
to collect waste in the city.
(1993 Code, § 50-58) (Ord. passed 10-28-1991; Ord. passed 1-24-1994)
CHAPTER 51: RESERVED
CHAPTER 52: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
Article I. Property Maintenance Code
   
52-1   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code by reference
   
52-2   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code
Article II. Nuisance Abatement
Division 1. Generally
   
52-26   Public nuisance defined and prohibited
   
52-27   Enumeration of nuisances
Division 2. Open Storage of Inoperable Motor Vehicles
   
52-41   Definitions
   
52-42   Construction of division
   
52-43   Storage of inoperable motor vehicles or parts
   
52-44   Permits
   
52-45   Removal of abandoned vehicles
   
52-46   Presumption of violation by registered owner
Division 3. Noise
   
52-71   Unlawful acts
   
52-72   Enumeration of specific offenses
   
52-73   Exceptions
   
52-74   Standards for density of emissions
Division 4. Weeds
   
52-91   Weed growth prohibited
   
52-92   Duty of occupant or owner
   
52-93   Cutting by city
   
52-94   Violation not excused
Article III. Fees
   
52-100   Schedule of fees for issuance of notices of violation, City Attorney
warning letters, requests for reinspection
   
52-101   Establishment of the amount of fees
   
52-102   Establishment of a lien
Editor's note:
   Ord. of August 12, 2002 repealed in their entirety §§ 52-1 through 52-3, and
enacted new §§
52-1 and
52-2 as set out herein. Said former sections pertained to similar subject
matter and derived from Ord. of 9-13-1999 and Ord. of 9-10-2001
ARTICLE I. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 52-1 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authorization set forth in § 3(k) of the Michigan Home
Rule Cities Act, being M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k), the city does hereby re-adopt and
amend the International Property Maintenance Code of 2021 prepared by the
International Code Council, Inc., as the property maintenance code of the city,
as amended herein.
   (B)   That said code, four copies of which shall at all times be available
for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk together with all
amendments marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2021 Edition, published by the International Code Council shall be and is
hereby adopted by the city, including all referenced codes within the
International Property Maintenance Code. That said code is adopted and made a
part hereof by reference except as amended by and within this article. In
accordance with the authorization set forth in § 3(k) of the Michigan Home Rule
Cities Act, being M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k), the City Clerk shall make available
copies of the code in the City Clerk’s office together with amendments which
shall be available for distribution to members of the public at large at a
charge to be established by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 52-1) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002; Ord. 2009-03, passed 2-23-2009;
Ord. 2022-04, passed 8-1-2022; Ord. 2025-06, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 52-2 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code of 2021, as adopted by the city,
shall be and is hereby amended as follows:
   (A)   Sections 101.1, 103.1 and 103.2 shall be and are hereby amended to
read:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Charlotte, hereinafter referred to as
“this code”.
      103.1 Designated agencies within the City of Charlotte. The City of
Charlotte Community Development Department and the Fire Department are the
designated agencies, and officials in charge therein shall administer the
International Property Maintenance Code. The functions of the agencies may be
carried out by designees, including the Fire Department Code Official, Code
Enforcement Officer
      and Rental Inspector. All such persons shall be individually and
collectively known as the “code official.”
      103.2 Appointment. The City Manager shall appoint the code officials,
subject to confirmation of the City Council, and the Oath shall be administered
by the Clerk, or designee.
   (B)   Sections 104.1, 105.2, and 107.1 shall be amended and Sections 107.5,
107.6, 107.7, 107.8 and 107.9 shall be and are hereby added to read:
   SECTION 104
   FEES AND FINES
      104.1 Fees and Fines. A schedule of fees for activities necessary to the
administration of this code and fines as penalties for violation of this code
shall be established and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.
   SECTION 105
   DUTIES AND POWERS OF CODE INSPECTORS
      105.2 Inspections. Inspections shall be scheduled as needed when the
building or code official has cause to believe there exists in any property any
condition which makes such property, or any portion thereof, substandard, or
unsafe, or that a violation of this chapter or other applicable ordinances or
laws may exist.
   SECTION 107
   MEANS OF APPEAL
      107.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals. The board of appeals shall be the City of Charlotte Zoning Board of
Appeals. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a
duplicate copy to the code official.
      107.5 Code Violations. Notice of violation or order issued under this
code issued pursuant to a City municipal ordinance violation citation, district
court citation, or those violations instituted at law or in equity in district
court or circuit court, to, but not limited to, restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or demolition of structures or building, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto,
jurisdiction of such violation(s) and actions vest in the state courts of Eaton
County.
      107.6. Decision. The decision of the Board shall be in writing, and a
copy thereof shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code Official.
      107.7 Judicial Review. Any party shall have the right to seek judicial
review of the Board’s decision in the state courts of Eaton County, which
review shall be limited to a determination of whether the decision is supported
by a preponderance of the evidence on the record as a whole.
      107.8 Appeals. Appeals of notice and orders (other than Imminent Danger
notice) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is
heard by the appeals board.
      107.9. Hearings. Hearings before the Board shall be open to the public
and shall comply with the Michigan Open Meetings Act (M.C.L. § 15.261 et seq).
The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Code Official, and any
person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
A quorum shall consist of not less than a majority of the Board membership.
   (C)   Section 108 Board of Appeals. Section 108.1 shall be and is hereby
amended to read:
      108.1 Membership of Board. The board of appeals shall consist of the
membership of the City of Charlotte Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Section 109 Violations. Section 109.3 shall be and is hereby amended
and Sections 109.6 through 109.15 shall be and are hereby added to read:
      109.3 Prosecution of Violation. Except where designated as a misdemeanor
violation, subject to the penalties herein, any person or entity failing to
comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section
111.4 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction or district court
civil infraction citation and shall be subject to a civil fine subject to City
Resolution, or as provided herein. Municipal civil infraction violations are
made payable at the City Municipal ordinance violation bureau. Repeat
violations are determined based on the date of the commission of the violation.
Each day that a violation continues beyond the time specified for compliance
shall be deemed to be a separate offense. If the notice of violation is not
complied with, City officials may institute the appropriate proceeding at law
or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation
of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto. Such legal or court action shall serve as notice. Any action taken by
the City on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which
the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
      Jurisdiction for district court citations and legal action as necessary
to enforce City ordinance, this Code, and state law, vest in the state courts
of Eaton County.
      Section 109.6. Violation of Code Section 111.1.1 Unsafe structures;
Penalties. No person shall keep nor maintain an unsafe structure as defined by
code section 111. Violation of section 111.1.1, shall be a civil infraction
subject to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
      Section 109.7. Violation of Code Section 111.1.2 Unsafe equipment;
Penalties. No person shall keep nor maintain unsafe equipment as defined by
code section 111.1.2. Violation of section 111.1.2, shall be a civil infraction
subject to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
      Section 109.8. Violation of Code Section 111.1.3 Structure unfit for
human occupancy; Penalties. No person shall keep nor maintain a structure unfit
for human occupancy as defined by code section 111.1.3. Violation of section
111.1.3, shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00).
      Section 109.9. Violation of Code Section 111.1.4 Unlawful Structure;
Penalties. No person shall keep nor maintain an unlawful structure as defined
by code section 111.1.4. Violation of section 111.1.4, shall be a civil
infraction subject to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
      Section 109.10. Violation of Code Section 111.1.5 Dangerous structure or
premises; Penalties. No person shall keep nor maintain a dangerous structure or
premises as defined by code section 111.1.5. Violation of section 111.1.3,
shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00).
      Section 109.11. Violation of Code Section 111.5 Unauthorized tampering;
Penalties. No person shall mutilate, destroy, or tamper with, or remove any
signs, tags or seals posted by the code official without permission, from the
code official. Violation of section 111.5, shall be a civil infraction subject
to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
      Section 109.12. Violation of Code Section 111.7 Placarding; Penalties.
Violation of section 111.7, shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
      Section 109.13. Violation of Code Section 117.1.1 Placard removal;
Penalties. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the
approval of the code official shall be in violation of Code Section 117.1.1.
Conviction for violation of section 117.1.1, shall be a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment.
      Section 109.14. Violation of Code Section 111.8 Prohibited occupancy;
Penalties. Any person who shall occupy a condemned structure or premise,
placarded by the code official, and any owner, owner’s authorized agent or
person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded
premises or operate placarded equipment shall be in violation of Code Section
111.8. Conviction for violation of section 111.8, shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment.
      Section 109.15. Violation of Code Section 112 - Emergency Measures,
Section 112.1 Imminent danger; Penalties. Conviction for violation of section
112.1, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or
both such fine and imprisonment.
   (E)   Section 111 Unsafe Structures and Equipment. Section 111.4 shall be
and is hereby amended to read:
      Section 111.4 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official
determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to
believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in Sections 111.4.1 and 111.4.2 to the person responsible for the
violation as specified in this code. Code officials may issue municipal civil
infractions or district court citation pursuant to Section 109 of this Code.
Notwithstanding Section 109, the City Manager or City Council may initiate
legal action as necessary to enforce City ordinance, this Code, and state law,
including but not limited to, abate violations and nuisances, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation
of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto and such action shall serve as notice of the violation.
   (F)   Section 112 Emergency Measures. Section 112.6 Hearing shall be and is
hereby amended to read:
      Section 112.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures
shall comply with such order forthwith. An appeal or request for hearing shall
not delay compliance with an order to take emergency measures. A hearing
regarding an order to
      take emergency measures shall be limited to whether the order should be
continued, modified, or revoked.
   (G)   Section 302 Exterior Property Areas. Section 302.4 Weeds shall be
amended as provided for under § 52-91 of this Code.
   (H)   Section 304 Exterior Structure. Section 304.14 Insect Screens shall be
amended to indicate that during the period from March 1 through November 30.
   (I)   Section 602 Heating Facilities. Sections 602.3 and 602.4 shall be and
are hereby amended to indicate the following dates:
      Section 602.3 Heating supply. Dates shall be during the period from
October 1 through April 30.
      Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Dates shall be during the period
from October 1 through April 30.
(1993 Code, § 52-2) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002; Ord. 2009-03, passed 2-23-2009;
Ord. 2022-04, passed 8-1-2022; Ord. 2025-06, passed 5-12-2025)
§§ 52-3 -- 52-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. NUISANCE ABATEMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 52-26 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED AND PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A “public nuisance” is defined as follows:
      (1)   Any unreasonable interference with a common right enjoyed by the
general public. It includes conduct:
         (a)   Which significantly interferes with the safety, health, comfort,
peace, convenience or repose of the public;
         (b)   Offends public decency;
         (c)   Significantly interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous
any street, highway, navigable lake or stream;
         (d)   In any way renders the public insecure in life or property; or
         (e)   Which is known, or should have been known, to be of a continuing
nature that produces a permanent or long-lasting, significant effect on these
common rights.
      (2)   Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is
forbidden by any provision of this article, or where nuisance is referenced in
Chapters
10,
18,
58,
68 and
82.
   (B)   No person shall commit, create or maintain any public nuisance.
   (C)   A public nuisance is not defined as persons, tenants, residents, or
occupants requesting law enforcement services believed to be victims of crime,
or otherwise not at fault for criminal activity.
(1993 Code, § 26-26) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 2024-02, passed 12-
9-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2 
§ 52-27 ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES.
   The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are hereby declared
to be public nuisances:
   (A)   The maintenance of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant
water.
   (B)   The pollution of any stream, lake or body of water by depositing or
permitting to be deposited any refuse, toxic or industrial waste of forcing or
discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any stream or gas.
   (C)   Any vehicle used for any illegal purpose.
   (D)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupations.
   (E)   All gambling devices.
   (F)   Gambling houses and all houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or
promiscuous sexual intercourse.
   (G)   All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place,
or left or operated on private property so as to endanger the safety of the
public.
   (H)   The owning, driving or moving upon any public streets and alleys of
trucks or other motor vehicles that are constructed or loaded so as to permit
any part of their load or contents to blow, fall or be deposited upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits
from its wheels, tires or other parts, onto the street, alley, sidewalk or
other public or private place, dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign
matter of any kind.
   (I)   The placing, or causing to be placed, in or on any motor vehicle
parked upon any street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits
of the city, any paper, posters, signs, cards or other advertising matter.
   (J)   The presence of an inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor
vehicle on any land in violation of the terms of Division 2 of this article.
(1993 Code, § 26-27) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§§ 52-28 -- 52-40 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. OPEN STORAGE OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 52-41 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle located on a public right-of-way or an area
open to the public without consent of the Police Department, for a period of 48
hours after the Police Department has affixed a written notice to the vehicle.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that, on the date of inspection,
cannot be driven under its own power in compliance with the Uniform Traffic
Code, as amended. Vehicles without current registration plates shall be deemed
inoperable.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled vehicle that is self-propelled or intended to be
self-propelled.
(1993 Code, § 26-41) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-42 CONSTRUCTION OF DIVISION.
   This division shall not be deemed to be in conflict with other provisions of
this code relating to rubbish, litter, garbage, refuse, trash or junk, but
shall be construed as supplementary to any such provisions as well as any
statutes of the state relating thereto.
(1993 Code, § 26-42) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste, see
Chapter 50
§ 52-43 STORAGE OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES OR PARTS.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to store on, place on,
or permit to be stored or placed on, or allowed to remain on any land, an
inoperable motor vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle, unless the vehicle or
parts shall be kept in a wholly enclosed building. Any such owner, co-owner,
tenant or cotenant may be excused from compliance with this section for a
period of not to exceed 48 hours, if such motor vehicle is registered to such
person, and any such person may, in the event of hardship, upon payment of the
fee provided in this division, secure a permit from the Building Official to
extend such period of 48 hours for an additional period of not to exceed 1 week
for any vehicle, if such motor vehicle is registered to such person. This
section shall not apply to businesses in areas zoned to permit inoperable
vehicles.
(1993 Code, § 26-43) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-44 PERMITS.
   Upon application duly made by the registered owner of a motor vehicle and
upon showing of hardship, the Building Official is hereby authorized to issue
the permits provided for in §
52-43. A fee of $1 for each such permit issued shall be collected and shall be
paid into the General Fund.
(1993 Code, § 26-45) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-45 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to place or allow to remain on a public
right-of-way or area open to the public a vehicle, for a period of time in
excess of 48 hours subsequent to the affixing of a written notice on the
vehicle by the Police Department. After the passage of the 48-hour period, the
vehicle may be removed by the Police Department.
(1993 Code, § 26-46) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-46 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY REGISTERED OWNER.
   The registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be presumed to be the
person who placed or allowed the vehicle to remain in violation of this
division. For purposes of criminal prosecution, proof of registration shall be
prima facie evidence of the placing or allowing to remain by the owner of the
abandoned vehicle.
(1993 Code, § 26-47) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§§ 52-47 -- 52-70 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. NOISE
§ 52-71 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise that either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the city.
(1993 Code, § 26-71) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-72 ENUMERATION OF SPECIFIC OFFENSES.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but their enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive.
   (A)   Horns, signaling devices, and the like. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on
any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device, except one
operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device
operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up.
   (B)   Radios, phonographs, and the like. The playing, using or operating, or
permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort
of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle
or chamber in which such machine or device is operated, and who are voluntary
listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph,
machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50
feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device
for the producing or reproduction of sound, which is cast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention
of the public to any building or structure.
   (D)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling
or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
   (E)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird that,
by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity.
   (F)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam
whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of
proper city authorities.
   (G)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
Further, it shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle within the city
using exhaust brakes, engine brakes, compression release engine brakes (also
known as Jake brakes or Jacobs brakes) or similar devices; provided, however,
such brakes or similar devices may be lawfully used on any interstate highway
located within the city.
   (H)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
   (I)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
   (J)   Construction or repairing of buildings; permit for work. The erection
(including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a
permit from the Building Official, which permit may be granted for a period not
to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues, and which permit
may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues.
If the Building Official should determine that the public health and safety
will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he or she shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission
for such work to be done within the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during
the progress of the work.
   (K)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while such are in use, or adjacent to any hospital that unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or that disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital; provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
such streets indicating that the street is a school, hospital or court street.
   (L)   Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker,
amplifier or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention
for any purpose.
(1993 Code, § 26-72) (Ord. passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009;
Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-28-2011)
§ 52-73 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the terms or prohibitions of this article shall apply to or be
enforced against the following.
   (A)   Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while
engaged upon emergency business.
   (B)   Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of
bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the city, county or the state,
during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it
impossible to perform such work during the day.
   (C)   Loudspeakers at an approved event. Using, operating or permitting to
be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproduction of sound, which is cast upon the public streets
during an event that has received prior approval from the City Manager or
designee when the event is sponsored by the city or a non-profit organization.
(1993 Code, § 26-73) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-
12-2019)
§ 52-74 STANDARDS FOR DENSITY OF EMISSIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this section, a
person shall not cause or permit to be discharged into the outer air, from a
process or process equipment, a visible emission of a density greater than the
most stringent of the following:
      (1)   A 6-minute average of 20% opacity, except for 1 6-minute average
per hour of not more than 27% opacity;
      (2)   A limit specified by an applicable federal new source performance
standard;
      (3)   A limit specified as a condition of a permit to install or permit
to operate.
   (B)   The provisions of this rule shall not apply to any process or process
equipment for which fugitive visible emission limitations are specified by the
State Department of Environmental Quality.
   (C)   The provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to
visible emissions due to uncombined water vapor.
   (D)   Upon request of the owner of a process or process equipment for which
an allowable particulate emission rate is established by the State Department
of Environmental Quality, the Department may establish an alternate opacity.
Such alternate opacity shall not be established by the City unless the City is
reasonably convinced of all of the following:
      (1)   That the process or process equipment subject to the alternate
opacity is in compliance or on a legally enforceable schedule of compliance
with other rules of the State Department of Environmental Quality;
      (2)   That compliance with the provisions of subsection (A) of this
section is not technically or economically reasonable;
      (3)   That reasonable measures to reduce opacity have been implemented or
will be implemented in accordance with the schedule approved by the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, which is
enforceable as provided by law. Each day that a violation exists or continues
constitutes a separate and additional violation.
(1993 Code, § 26-74) (Ord. passed 12-9-2002; Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-
2009)
§§ 52-75 -- 52-90 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. WEEDS
§ 52.91 WEED GROWTH PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All areas, except those lots that are in excess of 5 acres in size,
shall be kept free from weeds in excess of 10 inches. Lots that are in excess
of 5 acres shall be kept free from weeds in excess of 10 inches within 100 feet
of any street or alley, and within 100 feet of any property line that abuts any
platted lot; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to the following areas:
      (1)   Open space, landscaped areas and storm water retention and
detention facilities developed in accordance with a site plan approved by the
Planning Commission;
      (2)   Areas beside ponds, lakes and open waterways;
      (3)   Steep slopes subject to erosion;
      (4)   Parcels used for public parks or other governmental purposes;
      (5)   Wildflower plantings, meadows or similar naturalized areas grown on
portions of unplatted lots or parcels;
      (6)   Groups of contiguous platted lots in excess of 5 acres; and
      (7)   Unplatted parcels in excess of 5 acres zoned R-l or R-2 that are
vacant or used for farms or single-family developments of a rural character.
   (B)   WEEDS shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation
other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens. It shall be the duty of any person owning,
leasing, occupying or otherwise controlling any plot of ground in the city to
prevent the growth of weeds thereon.
(1993 Code, § 70-76) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-92 DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every premises and the owner of
unoccupied premises within the city to cut and remove, or destroy by lawful
means, all such weeds and grass as often as may be necessary to comply with the
provisions of §
52-91.
(1993 Code, § 70-77) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-93 CUTTING BY CITY.
   (A)   If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of §
52-92 by the specified time, the City Manager shall, through the Department of
Public Works, cause all such grass and weeds to be cut or destroyed upon lands
of the person not complying with the provisions of this article. The City
Council shall determine the hourly rates to be charged for cutting of weeds.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall cause the owners of
property, upon which the City has cut weeds, to be billed for such services in
accord with the time spent and the rates established.
   (B)   If such charges are unpaid, the costs for weed cutting shall be
certified to the City Treasurer and collected as provided in Charter, §
9.10.
(1993 Code, § 70-78) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-94 VIOLATION NOT EXCUSED.
   The facts that grass or weeds are cut by the City and the cost thereof
charged to or paid by the owner shall not excuse the owner from responsibility
for the violation of this Code thereby abated. Failure to cut grass or weeds by
the owner, as required in this article, shall constitute a violation of this
Code, punishable as provided in §
1-16, regardless of whether such grass and weeds are cut subsequent to the
commission of such violation.
(1993 Code, § 70-79) (Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§§ 52-95 -- 52-99 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. FEES
§ 52-100 SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR ISSUANCE OF NOTICES OF VIOLATION, CITY ATTORNEY
WARNING LETTERS, AND REQUESTS FOR REINSPECTION.
   (A)   The City hereby assesses fees which shall be paid by the owner of the
property, or such other responsible person, as it relates to the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter. The City assesses fees relating to the
following activities:
      (1)   There shall be a fee assessed for the issuance of a notice of
violation.
      (2)   There shall be a fee assessed for the administrative extension of a
notice of violation.
      (3)   There shall be a fee assessed for the issuance of any City Attorney
warning letter regarding the enforcement of this chapter.
      (4)   There shall be a fee assessed for any reinspection requested by the
City Attorney or the court to determine compliance with the cited violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   These fees shall be in addition to fines and costs, if any, as may be
assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-101 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AMOUNT OF FEES.
   At the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 2009-04, the City Council
shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for those activities as set
forth in §
52-100. Thereafter, the schedule of fees may be amended by City Council from
time to time by resolution.
(Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 52-102 ESTABLISHMENT OF A LIEN.
   If the fees as established in this article remain unpaid for a period of 60
days, then pursuant to §
2.1(B)(1) of the City Charter, the fees so assessed shall become a lien upon
the property, shall be charged as a special assessment against the real
property, and shall be collected in the same manner as special assessments are
collected under the City Charter and the City Code.
(Ord. No. 2009-04, passed 6-22-2009)
CHAPTER 53: RESERVED
CHAPTER 54: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section
   
54-1   Definitions
   
54-2   Authority to assess
   
54-3   Initiation of projects; petitions
   
54-4   Survey and report
   
54-5   Determination on the project; notice; hearing generally
   
54-6   Hearing on need
   
54-7   Special assessment roll
   
54-7.5   Special assessment roll; hazards and nuisances
   
54-8   Filing assessment roll
   
54-9   Meeting to review special assessment roll; objections
   
54-10   Changes and corrections in assessment roll
   
54-11   Due date; notice of filing appeal
   
54-12   Partial payments
   
54-13   Creation of lien
   
54-14   Additional assessments; refunds
   
54-15   Additional procedures
   
54-16   Accounts
   
54-17   Contested assessments
   
54-18   Reassessment for benefits
   
54-19   Combination of projects
   
54-20   Assessment after completion of improvement
   
54-21   Hardship deferments
Charter reference:
   Special assessments, see
Chapter 9
Cross reference:
   Finance, see §
2-151
Statutory reference:
   Powers re assessments, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4a, 117.4d, 117.5
§ 54-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   COST. When referring to the cost of any local public improvement, includes
the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices,
advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs
incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor
and the financing thereof.
   LOCAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any public improvement which is of such a nature
as to benefit especially any real property within a district in the vicinity of
such improvements.
(1993 Code, § 54-1)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 54-2 AUTHORITY TO ASSESS.
   The whole cost or any part thereof of any local public improvement may be
defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefitted by the
improvement in the manner provided in this chapter.
(1993 Code, § 54-2)
§ 54-3 INITIATION OF PROJECTS; PETITIONS.
   Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the city may
be commenced by resolution of the Council. Such action may also be requested by
the filing with the City Clerk of a petition signed by the owners of more than
50% of the property to be assessed for the improvement requesting that the
improvement be made and the cost thereof be defrayed by special assessment upon
the property benefitted, but such petition shall be advisory to the City
Council only.
(1993 Code, § 54-3) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-27-2015)
§ 54-4 SURVEY AND REPORT.
   (A)   Before the Council shall consider making any local public improvement,
the local public improvement contemplated shall be referred by resolution to
the City Manager, directing him to prepare a report which shall include
necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of cost, an
estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment
district and such other pertinent information as will permit the Council to
decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part
or proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property
especially benefitted and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at
large.
   (B)   The Council shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of
any local public improvement until such report of the City Manager has been
filed nor until after a public hearing has been held by the Council for the
purpose of hearing objections to the making of such improvement.
(1993 Code, § 54-4)
§ 54-5 DETERMINATION ON THE PROJECT; NOTICE; HEARING GENERALLY.
   (A)   After the City Manager has presented the report required in §
54-4 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of
the Council and the Council has reviewed the report, a resolution may be passed
tentatively determining the necessity of the improvement, setting forth the
nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such
improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially
benefitted and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large,
designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected,
designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits,
placing the complete information on file in the office of the Clerk where the
information may be found for examination, and directing the Clerk to give
notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and place
opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard.
   (B)   The notice of public hearing shall be given by 1 publication in a
newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail
addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be assessed as
shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city. The publication and
mailing shall be made at least 10 full days prior to the date of the hearing.
The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or
special meeting of the Council.
   (C)    The notice of hearing shall include a statement that appearance and
protest at the hearing is required in order to appeal the amount of the special
assessment to the state tax tribunal and shall describe the manner in which an
appearance and protest shall be made.
   (D)   An owner or party in interest or his agent may appear in person at the
hearing to protest the special assessment or shall be permitted to file his
appearance or protest by letter and his personal appearance shall not be
required.
   (E)   The City Council shall maintain a record of parties who appear to
protest at the hearing. If the hearing is terminated or adjourned for the day
before a party has been heard, a party whose appearance was recorded is
considered to have protested the special assessment in person.
(1993 Code, § 54-5)
§ 54-6 HEARING ON NEED.
   At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the Council may modify
the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem
to be in the best interest of the city as a whole, provided that if the amount
of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another
hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in §
54-5. If the determination of the Council shall be to proceed with the
improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles,
plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed estimates of cost,
determining the probable useful life of the improvement, and directing the
Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the Council's
determination and to report the special assessment roll to the Council for
confirmation. If, prior to the adoption of the resolution to proceed with the
making of the public improvement, written objections thereto have been filed by
the owners of property in the district which, according to the City Manager's
report, will be required to bear more than 50% of the cost thereof or by a
majority of the owners of property to be assessed, no resolution determining to
proceed with the improvement shall be adopted while such objections remain,
except by the affirmative vote of 5 members of the Council.
(1993 Code, § 54-6)
§ 54-7 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   The Assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of
land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed improvement and
assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount benefitted
thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed
estimate of the City Manager as approved by the Council.
(1993 Code, § 54-7)
§ 54-7.5 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL; HAZARDS AND NUISANCES.
   Pursuant to the provisions of §
2.1(B)(1) of the Charter, the assessor shall make a special assessment roll of
all lots and parcels of land within the City upon which hazards and nuisances
were found to have existed and for which the City incurred costs associated
with altering, repairing, tearing down, abating or removing the hazards and
nuisances. The assessment roll shall be prepared annually and shall list for
each lot and parcel the amount of such cost that has remained unpaid for at
least 30 days.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 8-9-2010)
§ 54-8 FILING ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   When the Assessor shall have completed the assessment roll as required in §
54-7, he shall file the assessment roll with the Clerk for presentation to the
Council for review and certification by it.
(1993 Code, § 54-8)
§ 54-9 MEETING TO REVIEW SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL; OBJECTIONS.
   Upon receipt of the special assessment roll as required in this chapter, the
Council, by resolution, shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be
filed in the office of the Clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and
place the Council will meet to review such special assessment roll and direct
the Clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an
opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by 1
publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first
class mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city. The
publication and mailing are to be made at least 10 full days prior to the date
of the hearing. Such notice shall meet all requirements of §
54-5. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the Council. At this meeting, all interested
persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the
assessments against them. The Assessor shall be present at every meeting of the
Council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed.
(1993 Code, § 54-9)
§ 54-10 CHANGES AND CORRECTIONS IN ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   The Council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of
the special assessment roll prepared as required in this chapter, and at such
meeting or a proper adjournment thereof shall consider all objections to the
special assessment roll submitted in writing. The Council may correct the roll
as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or
other errors appearing therein or it may, by resolution, annul such assessment
roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall
be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If,
after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the Council
deems justified the Council determines that it is satisfied with the special
assessment roll and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it
shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such
roll, placing it on file in the office of the Clerk and directing the Clerk to
attach his warrant to a certified copy thereof within 10 days and commanding
the Assessor to spread and the Treasurer to collect the various sums and
amounts appearing thereon as directed by the Council. Such roll shall have the
date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and
conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only
to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in
§
54-14.
(1993 Code, § 54-10)
§ 54-11 DUE DATE; NOTICE OF FILING APPEAL.
   (A)   All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the
Council shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall
be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll.
   (B)   The notice of a special assessment made against property shall include
a statement that the owner or any person in interest may file a written appeal
with the state tax tribunal within 30 days after confirmation of the roll if
the special assessment was protested at the hearing held for the purpose of
confirming the roll.
(1993 Code, § 54-11)
§ 54-12 PARTIAL PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The Council may provide for the payment of special assessments in
annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed 20 in number,
the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll. Interest shall
be charged on all deferred installments at a rate to be set by the City
Council, commencing on the due date of the first installment and payable on the
due date of each subsequent installment. The full amount of all or any deferred
installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid
in advance of the due dates thereof.
   (B)   If the full assessment or the first installment thereof shall be due
upon confirmation of the special assessment roll, each property owner shall
have 60 days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of the
assessment or the full amount of any installment thereof, without interest or
penalty. Following the 60 day period, the assessment or first installment
thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent and the same penalties
shall be collected on such unpaid assessments or first installments thereof as
are provided in the Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes.
Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until 60 days after
the due date thereof, after which time such installments shall be considered as
delinquent and such penalties on installments shall be collected as are
provided in the Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes.
   (C)   After the Council has confirmed the roll, the City Treasurer shall
notify by mail each property owner on the roll that the roll has been filed,
stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of
the City Treasurer to give such notice or of such owner to receive the notice
shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment
thereon nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties.
(1993 Code, § 54-12) (Ord. passed 9-26-2005)
§ 54-13 CREATION OF LIEN.
   (A)   Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon
from the date of confirmation of the roll shall become a personal obligation to
the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and, until paid, shall be
and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect
as the lien created by general law for county and school taxes and by the
Charter for city taxes, and the lands upon which the special assessments are a
lien shall be subject to sale therefor the same as are lands upon which
delinquent city taxes constitute a lien.
   (B)   In addition to the procedures established in subsection (A) of this
section for the collection of special assessments levied against property, the
city may recover the special assessments in a suit in any court of competent
jurisdiction. In any such suit, the confirmed special assessment roll upon
which the special assessment concerned appears shall be prima facie evidence of
the existence of the special assessment, of the regularity of the proceedings
in making the special assessment and of the right of the city to recover
judgment therefor.
(1993 Code, § 54-13)
§ 54-14 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS; REFUNDS.
   (A)   The City Manager shall, within 60 days after the completion of each
local public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the cost
to the Council. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to
meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the Council may make an
additional pro rata assessment; provided, however, that no property shall be
assessed in excess of benefits received. No additional assessment for any local
public improvement which exceeds 10% of the original assessment shall be made
except in accordance with the requirements of Charter, §
9.2(7).
   (B)   The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the
actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in
the General Fund of the city, if such excess is less than 5% of the total
amount of the assessment roll, but should the assessment prove larger than the
amount by 5% or more, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis
to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit
against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist
and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which
contravene the provisions of outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in
whole or in part by such special assessment.
(1993 Code, § 54-14)
§ 54-15 ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES.
   If the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry out
fully the making of any special assessment, the Council shall provide by
ordinance any additional steps or procedures required.
(1993 Code, § 54-15)
§ 54-16 ACCOUNTS.
   Monies raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be
credited to a special assessment account and shall be used to pay the special
assessment portion of the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was
levied and of expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the
principal and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive
assessments, if refunds are authorized.
(1993 Code, § 54-16)
§ 54-17 CONTESTED ASSESSMENTS.
   No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the
purpose of contesting or enjoining collection of any special assessment unless
within 30 days after confirmation of the special assessment roll written notice
is given to the City Clerk of intention to file such suit or action, stating
grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and unless such suit
or action shall be commenced within 60 days of confirmation of the roll.
(1993 Code, § 54-17)
§ 54-18 REASSESSMENT FOR BENEFITS.
   Whenever the Council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective
for any reason whatever or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have
adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in whole or in
part, the Council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the
same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement
or any part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment
has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the
collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original
assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected
and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the
reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount
reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the
person making such payment.
(1993 Code, § 54-18)
§ 54-19 COMBINATION OF PROJECTS.
   The Council may combine several districts into 1 project for the purpose of
effecting a saving in the costs of the local public improvement assessed under
the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that for each district there
shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the
improvement.
(1993 Code, § 54-19)
§ 54-20 ASSESSMENT AFTER COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENT.
   If funds are on hand or a revolving fund exists to defray the expense of any
public improvement prior to the completion thereof, a special assessment roll
to defray such cost may be made within 30 days after the improvement is
completed based upon the actual cost thereof. The proceeds from such special
assessment shall be used to reimburse the account or fund from which the cost
of the improvement was derived.
(1993 Code, § 54-20)
§ 54-21 HARDSHIP DEFERMENTS.
   The City Manager may grant a deferment of the annual installment payments
due on special assessments for street and sidewalk improvements on homestead
properties in case of hardship, subject to the following.
   (A)   The payment of special assessment installments may be deferred for
owners who meet the terms and conditions of this section annually for a period
not to exceed 20 years or until the property is sold or until 1 year after the
owner's death; however, the death of a spouse shall not terminate deferral of
an assessment on homestead property owned by a husband and wife. The gross
amount of the annual special assessment installment eligible for deferment
under this section shall not be less than $300.
   (B)   To receive deferment, the owner shall annually certify to the City
Manager on or before July 1 that his annual household income does not exceed
HUD Section 8 income limits for Eaton County for very low income families.
   (C)   The owner shall execute and deliver to the City Clerk a lien in
recordable form in favor of the city indicating the amount of the annual
special assessment deferred, plus interest as provided in subsection (D), and
identifying the homestead.
   (D)   The payment of special assessment installments deferred under this
section which are subsequently made by the owner or owner's estate shall
include interest computed at the rate of .005% per month or fraction of a
month.
   (E)   The City Treasurer shall not report as delinquent any special
assessment installment which is deterred under this section for which a lien
has been recorded in favor of the city, until such time as the term of the
deferment expires as provided in division (A) above.
   (F)   A hardship deferment shall not be granted by the City Manager where
the owner of homestead property is eligible for a deferment of special
assessment on that homestead pursuant to Public Act 225 of 1976, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 211.761 et seq.
(Ord. passed 11-24-2003; Am. Ord. passed 9-26-2005)
CHAPTERS 55 – 57: RESERVED
CHAPTER 58: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Section
Article I. In General
   
58-1   Nuisances
Article II. Streets
Division 1. Generally
   
58-26   Definitions
   
58-27   Additional regulations
   
58-28   Permits, insurance and deposits
   
58-29   Materials or merchandise on street or sidewalk
   
58-30   Utility poles
   
58-31   Maintenance of installations
   
58-32   Sweepings
   
58-33   Deposits prohibited
   
58-34   Vehicle load security
   
58-35   Temporary street closings
   
58-36   Curb cuts
Division 2. Excavations and Obstructions
   
58-46   Excavations and obstructions restricted
   
58-47   Permit required for excavation
   
58-48   Barricades and warning lights
   
58-49   Shoring excavations
   
58-50   Backfilling
   
58-51   Removal of encroachment and obstructions; refilling excavations
   
58-52   Emergency openings
Sidewalks
Division 1. Generally
   
58-76   Definitions
   
58-77   Prohibited surfaces
   
58-78   Pedestrian passage
Division 2. Construction and Repair
   
58-91   Authority to order construction; supervision
   
58-92   Line and grade
   
58-93   Specifications
   
58-94   Permit required
   
58-95   Bond
   
58-96   Default by contractor
   
58-97   Reserved
   
58-98   Compliance with specifications
   
58-99   Agreement between city and property owner
   
58-100   Notice to construct
   
58-101   Reserved
   
58-102   Reserved
Division 3. Snow and Ice Removal
   
58-116   Clearing of sidewalks
   
58-117   Time limits for clearing
   
58-118   Clearing by city
Article IV. Telecommunications Providers
   
58-119   Purpose
   
58-120   Conflict
   
58-121   Terms defined
   
58-122   Permit required
   
58-123   Issuance of permit
   
58-124   Construction/engineering permits
   
58-125   Conduit or utility pole
   
58-126   Route maps
   
58-127   Repair of damage
   
58-128   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
   
58-129   Modification of existing fees
   
58-130   Savings clause
   
58-131   Use of funds
   
58-132   Annual report
   
58-133   Cable television operators
   
58-134   Existing rights
   
58-135   Compliance
   
58-136   Reservation of police powers
   
58-137   Severability
   
58-138   Authorized city officials
   
58-139   Municipal civil infraction
   
58-140   Repealer
   
58-141   Effective date
Cross reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Chapter 14;
   Community development, see
Chapter 22;
   Parks and recreation, see
Chapter 38;
   Planning, see
Chapter 42;
   Subdivision regulations, see
Chapter 62;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 58-1 NUISANCES.
   The following acts are hereby declared to be public nuisances: the throwing,
placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public
place, square or sidewalk or in any private place or premises where such
throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is dangerous or detrimental to public
health or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents or
vermin, by any person, of any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish,
shell, tin cans, bottles, glass or other rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth,
unclean or nauseous water or fluids, hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal
bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or any other
offensive article or substance whatever.
(1993 Code, § 58-1)
§§ 58-2 – 58-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. STREETS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 58-26 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works.
   STREET. All of the land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, alleys and boulevards in the city and includes lawn extensions and
sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where such are not yet constructed.
(1993 Code, § 58-26)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 58-27 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and
excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions and house moving,
which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. No
person shall fail to comply with any such regulations.
(1993 Code, § 58-27)
§ 58-28 PERMITS, INSURANCE AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Permits. Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be
obtained upon application to the Director, upon such forms as he shall
prescribe, and there shall be a charge as prescribed by resolution of the City
Council from time to time for each such permit, except as otherwise provided by
resolution of the Council. Such permit shall be revocable by the Director for
failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this article, and the lawful orders of the Director or his duly authorized
representative. The permit shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed
on the permit. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article
shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work
permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection
with such work, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations
on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless
the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on
account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the
permit or in connection therewith.
   (B)   Insurance. Where liability insurance certificates are required to be
filed in making application for a permit, they shall be as specified by the
City Council. A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of
such insurance policy, approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be filed
with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Cash deposits. Where cash deposits are required with the application
for any permit under the provisions of this article, such deposit shall be in
the amount set by resolution of the City Council, except as otherwise specified
in this article. Such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city
arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in
connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under
the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. If
the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit
shall be paid by the applicant.
(1993 Code, § 58-28)
§ 58-29 MATERIALS OR MERCHANDISE ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall place any merchandise or material on any sidewalk or any
merchandise or material within any street area, except that a reasonable
quantity of material may be stored within such area for a period not exceeding
90 days upon permit issued by the Department. At least 5 feet of sidewalk space
shall be kept clear for free passage at all times. Such goods or material shall
be barricaded in a manner prescribed by the Department, and the granting of
such authority shall be conditioned upon obtaining a permit from the Director
and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance certificate as required by §
58-28.
(1993 Code, § 58-29) (Ord. passed 5-10-2004)
§ 58-30 UTILITY POLES.
   Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the Director shall prescribe
and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the Director.
Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the Director shall from time to
time direct. Where utility easements exist at the rear of lots, poles shall be
located in such easements, if feasible in the opinion of the Director.
(1993 Code, § 58-30)
§ 58-31 MAINTENANCE OF INSTALLATIONS.
   Every owner and every person in control of any estate who maintains a
sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation or any post, pole,
sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon
any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate shall do so only on
condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part
with the city to keep the excavation or structure and the covers thereof and
any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon in good repair and condition at
all times during his ownership or control thereof. Every such owner or person
shall indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at
law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure
being under, over, in or upon the street or being unfastened, out of repair or
defective during such ownership or control.
(1993 Code, § 58-31)
§ 58-32 SWEEPINGS.
   No person shall sweep or cause to be swept any dirt or litter of any kind or
type whatsoever out of or off of any building or private property and into any
public sidewalk, parkway, alley or roadway of the city.
(1993 Code, § 58-32)
§ 58-33 DEPOSITS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place or cause to be placed in or on any public sidewalk or
on any pavement, gutter, drain, ditch, alley or roadway in the city any grass
clippings, leaves, lawn rakings, tree or bush trimmings, tree trunks, stumps,
ashes, soil, dirt or household debris, unless specifically approved by the
Director.
(1993 Code, § 58-33)
§ 58-34 VEHICLE LOAD SECURITY.
   No person shall drop, leave or scatter on any sidewalk, park, alley or
roadway within the city any coal, sand, dirt, gravel, brick, scrap materials or
any other material or substance that is being hauled or carried about in a
truck, trailer, wagon or cart or any other vehicle.
(1993 Code, § 58-34)
§ 58-35 TEMPORARY STREET CLOSINGS.
   The Director shall have authority to temporarily close any street or portion
thereof when he shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable
for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be
erected on the street, indicating that the street is closed to public travel.
When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no
person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the street, except as may be
necessary and incidental to any street repair or construction work being done
in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any
sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the
Director.
(1993 Code, § 58-35)
§ 58-36 CURB CUTS.
   (A)   No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without
first obtaining a written permit from the Director.
   (B)   Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private
property shall comply with the following:
      (1)   No single curb cut shall be less than 10 feet;
      (2)   The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk
shall be 5 feet;
      (3)   The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving
residential property, shall be 25 feet;
      (4)   The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire
hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals or other public
improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city;
      (5)   Complete curb sections shall be removed to the nearest joint.
(1993 Code, § 58-36)
§§ 58-37 – 58-45 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 58-46 EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person shall make any excavation in or cause any damage to any
street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in
this article.
   (B)   No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street,
except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article. This
subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may
be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from
abutting premises, to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the
street reserved for vehicular traffic, nor to any sign or other material object
erected or maintained for public health and safety purposes by the city.
   (C)   No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or street area
unless expressly authorized by this Code, provided that the City Council, when
in its opinion public safety requires, may authorize the erection of fire
escapes or similar devices by resolution. This subsection shall not apply to
awnings or marquees when no part thereof is less than 7 feet above the sidewalk
grade.
(1993 Code, § 58-46)
§ 58-47 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION.
   No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director. No permit shall be
granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability
certificate as required by §
58-28.
(1993 Code, § 58-47)
§ 58-48 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   All openings, excavations and obstructions in streets shall be properly and
substantially barricaded and railed off and at night shall be provided with
prescribed warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic
shall not be more than 3 feet apart and parallel to the flow of traffic not
over 15 feet apart.
(1993 Code, § 58-48)
§ 58-49 SHORING EXCAVATIONS.
   All openings and excavations in streets shall, where necessary, be properly
and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workers and to prevent
cave-ins or washouts that would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface
structure of the street.
(1993 Code, § 58-49)
§ 58-50 BACKFILLING.
   All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special
permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant
to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within 4 hours after
notification to do so.
(1993 Code, § 58-50)
§ 58-51 REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT AND OBSTRUCTIONS; REFILLING EXCAVATIONS.
   Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations
refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting
land owner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him,
otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The
procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in Charter, §
9.10.
(1993 Code, § 58-51)
§ 58-52 EMERGENCY OPENINGS.
   The Director may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant
permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a
permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of
this article shall be complied with.
(1993 Code, § 58-52)
§§ 58-53 – 58-75 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. SIDEWALKS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 58-76 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   SIDEWALK. All sidewalks in the public streets or alleys of the city.
(1993 Code, § 58-76)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 58-77 PROHIBITED SURFACES.
   No door shall be placed in any sidewalk unless the design and specifications
therefor shall be approved by the Department. No open iron grating or other
open devices or any device containing glass shall be placed in or used as the
surface of any sidewalk.
(1993 Code, § 58-77)
§ 58-78 PEDESTRIAN PASSAGE.
   At least 5 feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free
passage of pedestrians. If building operations are such that such free
passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial
railings or sidewalk shelter, built in accordance with the State Construction
Code adopted by reference in this Code, shall be provided around such
obstruction.
(1993 Code, § 58-78)
§§ 58-79 – 58-90 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 58-91 AUTHORITY TO ORDER CONSTRUCTION; SUPERVISION.
   (A)   The City Council, whenever it shall deem it necessary, may authorize
and order the construction or repair of any sidewalk in the public streets and
alleys of the city at city expense and the city may employ a contractor to
construct or repair such sidewalk.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of property owners to replace or repair
damaged sidewalk resulting from any action of the property owner, including
such activities as contracted work on their property.
   (C)   If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of division (B)
of this section by the specified time, the City Manager shall, through the
Department of Public Works, cause such damaged sidewalks to be repaired or
replaced. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall cause the owners
of property on which the sidewalks have been repaired or replaced to be billed
for all costs and expenses incurred by the city for the repair or replacement.
   (D)   Failure of the property owner to pay these costs and expenses within
60 days after billing shall result in said costs and expenses being placed on
the tax roll of the involved property as provided by law.
   (E)   Sidewalks shall be constructed or repaired under the supervision and
direction of the Director of Public Works on the established grade as
ascertained, determined and furnished by him.
(1993 Code, § 58-91) (Ord. passed 9-14-1998; Ord. passed 5-28-2002)
§ 58-92 LINE AND GRADE.
   The line and grade of all sidewalks shall be ascertained, determined and
furnished by the Director of Public Works and when so furnished shall be
accepted by the owner of the premises abutting the sidewalk and the city as
correct and his determination fixing the line and grade of any sidewalk shall
be final as between the city and the owner of the premises abutting the
sidewalk.
(1993 Code, § 58-92)
§ 58-93 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All sidewalks constructed on the public streets and alleys of the city shall
be constructed according to the specifications and dimensions furnished by the
Director of Public Works and approved by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 58-93)
§ 58-94 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No sidewalk shall be constructed or an existing sidewalk replaced
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of the Department of
Public Works, and any sidewalk construction shall be according to the
specifications as furnished by the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   No existing sidewalk shall be repaired, altered or changed without
first obtaining a written permit from the Director of the Department of Public
Works, and all sidewalks repairs shall be according to the specifications as
furnished by the City Manager.
(1993 Code, § 58-94)
§ 58-95 BOND.
   Every contractor or owner, before proceeding to construct, build or repair
any sidewalk in the public streets or alleys of the city, shall upon request of
the City Council execute and deliver to the city a bond with such surety as
shall be approved by the Council in the penal sum of at least $1,000,
conditioned that the sidewalks so constructed shall be constructed according to
plans, dimensions, specifications and standards furnished by the Director of
Public Works. The bond shall be in full force and effect until the sidewalks
covered by the bond shall he accepted in writing by the Director of Public
Works as conforming to the plans, dimensions, specifications and standards
submitted to such contractor by the city, which bond shall be in the following
form:
   Know All Men By These Presents, that we,
                                      as principal, and
                                and
                                                   as sureties, are held and
firmly bound unto the City of Charlotte, Michigan in the sum of One Thousand
Dollars to be paid the said City of Charlotte, for which payment well and truly
to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors and administrators,
successors and assigns, and each and every one of them firmly by these
presents.
   Sealed with our seals and dated this                   day of
                                   A.D. 20         .
   The condition of the above obligation is such that WHEREAS, the above
bounden principal                               is about to engage in
constructing or repairing sidewalks upon the streets of said City, a part of
the expense for the building or repairing of such sidewalks is to be borne by
said City and part by the adjacent property owners, said sidewalks being
described as follows:
   WHEREAS the above bounden principal does hereby agree and warrant that he or
it shall construct or repair said sidewalk or sidewalks according to the plans,
specifications, dimensions and standards submitted by the City Director of
Public Works and within the time specified.
   WHEREFORE, if said principal
                                                      shall in all respects
well and faithfully construct or repair each, any and all sidewalks he or it
may undertake to construct or repair strictly according to the terms,
requirements, plans, dimensions, specifications and standards specified, and
when said sidewalk or sidewalks are formally accepted in writing by the City
Director of Public Works as conforming to the plans, specifications, dimensions
and standards as furnished by him and shall well and truly pay as it may become
due and payable all indebtedness which may become due to any person, firm or
corporation, on account of any labor performed or material furnished in the
construction or repair of such sidewalk or sidewalks, and shall save the City
of Charlotte harmless from any and all claims as a result of accident, personal
injury or property damage occurring through the negligence of said principal,
his or its agents or employees while engaged in the constructing of any such
sidewalk or sidewalks, then this obligation to be void; otherwise to be in full
force and effect.
(1993 Code, § 58-95)
§ 58-96 DEFAULT BY CONTRACTOR.
   If any contractor or owner shall construct or repair a sidewalk and the
sidewalk shall not conform in every respect to the plans, dimensions,
specifications and standards submitted and shall not be formally accepted by
the Director of Public Works, either because of faulty materials or defective
workmanship in the construction or repair or in the materials used, the
contractor shall proceed within 10 days after receiving notice from the
Director of Public Works to reconstruct or rerepair such sidewalk in accordance
with the plans, specifications, dimensions and standards furnished him. If the
contractor shall fail to do so, the city may on its own motion proceed to
reconstruct or rerepair or have reconstructed or rerepaired the sidewalk, and
the contractor and his bondsmen shall be liable on their bond for the penalty
thereof.
(1993 Code, § 58-96)
§ 58-97 RESERVED.
(1993 Code, § 58-97)
Editor's note:
   Ord. of 9-14-99(1) repealed § 58-97 in its entirety. Former § 58-97
pertained to the determination of cost of new construction or repair and
derived from the Code of 1979, § 4.68.
§ 58-98 COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or repair any
sidewalk within the limits of any of the public streets or alleys of the city
without a permit as required in this division. He shall use material in
accordance with the plans, specifications, dimensions and standards furnished
by the Director of Public Works.
(1993 Code, § 58-98)
§ 58-99 AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY AND PROPERTY OWNER.
   The City Council may, when requested by any property owner, construct or
change any sidewalk upon such terms and conditions as agreed upon by the
property owner and the city.
(1993 Code, § 58-99) (Ord. passed 9-14-1998)
§ 58-100 NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT.
   Whenever the Council shall by resolution or otherwise order the construction
of any new sidewalk or the repair of any sidewalk, the City Manager shall give
notice of such order, in accordance with §
1-15, to the owner or occupant of the land adjacent to and abutting on the
street or alley upon which the new sidewalk is to be built or the old sidewalk
is to be repaired. Such notice shall be in writing, signed by the Director of
Public Works and shall be directed to the owners or occupants of the land
adjacent to the sidewalk, advising such owner or occupant of the premises that
the city intends to construct or repair the sidewalk.
(1993 Code, § 58-100) (Ord. passed 9-14-1998)
§ 58-101 RESERVED.
(1993 Code, § 58-101)
Editor's note:
   Ord. of 9-14-99(1) repealed § 58-101 in its entirety. Former § 58-101
pertained to construction by the city and derived from the Code of 1979, §
4.72.
§ 58-102 RESERVED.
(1993 Code, § 58-102)
Editor's note:
   Ord. of 9-14-99(1) repealed § 58-102 in its entirety. Former § 58-102
pertained to the maintenance of lien and derived from the Code of 1979, § 4.73.
§§ 58-103 – 58-115 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 58-116 CLEARING OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the establishment of special
assessment districts by the City Council for the purpose of snow removal, no
person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any house, building or
lot shall permit any snow or ice to remain on any sidewalk in front of any
house, building or lot within the City of Charlotte.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who is found to have violated §
58-116(A) shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction as
defined by § 113(1) of the Revised Judicature Act [M.C.L.A. § 600.113(1)] and
punished by a civil fine as provided by §
32-6 of this Code.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, a PRIOR OFFENSE means a prior or
current resident of the property or prior or current owner of the property for
which the current violation applies has had a judgment entered against them for
a violation of §
58-116  for that property within the same snow season.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, a SNOW SEASON shall mean from October
1 to April 30 of the following year.
      (4)   To charge a violation as a subsequent offense, the issuing officer
shall note on the citation that it is a subsequent offense and all dates of the
prior offenses and all of the names of all persons or entities to whom the
prior citations were issued that make this a subsequent offense.
      (5)   The Chief of Police is charged with the enforcement of §
58-116 and may for such purpose assign enforcement to limited duty parking and
property maintenance officers who shall be authorized to issue and serve
citations for municipal civil infractions as provided by § 8707 of the Revised
Judicature Act.
(1993 Code, § 58-116) (Ord. passed 6-10-1991; Ord. passed 5-12-2003; Ord. 2009-
02, passed 2-23-2009; Ord. 2009-06, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-
10-2014; Ord. 2017-08, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 58-117 TIME LIMITS FOR CLEARING.
   No person shall permit any snow or ice to remain on the sidewalk in front of
any house, building or lot occupied by him or, if unoccupied, owned by him
longer than 48 hours after the snow or ice has fallen or formed in the area
mentioned in §
58-116. When ice is formed on any sidewalk, such owner or occupant shall,
within 12 hours after the ice has formed, cause salt, chloride or sand to be
strewn on the sidewalk.
(1993 Code, § 58-117) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-10-2014)
§ 58-118 CLEARING BY CITY.
   If any owner or occupant of any house, building or lot in the area mentioned
in §
58-116 shall fail to remove or cause to be removed snow as provided in this
division, the city may cause the snow to be removed at the expense of such
occupant or owner and the cost, as determined by the City Council, if not paid
within 30 days after billing, shall become a lien in favor of the city against
the house, building or lot. The cost shall be assessed against the house,
building or lot or, in the case of business property occupied by other than the
owner, against the personal property contained thereon, the same as real and
personal property taxes are assessed and levied.
(1993 Code, § 58-118)
ARTICLE IV. TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
§ 58-119 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and to exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101—484.3120) and
other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions
under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the
Act.
(1993 Code, § 58-119) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-120 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
(1993 Code, § 58-120) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-121 TERMS DEFINED.
   (A)   The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings.
      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101—484.3120), as
amended from time to time.
      CITY. The City of Charlotte.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Charlotte or its designee.
This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is
required by law to be made by the City Council.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee.
      PERMIT. A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article
to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights- of-way in the city
for its telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following.
      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to the Act.
      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services and shall have the same meaning as the term
COMMISSION in the Act.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not
include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit,
carry, or provide telecommunications services or signals. Telecommunication
facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters of houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile
service as defined in Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, Title III, Part
I, § 332(d), 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial
mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. 20.3, and service provided by any wireless,
two-way communication device.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Those terms as defined in Michigan Telecommunications Act 1991, Public Act 179
of 1991, § 102, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not
include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally
licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in the Communications Act
of 1934, Chapter 542, Part I, § 332(d), 48 Stat. 1054, 47 U.S.C. 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. 20.3, or
services provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the
purpose of the Act and this ordinance only, a provider also includes all of the
following:
         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way;
         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(1993 Code, § 58-121) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-122 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this article.
   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with the Act. A
telecommunications provider shall file 1 copy of the application with the City
Clerk, 1 copy with the City Manager, and 1 copy with the City Attorney.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act,
including without limitation a route map showing the location of the providers'
existing and proposed facilities in accordance with the Act.
   (C) Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contains trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from Michigan's Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, § 6
(5), as amended, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate
on the face of each map.
   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, an
application shall be accompanied by a 1 time nonrefundable application fee in
the amount of $500.
   (E)   Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information
established by the City Manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on
the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or
the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act.
   (F)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city, under the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, as amended, and authorizations
or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995
enactment of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy
the permit requirements of this ordinance.
   (G)   Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of
such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under the
Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, as amended, shall
submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the
requirements of this article. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is
not required to pay the $500 application fee required under subsection (D)
above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180
days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority for good
cause, as provided in § 5(4) of the Act.
(1993 Code, § 58-122) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-123 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application
for permit is delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act,
the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45
days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a
permit in accordance with §
58-122(B) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the city.
The City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or
denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the
application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The
City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2)
and 15 of the Act.
   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and use of the public
right-of-way.
   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(C) of the Act, and without
limitation on subsection (C) above, the City Manager may require that a bond be
posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a
bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use.
(1993 Code, § 58-123) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-124 CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMITS.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a
construction or engineering permit as required under the City Code, as amended,
for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for
such a construction or engineering permit.
(1993 Code, § 58-124) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-125 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLE.
   In accordance with the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required
under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider
a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(1993 Code, § 58-125) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-126 ROUTE MAPS.
   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within
90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city.
The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC
determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act.
(1993 Code, § 58-126) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-127 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   A telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or
installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of- way or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a
permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all
installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall
promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
(1993 Code, § 58-127) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-128 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in §
58-122(D) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance
fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.
(1993 Code, § 58-128) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-129 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby
modifies, to the extent necessary, fees charged to telecommunications providers
after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and
use of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees
and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In
compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby
approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication
facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those
providers pay only those fees required under § 8 of the Act. The city shall
provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee a copy of this
ordinance, in compliance with the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act. To the
extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the
amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the
Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and
intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
(1993 Code, § 58-129) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-130 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, if § 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 11 above shall be void from
the date the modification was made.
(1993 Code, § 58-130) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-131 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the
Authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes.
In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the
Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street
Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951.
(1993 Code, § 58-131) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-132 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual report
with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by
the Authority.
(1993 Code, § 58-132) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-133 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television
operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
(1993 Code, § 58-133) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-134 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with
respect to fees, this ordinance shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the
city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider
related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(1993 Code, § 58-134) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-135 COMPLIANCE.
   The city declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to
fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions of this
article should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The
city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including
but not limited to the following.
   (A)   Exempting certain route maps from disclosure consistent with the Act
and state law as provided in §
58-122(F) of this article.
   (B)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with §
58-122(F) of this article.
   (C)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for
access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with §
58-123(A) of this article.
   (D)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with §
58-123(A) of this article.
   (E)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with §
58-123(A) of this article.
   (F)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
58-123(B) of this article.
   (G)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and use of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with §
58-123(C) of this article.
   (H)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and
use, in accordance with §
58-123(D) of this article.
   (I)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with §
58-124 of this article.
   (J)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with §
58-129 of this article.
   (K)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with §
58-132 of this article.
   (L)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to
pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with §
58-133 of this article.
(1993 Code, § 58-135) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-136. RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the city's
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's Authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(1993 Code, § 58-136) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-137 SEVERABILITY.
   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the
constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article shall
not be affected.
(1993 Code, § 58-137) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-138 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infractions
violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal
ordinance violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by
the City Code.
(1993 Code, § 58-138) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-139 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to civil infraction fines and costs as provided for in this
Code. Nothing in this § 58-139 shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article
or a permit.
(1993 Code, § 58-139) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-140 REPEALER.
   All ordinances and portions of ordinances inconsistent with this article are
hereby repealed.
(1993 Code, § 58-140) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
§ 58-141 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This article shall take effect 20 days after adoption.
(1993 Code, § 58-141) (Ord. passed 11-12-2002(1))
CHAPTERS 59 – 61: RESERVED
CHAPTER 62: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Article I. In General
   
62-1   Purposes
   
62-2   Definitions
   
62-3   Interpretation
   
62-4   Violations
Article II. Procedure for the Preparation and Filing of Plats
   
62-31   Scope
   
62-32   Initial plat investigation
   
62-33   Sketch plan
   
62-34   Preliminary plat
   
62-35   Final plats
Article III. Design Standards
   
62-56   Scope
   
62-57   Streets
   
62-58   Blocks
   
62-59   Lots
   
62-60   Natural features
   
62-61   Floodplains
   
62-62   Subdivision options
Article IV. Improvements
   
62-86   Standards; bond
   
62-87   Streets
   
62-88   Utilities
   
62-89   Sidewalks
   
62-90   Public walkways
   
62-91   Trees
   
62-92   Street signs
Article V. Compliance Standards
   
62-116   Approval
Article VI. Variances
   
62-136   Variance for hardship
   
62-137   Variance for complete community
Article VII. Partial Lot or Lot Conveyance Within Approved Plats
   
62-138   Definitions
   
62-139   Procedure
Article VIII. Review Fees
   
62-161   Payment
   
62-162   Planning review fees
   
62-163   Other fees
Cross reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Chapter 14;
   Planning, see
Chapter 42;
   Utilities, see
Chapter 68;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Statutory reference:
   Minimum standards, see M.C.L.A. § 560.259;
   Subdivision Control Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 62-1 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the
community;
      (2)   Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street
systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public
facilities;
      (3)   Achieve individual property lots immotility and livability;
      (4)   Secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary
sewerage and other health requirements;
      (5)   Secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and
other public facilities; and
      (6)   Provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes.
(1993 Code, § 62-1)
§ 62-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to
abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   BLOCK. That property abutting 1 side of a street and lying between the 2
nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad
right-of- way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of
such properties and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
   CITY ENGINEER or ENGINEER. The staff engineer or consulting engineer of the
city.
   CITY PLANNER or PLANNER. The staff planner or consulting planner of the
city.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
   EASEMENT. A specific area of land over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some
particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes and
which shall be designated a "public" or "private" easement, depending on the
nature of the user.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
crosswalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
culverts, bridges and other additions to the natural state of land which
increase its value, utility or habitability.
   LOT. A parcel of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary or
recorded plat for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
   MAJOR STREETS OR THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of the Master Plan which sets
forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets
and thoroughfares.
   MASTER PLAN. The comprehensive land use plan for the city, including graphic
and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the
streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts and all physical
developments of the city, including any unit or part of such plan separately
adopted, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof adopted by the
Planning Commission.
   PARCEL or TRACT. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described
as provided for in the Subdivision Act.
   PLAT. A map, chart or diagram of a subdivision of land.
      (1)   SKETCH PLAN. An informal plan or sketch drawn to scale and in
pencil, if desired, showing the existing features of a site and its
surroundings and the general layout of a proposed subdivision.
      (2)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision of land required by the Subdivision Act, and as required by this
chapter and submitted for purposes of preliminary consideration.
      (3)   FINAL PLAT. A map of a subdivision of land ready for approval and
recording in a form required by the Subdivision Act.
   PROPRIETOR. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership interest in land,
whether recorded or not.
   PUBLIC RESERVATION. A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public
use and made available for public use and acquisition.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board
or commission, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, under governmental
regulations, to the public gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communication, telegraph, transportation or water.
   PUBLIC WALKWAY. A right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian
access through residential areas, and located so as to connect to 2 or more
streets, or a street and a public land parcel.
   STREET. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley
or other way which is an existing state, county or city roadway; a street or
way shown in a plat approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or
a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Register of Deeds. A STREET includes the land between the  street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
      (1)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street of great continuity which is
intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both the immediate city
area and region beyond and may be designated on the city's major thoroughfare
plan as a major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway or equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the Street Plan.
      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET (SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE). A street used primarily
to carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares.
      (3)   MINOR STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to abutting residential properties.
      (4)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street paralleling and adjacent to
a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
      (5)   BOULEVARD STREET. A street developed to 2, two-lane, one-way
pavements, separated by a median.
      (6)   TURNAROUND. A short boulevard street permanently terminated by a
vehicular turnaround.
      (7)   CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A minor street of short length, having 1 end
open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a
vehicular turnaround.
      (8)   LOOP STREET. A minor street of short length with 2 openings to
traffic beginning from the same street and projecting parallel to each other
and connecting at their termination by a loop.
   SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by
the proprietor thereof or  by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of more
than 1 year or of building development, where the act of division creates 5 or
more parcels of land, each of which is 10 acres or less in area, or 5 or more
parcels of land, each of which is 10 acres or less in area, are created by
successive divisions within a period of 10 years.
   SUBDIVISION ACT. The Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., as amended.
   ZONING CHAPTER. The zoning ordinance of the city,
Chapter 82 of this Code.
(1993 Code, § 62-2)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 62-3 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general
welfare of the city. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or
in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the city nor
conflict with any statutes of the state or the county, except that this chapter
shall prevail in cases where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is
provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.
(1993 Code, § 62-3)
§ 62-4 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person or anyone acting in behalf of a person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not more than $500 and the costs of prosecution or, in default of the
payment thereof, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
90 days or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
violation.
(1993 Code, § 62-4)
§§ 62-5 – 62-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURE FOR THE PREPARATION AND FILING OF PLATS
§ 62-31 SCOPE.
   The preparation of a subdivision shall be preceded by an initial
investigation and pre- preliminary plat or sketch plan and shall go through 2
phases, preliminary plat and final plat, all in accordance with the procedure
as provided in this article.
(1993 Code, § 62-31)
§ 62-32 INITIAL PLAT INVESTIGATION.
   Before preparing a preliminary plat for a subdivision, the proprietor should
meet informally with the city departments concerned to investigate the
procedures and standards of the city with reference to this chapter and with
the proposals of the Master Plan as they affect the area in which the proposed
subdivision is located. The proprietor shall investigate the following factors:
      (1)   This chapter and §§
42-26 et seq. of this Code, engineering specifications, city standards and
other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and
improvement of land so as to be aware of the requirements of the city;
      (2)   Is the proposed subdivision properly zoned for the intended use?
      (3)   Adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of the public open
spaces, including parks and playgrounds, to serve the proposed subdivision;
      (4)   The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major
thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares;
      (5)   Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the
city;
      (6)   The environmental impacts of the proposed development.
(1993 Code, § 62-32)
§ 62-33 SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   Submission. The subdivider shall submit 4 copies of the subdivision
sketch plan to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Contents. The plan shall show the subdivision's entire development
scheme in schematic form, including the area for immediate development, and
shall include the following:
      (1)   General layout of streets, blocks, lots and out-lots in sketch
form;
      (2)   Existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and adjacent
to the site;
      (3)   Any general area set aside for schools, parks and other community
facilities.
   (C)   Acceptance. Acceptance of the sketch plan does not ensure acceptance
of the preliminary plat.
   (D)   Feasibility study. A letter from a surveyor concerning the general
feasibility of the land for subdivision may be required by the city.
   (E)   Ownership. The city may require such information regarding ownership
of the land proposed to be subdivided as it deems necessary.
   (F)   Financing.
      (1)   The city may require such proof of financing of the proposed
subdivision as it deems necessary.
      (2)   The city may require a resume of past performance of the subdivider
or any agent thereof with respect to plat development.
   (G)   Procedure.
      (1)   The individual departments will review the plan. Copies of the
sketch plan may be submitted to other affected public agencies for review.
      (2)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall inform the
subdivider or his agent of the city's development policies and make appropriate
comments and suggestions concerning the proposed development scheme.
      (3)   The Secretary shall inform the Planning Commission of the results
of the review of the sketch plan at its next regular meeting.
      (4)   The procedure of this subsection shall be completed within 20 days
of filing with the Secretary.
(1993 Code, § 62-33)
§ 62-34 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Compliance. The proprietor, subdivider or developer shall comply with
all sections of the Subdivision Act with respect to preliminary plats and such
additional requirements as shall appear in this chapter. All documents required
by the Subdivision Act shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   Submission. In addition to the number of copies required by other
agencies under the Subdivision Act, the subdivider shall submit 8 copies of the
preliminary plat on a topographic map to the City Clerk at least 15 days before
a meeting of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Size and scale. The preliminary plat may be on paper and shall be
not less than 24 inches by 36 inches at a scale of 1 inch to 100 feet showing
the date and north arrow.
      (3)   Information required. The subdivider shall furnish the following to
the Planning Commission with the preliminary plat filed with the City Clerk:
         (a)   The name of the proposed subdivision;
         (b)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider and the
surveyor preparing the plat;
         (c)   Location of the subdivision, giving a brief legal description of
the property involved;
         (d)   The names of abutting subdivisions;
         (e)   Statement of intended use of the proposed plat, such as
residential single-family, two- family and multiple housing, commercial,
industrial, recreation or agricultural. Also proposed sites, if any, for
multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry and other nonpublic
uses exclusive of single- family dwellings. Also, any sites proposed for parks,
playgrounds, schools or other public uses;
         (f)   A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the
proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;
         (g)   A location map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to
the surrounding area;
         (h)   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and
the adjacent tracts;
         (i)   Streets, street names, right-of-way, roadway widths;
         (j)   Lot lines and approximate lot dimensions;
         (k)   Contours shall be shown on the preliminary plat at 2 foot
intervals;
         (l)   A site report as described in the rules of the State Department
of Public Health, if the proposed subdivision is not to be served by public
sewer or water systems;
         (m)   Three copies of proposed protective covenants and deed
restrictions, or state in writing that none are proposed;
         (n)   Right-of-way easements, showing location, width and purpose;
         (o)   Proposed and existing streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and
other required public improvements. This plan shall contain enough information
and detail to enable the city and the Planning Commission to make preliminary
determination as to conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable city
regulations and city standards.
         (p)   The City Council or the Planning Commission may require the
submission of other related data which might affect the health, welfare or
safety of the public or other pertinent information.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   Application; fees. The subdivider shall submit a written
application for approval and shall pay the fees established by §§
62-161 et seq.
      (2)   Recommendation for approval by Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall recommend approval, modification or disapproval of a plat
within 60 days after the submission of the plat to the city and after
conducting a public hearing as set by the City Clerk within such period as
required by Public Act 285 of 1931 (Extra Session), § 15, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.31 et seq., as amended, and shall note such action upon 1 or more copies
thereof and then transmit 1 or more copies thereof to the City Council.
      (3)   Distribution to authorities. The subdivider shall submit to the
various approving authorities the number of validated copies of the preliminary
plat required by the Subdivision Act.
      (4)   List of authorities; filing. The subdivider shall then file with
the City Clerk a list of all authorities to whom validated copies of the
preliminary plat have been distributed.
   (D)   Actions.
      (1)   Letters of conditional approval or rejection. When the subdivider
has secured the approvals of the various approving authorities as required by
the Subdivision Act, the subdivider shall deliver the approvals to the City
Clerk.
      (2)   City Council review.
         (a)   The City Council shall not review, approve or reject a
preliminary plat until it has received from the Planning Commission its report
and recommendations, unless no such action is taken by the Planning Commission
within 60 days from the date the plat is filed with the City Clerk.
         (b)   The City Council shall, within 30 days after receipt of the
necessary approved copies of the preliminary plat, either approve or reject it
and give its reasons therefor.
   (E)   Conditions.
      (1)   The city may enter into a written agreement with the developer to
construct within a reasonable time certain improvements within the area to be
platted. No construction shall be undertaken in the plat area before the grant
of all approvals of the preliminary plat plans as provided in the Subdivision
Act and the furnishing to the City Clerk of a cash deposit, certified check or
irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or a
surety bond acceptable to the city, covering the estimated costs of
construction of improvements required by the city, in the amount acceptable to
the city, to insure the faithful performance of the agreement. All such
security arrangements shall remain in effect for the period of construction.
      (2)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat. Approval of the final plat shall be conditioned on all further
requirements being met.
   (F)   Duration.
      (1)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council shall be for a
period of 2 years from the date of its approval.
      (2)   The City Council may extend the 2 year period if applied for and
granted in writing.
      (3)   The City Council may extend an expired preliminary plat for good
cause if applied for by the proprietor and granted in writing by the City
Council after review and approval of the Planning Commission.
(1993 Code, § 62-34) (Ord. passed 2-23-1998)
§ 62-35 FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   Final plats shall be prepared and submitted as provided in the
Subdivision Act.
      (2)   A written application for approval and the recording fee shall
accompany all final plats.
      (3)   The subdivider shall submit proof of ownership of the land included
in the final plat in the form of an abstract of title certified to the date of
the proprietor's certificate or a policy of title insurance currently in force.
   (B)   Submission to approving authorities. The subdivider shall submit the
final plat and as-built engineering plans, where required for approval, to the
City Clerk and all agencies enumerated in the Subdivision Act for certification
of approval.
   (C)   Actions.
      (1)   Departmental.
         (a)   The involved city departments shall examine the plat within 20
days of receipt thereof, for conformance to the following:
            1.   The provisions of the Subdivision Act;
            2.   The provisions of this chapter;
            3.   The preliminary plat, as approved;
            4.   City standards, rules and regulations.
         (b)   The time for review and recommendations by the city may be
extended by agreement with the subdivider.
      (2)   Planning Commission.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall examine the plat within 40 days of
receipt and forward it to the City Council and recommend that the City Council
approve or disapprove the plat. If a recommendation to disapprove is forwarded,
the reasons for disapproval shall accompany the plat.
         (b)   Recommendations for approval of the plat by the City Council
shall be accompanied by a copy of the minutes of the Planning Commission in
which approval was recommended.
      (3)   City Council.
         (a)   The City Council shall review the final plat and the report from
the departments and the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting or at a
meeting to be called within 20 days from receipt of submission of the plat and
reports from the Planning Commission.
         (b)   The City Council shall approve the plat or disapprove it. If
disapproved, it shall give the subdivider its reasons in writing.
         (c)   The City Council shall instruct the City Clerk to record all
proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which shall be open for inspection,
and to sign the city certificate on the approved plat on behalf of the City
Council, signifying approval of the plat by the City Council. The certificate
shall show the date of the meeting at which the approval was made and the date
the certificate was signed by the Clerk.
      (4)   Guarantee for construction of improvements and facilities required
by the city. (See §§
62-86 et seq.)
         (a)   The City Council may require all improvements and facilities to
be completed before it approves the final plat.
         (b)   If improvements and facilities are not required to be completed
by the City Council before plat approval, the final plat shall be accompanied
by a contract between the subdivider and the City Council for completion of all
required improvements and facilities.
         (c)   Performance of the contract shall be guaranteed by cash deposit,
certified check, surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit.
         (d)   The City Council shall not require a guarantee duplicating any
guarantee required by another governmental agency.
         (e)   Such surety shall be rebated or credited to the account of the
proprietor as the work progresses, as included in a written agreement between
the city and the subdivider.
         (f)   If the developer shall fail to complete the city improvements
required by the city within the period of time stated in the written agreement
for the completion of public improvements, the City Council may proceed to have
such work completed from the remaining security funds available to it for such
purpose.
(1993 Code, § 62-35)
§§ 62-36 – 62-55 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 62-56 SCOPE.
   The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this article are
development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must
be reviewed and approved by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 62-56)
§ 62-57 STREETS.
   (A)   Conformance. Streets shall conform to at least all minimum
requirements of the general specifications and typical cross sections as set
forth in this article and other conditions set forth by the City Council.
   (B)   Location and arrangement.
      (1)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of
the Master Plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned
major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part shall be platted in
the location and width indicated on such plan.
      (2)   The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector
thoroughfares in the adjoining subdivisions or the proper projection of streets
when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a
neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that
their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.
      (4)   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, the Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage or such other treatment as may be necessary
for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and
reduction of traffic hazards.
      (5)   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad,
expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning
Commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and
on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of
any use of the intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future
grade separation.
      (6)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this chapter, and where the Planning Commission finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the other half
shall be platted.
   (C)   Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at
least the following minimum requirements.
Street Type Right-of-Way Widths
Street Type                               Right-of-Way Widths
Major thoroughfare                        120 feet, or in conformance with the
                                          major thoroughfare plan of the city
Collector streets (secondary              86 feet
thoroughfares)
Industrial service streets                66 feet
Industrial collector streets              86 feet
Multiple-family residential streets       66 feet
(where platted)
Minor (single-family residential) streets 66 feet
Marginal access streets                   34 feet
Turnaround (loop) street                  110 feet
Alley                                     20 feet
Cul-de-sac streets, turnarounds
   a.   Industrial                  75 foot radius
   b.   Residential and others      60 foot radius
Length for cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet
 
   (D)   Street geometries. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades,
vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be established
by resolution of the City Council and approved by the City Engineer.
   (E)   Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major
thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares, shall do so with a tangent section
of centerline 50 feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the
major or collector thoroughfares.
   (F)   Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.
   (G)   Acceleration-deceleration lanes. Streets which intersect with major or
secondary thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and
deceleration lanes and passing lanes on both sides of the thoroughfares. Such
lanes shall be provided in keeping with the standards approved by the City
Council for this type of improvement.
(1993 Code, § 62-57)
§ 62-58 BLOCKS.
   Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.
      (1)   Sizes.
         (a)   Blocks shall not exceed 1,400 feet in length, except where, in
the opinion of the Planning Commission, conditions may justify a greater
distance.
         (b)   Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the
layout and shall be suited to the intended layout.
      (2)   Public walkways.
         (a)   Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the
Planning Commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public or
private facilities or where blocks exceed 900 feet in length.
         (b)   Public walkways shall be in the nature of an easement for this
purpose.
      (3)   Easements.
         (a)   Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the
rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give
access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of
not less than 12 feet wide, 6 feet from each parcel.
         (b)   Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric
company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving
the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of
the preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies.
         (c)   Easements 3 feet in width shall be provided where needed along
side lot lines so as to provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the approval
of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained
from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been
provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final plat
indicating:
   "The side lot lines between lots (indicating lot numbers) are subject to
streetlight dropout rights granted to the (name of utility company)."
(1993 Code, § 62-58)
§ 62-59 LOTS.
   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.
      (1)   Sizes and shapes.
         (a)   The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed
for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of
development contemplated.
         (b)   Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of the zoning chapter for the district in which the subdivision is
proposed.
         (c)   Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of the zoning chapter.
         (d)   Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted at
least 10 feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the zoning chapter.
         (e)   Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A
depth-to-width ratio of 3 to 1 shall normally be considered a maximum.
         (f)   Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be
specifically designed for such purposes and shall have adequate provision for
off-street parking, setbacks and other requirements in accordance with the
zoning chapter.
      (2)   Arrangement.
         (a)   Every lot shall front or abut on a street.
         (b)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street
lines.
         (c)   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector
thoroughfares, where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to
attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots or with side lot lines
parallel to the major traffic streets or shall be platted with extra depth to
permit greater distances between buildings and such traffic way.
         (d)   Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets
where possible.
(1993 Code, § 62-59)
§ 62-60 NATURAL FEATURES.
   The natural features and character of lands must be preserved in
subdivisions wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural
features such as large trees, natural groves and similar community assets that
will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The
preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the
proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where
appropriate, shall be required.
(1993 Code, § 62-60)
§ 62-61 FLOODPLAINS.
   Any area of land within the proposed subdivision which lies either wholly or
in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake or any other
areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater shall require
specific compliance with the Subdivision Act and its review by the Water
Resources Commission of the Department of Conservation.
(1993 Code, § 62-61)
§ 62-62 SUBDIVISION OPTIONS.
   The zoning chapter provides for a number of options to platting of lots in
the conventional minimum area and width. These include but may not be limited
to: the planned development zoning district, the subdivision open space plan
and the single-family clustering option. When such options are to be used, the
following requirements apply in addition to all other requirements of this
chapter where a preliminary plat is filed for approval under 1 of the options
permitted in the zoning chapter or under 1 of the options permitted under
Article XX, Schedule of Regulations, of the zoning chapter.
      (1)   Consideration by the Planning Commission and the City Council of
proposed optional use of the subdivision open space plan shall reflect the
following basic principles:
         (a)   The zoning chapter provides for optional methods of subdividing
property, and approval of such option is subject to the discretion of the city;
         (b)   Particular attention shall be given to the effect of such option
upon the immediate area, where the character of that area has been established
by previous development. Major attention shall be given by the Planning
Commission and the City Council to the benefits to be derived by the residents
of the proposed subdivision and the city because of the use of the option, with
minor consideration to be given to the proprietor;
         (c)   The following objectives shall govern the approval or
disapproval of the proposed subdivision option:
            1.   Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the
natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar
assets;
            2.   Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of residential areas;
            3.   Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the
land while recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the
developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site;
            4.   Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable
distance of all lot development so benefits may accrue to the subdivision and
to further encourage the development of recreational facilities and areas.
      (2)   The application for approval of a subdivision option shall contain
the following, in addition to the information required by other sections of
this chapter:
         (a)   A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated to
common use, called "open land," shall be provided, including the following as a
minimum:
            1.   Legal description of open land;
            2.   Topographical survey of open land;
            3.   Type of soil in open land (include a minimum of one soil
boring and percolation test per acre);
            4.   Description of natural features on open land (stands of trees
or other vegetation, streams or other bodies of water, and the like);
            5.   Other relevant factors.
         (b)   The proposed plan of development of the open land shall be
contained in the application and shall include the following as a minimum:
            1.   How legal title is to be held;
            2.   How the property shall be regulated;
            3.   Provisions for the payment of taxes;
            4.   Persons or corporations to be responsible for maintenance;
            5.   How maintenance is to be guaranteed;
            6.   How maintenance and development are to be financed;
            7.   Proposed uses of open land;
            8.   What improvements are to be constructed by the developer and
an estimate of the cost thereof prepared by a consulting engineer or architect;
            9.   Other relevant facts related to the proposed uses of open
land.
         (c)   The application shall contain a statement of the benefits to be
realized by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the city by approval
of the proposed subdivision option with particular reference to the objectives
as stated in this section.
      (3)   Before any action is taken upon any subdivision option filing,
copies of the preliminary plat, application and supporting data shall be
submitted by the City Clerk to the City Planner and to the City Attorney for
review and recommendation.
         (a)   The City Planner shall review and render an opinion upon the
proposed subdivision option from the materials furnished and from visits to the
site or such other information as he may deem necessary and render his opinion
with respect to the following:
            1.   The suitability of the proposed open land for purposes
proposed;
            2.   The need for the proposed uses in the general area;
            3.   The location and layout of the open spaces with relation to
the lots within the subdivision;
            4.   The effect upon neighboring areas which would result by the
subdivision option and the appropriateness of the development of the lot sizes
proposed under the subdivision option in the particular area involved;
            5.   Any other factor related to the development and proper design
of the proposed subdivision.
         (b)   The City Attorney shall review the proposed subdivision option
and render his opinion with respect to the following:
            1.   The proposed manner of holding title to the open land;
            2.   The proposed manner of payment of taxes;
            3.   The proposed method of regulating the use of open land;
            4.   The proposed method of maintenance of property and financing
thereof;
            5.   Any other factor related to the legal or practical problems of
ownership, use and maintenance of the open land.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission is satisfied that the proposed
subdivision option meets the letter and spirit of this section and the zoning
chapter and should be approved, it shall give tentative approval to the plat
with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. Thereafter, the
City Council shall take action upon such application in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   If the Planning Commission is not satisfied that the proposed
subdivision option meets the letter and spirit of the zoning chapter or finds
that the approval of the subdivision option will be detrimental to existing
development in the general area and should not be approved, it shall
communicate such disapproval to the City Council with the reasons therefor. The
proprietor shall be entitled to a hearing upon the proposal before the City
Council upon written request therefor filed with the City Clerk.
      (6)   If the City Council gives preliminary approval of the proposed
subdivision option, it shall instruct the City Attorney to prepare a contract
setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which contract,
after approval thereof by the City Council, shall be entered into between the
city and the proprietor prior to the approval of any final plat based upon the
approved preliminary plat.
      (7)   At the time of application for final approval, the proprietor shall
deposit a cash or corporate surety bond in the amount of the estimated cost of
the proposed improvements to the open land guaranteeing the completion of such
improvements within a time to be set by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 62-62)
§§ 62-63 – 62-85 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. IMPROVEMENTS
§ 62-86 STANDARDS; BOND.
   (A)   The subdivision improvements set forth in this article are to be
considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which
standards are not specifically set forth shall have standards set by ordinance
or published rules of the City Council. All improvements must meet the approval
of the City Council.
   (B)   Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall
deposit with the City Clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter
of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the
City Council to ensure faithful completion of all improvements within the time
specified. The amount of the deposit shall be set by the City Council based on
an estimate by the engineer. All improvements shall be constructed and approved
by the city before the final plat is approved. The City Council shall release
funds for the payment of work as it is completed and approved by the city.
   (C)   Prior to the acceptance by the city of improvements, a 2 year
maintenance bond in an amount set by the City Council shall be posted by the
proprietor.
   (D)   Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with
the standards and requirements established in this article or any other such
standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by
ordinance or published rules of the city.
(1993 Code, § 62-86)
§ 62-87 STREETS.
   (A)   Construction requirements. All streets and appurtenances thereto in
subdivisions shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications
approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Street pavement width standards.
   (C)   Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be in accordance with
details and specifications prescribed by the City Council.
   (D)   Roadway pavements. Roadway pavements shall be in accordance with
details and specifications prescribed by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 62-87)
Street Type Pavement Width (Measured from back of curb to back of curb)
Street Type                          Pavement Width (Measured from back of curb
                                     to back of curb)
                                     In conformance with the standards and
Major thoroughfare                   specifications established by the City
                                     Engineer or the City Council. This width
                                     is generally established as 48 feet
Collector streets                    41 feet
Industrial streets                   41 feet
Multiple family residential streets  36 feet
(where dedicated)
Minor residential streets            31 feet
Marginal access streets              20 feet
Turnaround (loop) streets            Not less than 80 foot diameter at
                                     terminating loop, 36 foot wide pavement
Alley                                20 feet
Cul-de-sac streets, turnarounds
   a.   Industrial             65 foot radius
   b.   Residential and others 45 foot radius
 
§ 62-88 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make
arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and other
similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely
throughout a subdivided area, except for a major thoroughfare right-of-way.
Such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to
such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways,
provided only that overhead lines may be permitted upon written recommendation
of the engineer, planner, Planning Commission and the approval of the City
Council at the time of final plat approval where it is determined that overhead
lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare,
plat design and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in
dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other
underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with standards of construction approved by the State Public Service Commission.
All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately
owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor.
   (B)   Storm drainage systems and other drainage improvements. Storm drainage
systems and other drainage improvements shall be per plans approved by the City
Council. Where county drains are involved, a letter or document of approval
from the County Commission must be submitted by the proprietor.
   (C)   Sewage disposal. Sewage disposal shall be per plans approved by the
City Council and the requirements of the County Health Board or other
appropriate public health authority.
   (D)   Water supply. The water distribution system shall be per plans
approved by the City Council and in conformance with the regulations of the
State Department of Health relating to city water supplies.
(1993 Code, § 62-88)
§ 62-89 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Sidewalks shall be required in all subdivisions. Financial security
will be required, in an amount and type to be determined by the City Council.
The time table within which the developer must complete all sidewalk
construction shall be determined by City Council. Exceptions may be granted by
the Planning Commission upon application by subdivider. Subdividers are
required to submit any requested documentation supporting the exception to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission must find that there is no harm to
the public good by failure to construct sidewalks. Additionally, the Planning
Commission must specifically find that all of the following conditions exist:
the subdivisions contains no more than 9 buildable lots, the road is located on
a cul-de-sac, and there is no reasonable likelihood for the cul-de-sac to be
connected to a public or private road now or in the future.
   (B)   Any appeals may be made to the City Council within 30 days, whose
decision shall be final. Review by the City Council shall be limited to whether
the Planning Commission made the appropriate findings based upon the
requirements of this section.
(1993 Code, § 62-89) (Ord. passed 10-9-2000(1))
§ 62-90 PUBLIC WALKWAYS.
   Walkways in subdivisions shall be at least 12 feet in width. Planting
pockets shall be provided in public walkways for tree and shrub planting. The
planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of the Planning
Commission. Fences or other improvements may also be required if the Planning
Commission or City Council determines they are necessary to protect the
adjacent property owners.
(1993 Code, § 62-90)
§ 62-91 TREES.
   Existing trees in a subdivision near a street right- of-way shall be
preserved by the subdivider. Street trees shall be provided at least 1 per lot
in the street right-of-way between the sidewalk and curb in accordance with
regulations established by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 62-91)
§ 62-92 STREET SIGNS.
   Street name signs in subdivisions shall be placed at all street
intersections and shall be of a permanent weather-resistant construction, with
street names visible from 2 directions, as approved by the City Council.
Traffic regulation signs, as may be required, will be located as required by
the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 62-92)
§§ 62-93 – 62-116 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. COMPLIANCE STANDARDS
§ 62-116 APPROVAL.
   The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements
within the city, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of- way and
public easements or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All
subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public
streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements or under the
ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions and
requirements of this chapter or any other related ordinance.
(1993 Code, § 62-116)
§§ 62-117 – 62-135 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI. VARIANCES
§ 62-136 VARIANCE FOR HARDSHIP.
   (A)   The City Council or Planning Commission may authorize a variance from
this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance and provided the variance does not pertain to requirements of the
zoning chapter. In granting any variance, the City Council or Planning
Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or
desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required below in
this section, the City Council or Planning Commission shall take into account
the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the
vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision
and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in
the vicinity.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the City Council or Planning
Commission finds that:
      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land;
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner;
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property
is situated.
(1993 Code, § 62-136)
§ 62-137 VARIANCE FOR COMPLETE COMMUNITY.
   The City Council may authorize a variance from this chapter in case of a
plan for a complete community where such development is permitted by the zoning
chapter.
(1993 Code, § 62-137)
ARTICLE VII. PARTIAL LOT OR LOT CONVEYANCE WITHIN APPROVED PLATS
§ 62-138 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   PARTIAL LOT or LOT CONVEYANCE. The conveyance of 1 lot or parcel or a
portion of that lot or parcel to the owner of an adjoining lot or parcel
without changing or in any way modifying the existing plat.
(1993 Code, § 62-138) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(2))
§ 62-139 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Application. Before any partial lot or lot conveyance is made pursuant
to this section, an application therefore shall be filed with the Zoning
Official, on a form approved by the Zoning Official which will include the
following information, together with any additional information or materials
required by the Zoning Official or the Planning Commission.
      (1)   A legal description of the lots or parcels affected and created by
the partial lot or lot conveyance, which legal descriptions shall, if required
by the Zoning Official or Planning Commission, be certified as accurate by a
registered land surveyor.
      (2)   A survey or drawing showing the dimensions of the lots or parcels
affected and created by the location of public water and sewer, the location of
all structures and the location of the nearest public street.
      (3)   The signatures by all parties of interest in the affected lots or
parcels below a statement reciting that they consent to the partial lot or lot
conveyance.
      (4)   Information satisfactory to the Zoning Official that the person(s)
signing the application are all of the parties of interest in the lots or
parcels affected by the proposed partial lot or lot conveyance.
      (5)   A statement by the owner(s) of the lot or parcel to which the
property is to be added as a result of the partial lot or lot conveyance,
stating the anticipated use of the property conveyed.
   (B)   Partial lot or lot conveyance. The Zoning Official shall, after making
a determination that all requirements of this section, this article and the
zoning ordinance for the city have been met, forward the application for a
partial lot or lot conveyance to the Planning Commission. If the Planning
Commission approves the partial lot or lot conveyance, no further city approval
shall be necessary.
   (C)   Disapproval. If the Planning Commission disapproves a request for a
partial lot or lot conveyance, the Planning Commission decision may be appealed
by the applicant to the City Council by filing an application for review. An
application for review by the City Council must be filed with the City Manager
not later than 10 business days after the issuance of the Planning Commission
decision. Decisions of the Planning Commission not appealed during the time
period allowed for appeal and decisions of the City Council upon review are
final. Applications for partial lot or lot conveyance will not be accepted for
a period of 1 year following a final decision to disapprove such an
application.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a partial lot or lot conveyance pursuant to
this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an
amount equal to that established by the city for a special condition use
request.
   (E)   Violations. No conveyance of property with the effect of altering a
partial lot or lot conveyance shall be recognized by the City Assessor, City
Treasurer, or Zoning Official without obtaining approval pursuant to the
section.
(1993 Code, § 62-139) (Ord. passed 5-9-1994(2))
§§ 62-140 – 62-160 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII. REVIEW FEES
§ 62-161 PAYMENT.
   Preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees,
inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable
development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as may be provided in this
article or by ordinance or resolution of the City Council from time to time.
(1993 Code, § 62-161)
Editor's note:
   An ordinance adopted May 9, 1994, added a new Art. VII and renumbered
existing Art. VII as Art. VIII.
§ 62-162 PLANNING REVIEW FEES.
   (A)   Fees shall be charged for the review of subdivision preliminary plats
on the basis of the following schedule or as set by City Council resolution.
   (B)   There shall be no additional planning review fee charged for final
plats which are in substantial conformance to a previously approved preliminary
plat:
      (1)   Conventional subdivision plats, $250, plus $2 per lot;
      (2)   Subdivision open space plan, $250, plus $2 per lot;
      (3)   Multiple-family residential plats, $250, plus $2 per individual
dwelling unit.
(1993 Code, § 62-162)
§ 62-163 OTHER FEES.
   (A)   Generally. Fees shall be charged under the provisions of this chapter
for engineering and city review, city inspection and administration, water and
sewer connection charges and other fees on the basis as set by City Council
resolution.
   (B)   Other agencies. The proprietor shall be responsible for fees to
various other agencies.
(1993 Code, § 62-163)
CHAPTER 63: RESERVED
CHAPTER 64: TAX EXEMPTION
Section
Article I: Sugar Mill Apartments
   
64-1   In general
   
64-2   Preamble
   
64-3   Definitions
   
64-4   Class of housing development
   
64-5   Establishment of annual service charge
   
64-6   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge
   
64-7   Contractual effect of article
   
64-8   Payment of service charge
   
64-9   Duration
   
64-10   Severability
Article II: Edmond Senior Apartments on  South Washington Street
   
64-11   In general
   
64-12   Preamble
   
64-13   Definitions
   
64-14   Class of housing development
   
64-15   Establishment of annual service charge
   
64-16   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge
   
64-17   Contractual effect of article
   
64-18   Payment of service charge
   
64-19   Duration
   
64-20   Severability
Article III: Butternut Creek Preservation LDHA Family Housing Development
at 535 Lansing Street
   
64-21   In general
   
64-22   Preamble
   
64-23   Definitions
   
64-24   Class of housing development
   
64-25   Establishment of annual service charge
   
64-26   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge
   
64-27   Contractual effect of article
   
64-28   Payment of service charge
   
64-29   Duration
   
64-30   Severability
ARTICLE I. SUGAR MILL APARTMENTS
§ 64-1 IN GENERAL.
   This article shall be known and cited as the “City of Charlotte Tax
Exemption Ordinance for Sugar Mill Apartments Complex on Maynard Street.”
(1993 Code, § 64-1) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 64-2 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966), Public Act 346 of 1966,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended. The city is authorized by this
Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by
any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount
it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that such housing is a public necessity, and as the city
will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same
by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid
public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provision of this article,
for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period
contemplated in this article, are essential to the determination of economic
feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in
reliance on such tax exemption.
   (B)   The city acknowledges that Sugar Mill Limited Dividend Housing
Association, Michigan Limited Partnership, ("the sponsor") has offered subject
to receipt of a mortgage loan from the Michigan State Housing Development
Authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Sugar
Mill Apartments (the "housing development") on certain property located on the
100 Block of Maynard Street in the city to serve senior citizens of low to
moderate income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city, on account
of this housing development, an annual service charge for public services in
lieu of taxes.
(1993 Code, § 64-2) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of
1966 of the State of Michigan, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended.
   ANNUAL SHELTER RENT. The total collections during an agreed annual period
from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy
charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities
furnished to the occupants.
   AUTHORITY. The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   ELDERLY PERSONS. A family where the head of household is 62 years of age or
older or a single person who is 62 years of age or older. Also includes persons
of any age who are handicapped or disabled.
   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. A development which contains a significant element of
housing for persons of low to moderate income and such elements of other
housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational
facilities as the Authority determines improves the quality of the development
as it relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income.
   MORTGAGE LOAN. A loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for the
construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development.
   SPONSOR. Person(s) or entities which have applied to the Authority for a
mortgage loan to finance a housing development.
   UTILITIES. Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service,
which are paid by the housing development.
(1993 Code, § 64-3) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-4 CLASS OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   It is determined that the class of housing development to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be senior housing which is financed or assisted pursuant to
the Act. It is further determined that Sugar Mills Apartments is of this class.
(1993 Code, § 64-4) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-5 ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   The housing development identified as Sugar Mills Apartments and the
property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property
taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging
that the sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of
the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of
this article, the qualification of the housing development for exemption from
all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this
article in consideration of the sponsors offer, subject to receipt of a
mortgage loan from the Authority, to construct, own and operate the housing
development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public
services in lieu of all property taxes.
   (B)   The annual service charge shall be the greater of the following:
      (1)   Fourteen percent (14%) of the difference between the annual shelter
rents actually collected and utilities; or
      (2)   A minimum payment determined as follows. In the first year of
operation, the minimum payment shall be $35,900, prorated on a daily basis from
the date the final occupancy permit is issued through the next August 31. Each
year thereafter, this payment shall be adjusted annually by the lesser of: 5%;
or the increase or decrease in the general price level for the preceding year,
as defined in the Michigan Constitution, § 33. The general price level is also
the same percentage used to calculate the taxable property value by the City
Tax Assessor.
(1993 Code, § 64-5) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2017-09, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-6 LIMITATION ON THE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §
64-5, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of
the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than
low to moderate income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of
the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the
housing development were not tax exempt.
   (B)   The term LOW TO MODERATE PERSONS as used herein means, with respect to
any housing development that is tax-exempt, senior persons are eligible to move
into that development.
(1993 Code, § 64-6) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-7 CONTRACTUAL EFFECT OF ARTICLE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a
contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party
beneficiary under the contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in
lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this
article.
(1993 Code, § 64-7) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-8 PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall
be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city
except that the annual payment will be paid on or before August 31 each year.
(1993 Code, § 64-8) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-9 DURATION.
   This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the Authority has any interest
in the property; provided, that construction of the housing development
commences within one year from the effective date of this article.
(1993 Code, § 64-9) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-10 SEVERABILITY.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. It is hereby amplified that it is the city's
intent to accept a payment in lieu of taxes only for the purpose of a senior
development. If the property is ever used for another purpose, or if this
article is unacceptable to any state agencies, this article is declared null
and void.
(1993 Code, § 64-10) (Ord. passed 8-12-2002(2); Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017;
Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
ARTICLE II. EDMOND  SENIOR APARTMENTS ON
SOUTH WASHINGTON STREET
§ 64-11 IN GENERAL.
   This article shall be known and cited as the “City of Charlotte Tax
Exemption Ordinance for the Edmond Senior Apartments on South Washington
Street.”
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 64-12 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966), Public Act 346 of 1966,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended. The city is authorized by this
Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by
any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount
it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that such housing is a public necessity, and as the city
will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same
by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid
public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provision of this article,
for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period
contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of economic
feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in
reliance on such tax exemption.
   (B)   The city acknowledges that the sponsor, as defined in this article, is
a limited dividend housing association limited partnership and has offered,
subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC) Program and a federally aided mortgage (as defined in the Act) to
construct, own and operate the housing development project to be known as the
Edmond Senior Apartments located in the city to serve low income persons, as
defined herein, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of
this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu
of all ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-13 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of
1966 of the State of Michigan, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended.
   ANNUAL SHELTER RENT. The total collections during an agreed annual period
from or paid on behalf of all low income persons, as defined herein, of the
housing development project, representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive
of charges for utilities, as defined herein.
   AUTHORITY. The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   CITY. The City of Charlotte, a Michigan municipal corporation.
   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The commencement of the housing development,
as defined herein.
   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. The project being constructed at the housing
development location, consisting of a building to include qualified low income
residential apartment units, including approximately 50 units reserved for low
income persons and such recreational, industrial, communal and educational
facilities as the sponsor and/or Authority determine will improve the quality
of the housing development project as it relates to housing for senior persons.
   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT LOCATION. Lots 7, 8, 11, 12, 15, 16 and the west 30 feet
6 inches of Lot 17, the dividing line being the center of a block wall, and the
vacated alley south of Lot 15 and the west 1/2 of the vacated alley adjacent to
Lots 7, 8, 11,  12 and 15 of the Cummings Subdivision to the original plat,
City of Charlotte, Michigan and Lots 9, 10, 13, 14, the east 11 feet 1/5 inches
of Lot 17, the dividing line being the center of a block wall, Lots 18, 19, 20,
the vacated alley south of Lot 14 and the east 1/2 of the vacated alley
adjacent to Lots 9, 10, 13 and 14 of the Cummings Subdivision to the original
plat, City of Charlotte, Michigan.
   LOW INCOME PERSONS. Senior persons eligible to move into the housing
development project pursuant to the Act and the Authority.
   MORTGAGE LOAN. A loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for the
construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development.
   SENIOR PERSONS. Single persons who are 55 years of age or older or a
household in which at least one member is 55 years of age.
   SPONSOR. The Edmond Senior Apartments Limited Dividend Housing Association
Limited Partnership, 333 North Pennsylvania Street, Suite 100, Indianapolis,
Indiana, who shall act as the owner of the housing development project.
   UTILITIES. Fuel, water, heat sanitary sewer service and/or electrical
service furnished to the occupants which are paid by the housing development
project.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-14 CLASS OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   It is determined that the class of housing development to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be senior housing which are financed or assisted pursuant to
the Act. It is further determined that the Edmond Senior Apartments are of this
class.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-15 ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this article, the housing development
project and the housing development location shall be exempt from all property
taxes for the period specified in §
64-19. The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the Authority have
established the economic feasibility of the housing development project in
reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this agreement and
qualification of the housing development project for the exemption from all
property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article.
Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor's offer to construct, own and
operate the housing development project, the city has agreed to accept payment
of an annual service charge, as defined below, for public services in lieu of
all ad valorem property taxes as provided for in §
64-15(C) provided the sponsor furnishes proof, on an annual basis upon request
by the city, that the number of qualified low income units in the housing
development project have not increased, decreased, or been altered in any
material form unless the city has otherwise amended the provisions of this
article.
   (B)   In addition to the annual certified verification requirement in §
64-15(A), the tax exemption shall commence upon the acquisition of the housing
development location by the sponsor. The sponsor of the housing development
project eligible for exemption, or the city as appropriate and necessary, shall
file with the local assessing officer a certified notification of the
exemption, which shall be in an affidavit form by either the Authority, the
city and/or the sponsor as appropriate. The completed affidavit form first
shall be submitted to the Authority for certification by the Authority that the
housing development project is eligible for the exemption. The sponsor and/or
the city shall file or cause to be filed the certified notification of the
exemption with the local assessing officer as soon as practically possible.
   (C)   The annual service charge shall be equal to 10% of the difference
between the annual shelter rent actually collected and utilities (the "service
charge").
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-16 LIMITATION ON THE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   Notwithstanding §
64-15, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for any part of
the housing development which is tax exempt and occupied by other than low
income persons shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be
due and payable on that portion of the housing development project if the
project were not tax exempt.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-17 CONTRACTUAL EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a
contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party
beneficiary under the contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in
lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this
article.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-18 PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall
be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city
except that the annual payment will be paid on or before June 30 of the year
following the calendar year upon which such service charge is calculated and
shall be distributed to the several units levying ad valorem property taxes in
the same proportion as for said taxes. Failure to pay the service charge on or
before June 30 of each year shall result in the service charge being subject to
1% interest per month until paid. If any amount of the annual service charge or
accrued interest shall remain unpaid as of December 31 of any year, the amount
unpaid shall be a lien upon the real property constituting the housing
development project upon the City Treasurer filing a certificate of non-payment
of the service charge, together with an affidavit of proof of service of the
certificate of non-payment upon the sponsor with the Eaton County Register of
Deeds, and proceedings may then be had to enforce the lien as provided by law
for the foreclosure of tax liens upon real property.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-19 DURATION.
   This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
housing development project continues to be used for low income persons as
provided in this article, but not to exceed 50 years; provided, however, if
construction of the housing development project does not commence within one
year of the Authority's LIHTC April 1, 2017 funding round award date, which is
anticipated to be on or about July 1, 2017, or if the sponsor materially
changes the scope or purpose of the housing development project with the
consent of the city, by and through its representatives, and in accordance with
the requirements of law, this article shall automatically expire, terminate and
be of no further effect.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 64-20 SEVERABILITY.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. It is hereby amplified that it is the city's
intent to accept a payment in lieu of taxes only for the purpose of a senior
development. If the property is ever used for another purpose, or if this
article is unacceptable to any state agencies, this article is declared null
and void.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-09, passed 12-14-2020)
ARTICLE III. BUTTERNUT CREEK PRESERVATION LDHA FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
AT 535 LANSING STREET
§ 64-21 IN GENERAL.
   This division shall be known and cited as the "City of Charlotte Tax
Exemption Ordinance for the Butternut Creek MI Limited Dividend Housing
Association Limited Partnership family housing development at 535 Lansing
Street.”
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023; Ord. 2023-03, passed 4-3-2023)
§ 64-22 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966) Public Act 346 of 1966,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended. The city is authorized by this
Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by
any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount
it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that such housing is a public necessity, and as the city
will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same
by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid
public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provision of the chapter,
for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period
contemplated in this chapter are essential to the determination of economic
feasibility of housing developments which are constructed, rehabilitated and
financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
   (B)   The city acknowledges that the sponsor, as defined in this article, is
a limited dividend housing association limited partnership and has offered,
subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC) Program and a Housing Assistance Payment Contract with the Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development to rehabilitate, own and operate
the proposed Housing Rehabilitation Project at 535 Lansing Street in the city
to serve low income persons, as defined herein, and that the sponsor has
offered to pay the city on account of this housing rehabilitation an annual
service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 64-23 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of
1966 of the State of Michigan, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended.
   ANNUAL SHELTER RENT. The total collections during an agreed annual period
from or paid on behalf of all low-income persons, as defined herein of the
housing development project representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive
of charges for utilities, as defined herein.
   AUTHORITY. The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   CITY. The City of Charlotte, a Michigan municipal corporation.
   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The commencement of the housing
rehabilitation, as defined herein.
   HOUSING REHABILITATION PROJECT. The project being rehabilitated at the
housing rehabilitation location, consisting of multiple buildings to include
qualified low-income residential apartment units including approximately 100
units reserved for low income persons and such recreational, industrial,
communal and educational facilities as the sponsor and/or authority determine
will improve the quality of the housing rehabilitation project as it relates to
housing for low income persons.
   HOUSING REHABILITATION LOCATION. 535 Lansing Street, Parcel No. 200-0007-
400-081-00, legally described as Com 810.89 ft S of center Sec.7, N 35 deg 26
min 21 sec E 410.00 ft, S 54 deg 33 min 39 sec E 383.98 ft, S 63 deg 20 min 20
sec E 123.78 ft, S 35 deg 26 min 21 sec W 174.89 ft, S 54 deg 33 min 39 sec E
429 ft, SWLY on C/L Lansing Rd 238 ft, N 54 deg 33 min 39 sec W 429 ft, S 35
deg 26 min 21 sec W 16 ft, N 54 deg 33 min 39 sec W 506.31 ft to beg. Sec.7,
T2N, R4W, City of Charlotte 1980.
   LOW INCOME PERSONS. Persons eligible to move into the housing rehabilitation
project pursuant to the Act and the authority.
   SPONSOR. Butternut Creek MI Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited
Partnership.
   UTILITIES. Fuel, water, heat, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical
service furnished to the occupants which are paid by the Housing Development
Project.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023; Am. Ord. 2023-03, passed 4-3-2023)
§ 64-24 CLASS OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   It is determined that the class of housing development to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be family housing which are financed or assisted pursuant to
the Act. It is further determined that the proposed sponsor project at this
location is of this class.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023; Am. Ord. 2023-03, passed 4-3-2023)
§ 64-25 ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this article, the housing rehabilitation
project and the housing rehabilitation location shall be exempt from all
property taxes for the period specified in §
64-29. The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have
established the economic feasibility of the housing rehabilitation project in
reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this agreement and
qualification of the housing rehabilitation project for the exemption from all
property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article.
Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor’s offer to rehabilitate, own and
operate the housing rehabilitation project, the city has agreed to accept
payment of an annual service charge, as defined below, for public services in
lieu of all ad valorem property taxes as provided for in §
64-25(C) provided the sponsor furnishes proof, on an annual basis upon request
by the city, that the number of qualified low income units in the housing
rehabilitation project have not increased, decreased, or been altered in any
material form unless the city has otherwise amended the provisions of this
article.
   (B)   The sponsor of the housing rehabilitation project eligible for
exemption, or the city as appropriate and necessary, shall file with the local
assessing officer a certified notification of the exemption, which shall be in
an affidavit form by either the authority, the city and/or the sponsor as
appropriate. The completed affidavit form first shall be submitted to the
authority for certification by the authority that the housing development
project is eligible for the exemption. The sponsor and/or the city shall file
or cause to be filed the certified notification of the exemption with the local
assessing officer as soon as practically possible.
   (C)   The annual service charge shall be equal to 10% of the difference
between the annual shelter rent actually collected and utilities (the “service
charge.”)
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 64-26 LIMITATION ON THE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   Notwithstanding §
64-25, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for any part of
the housing development which is tax exempt and occupied by other than low
income persons shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be
due and payable on that portion of the housing development project if the
project were not tax exempt.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 64-27 CONTRACTUAL EFFECT OF ARTICLE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a
contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party
beneficiary under the contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in
lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this
article.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 64-28 PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the article shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city
except that the annual payment will be paid on or before June 30 of the year
following the calendar year upon which such service charge is calculated and
shall be distributed to the several units levying ad valorem property taxes in
the same proportion as for said taxes. Failure to pay the service charge on or
before June 30 of each year shall result in the service charge being subject to
1% interest per month until paid. If any amount of the annual service charge or
accrued interest shall remain unpaid as of December 31 of any year, the amount
unpaid shall be a lien upon the real property constituting the housing
rehabilitation project upon the City Treasurer filing a certificate of non-
payment of the service charge, together with an affidavit of proof of service
of the certificate of non-payment upon the sponsor with the Eaton County
Register of Deeds, and proceedings may then be had to enforce the lien as
provided by law for the foreclosure of tax liens upon real property.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 64-29 DURATION.
   This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
housing development project continues to be used for low income persons as
provided in this article, but not to exceed 30 years; provided, however, if
construction of the housing rehabilitation project does not commence within one
year of the adoption date of this article, or if the sponsor materially changes
the scope or purpose of the housing rehabilitation project without the consent
of the city, by and through its representatives, and in accordance with the
requirements of law, this article shall automatically expire, terminate and be
of no further effect.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 64-30 SEVERABILITY.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. It is hereby amplified that it is the city's
intent to accept a payment in lieu of taxes only for the purpose of the
rehabilitation of qualifying affordable family housing. If the property is ever
used for another purpose, or if this article is unacceptable to any state
agencies, this article is declared null and void.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-3-2023)
CHAPTER 65: RESERVED
CHAPTER 66: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section
Article I. In General
   
66-1   Proof of insurance
   
66-2   Valid registration
   
66-3   Snowmobile operation
   
66-4   Prohibited commercial vehicle
Article II. Michigan Vehicle Code
   
66-31   Code adopted
   
66-32   References in code
   
66-33   Adoption of the Michigan Vehicle Code, M.C.L. § 257.625(1)(c)
Article III. Uniform Traffic Code
   
66-100   Uniform Traffic Code and amendments and revisions adopted
   
66-101   References in code
   
66-102   Changes in code
   
66-103   Penalty
Article IV. Motor Carrier Safety Act
   
66-200   Motor Carrier Safety Act adopted
   
66-201   Local amendments
Cross-reference:
   Offenses, see
Chapter 34;
   Open storage of inoperable motor vehicles, see §§
52-41 et seq.;
   Streets, sidewalks and other public places, see
Chapter 58;
   Vehicles for hire, see
Chapter 74
Statutory reference:
   Michigan Vehicle Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 et seq.;
   Regulation by local authorities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.605, 257.606, 257.610
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 66-1 PROOF OF INSURANCE.
   (A)   The owner or operator who operates or permits the operation of a motor
vehicle upon the highways of this state shall produce, upon the request of a
police officer, evidence that the motor vehicle is insured under M.C.L.A. §§
500.3101 through 500.3179. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who fails to
produce such evidence when requested is responsible for a civil infraction.
   (B)   A certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company which states
that security meeting the requirements of M.C.L.A. §§ 500.3101, 500.3102, is in
force shall be prima facie evidence that insurance is in force until the
expiration date. The certificate shall describe the motor vehicles, the name of
each person named on the policy and a policy declaration.
   (C)   If an owner is determined to be responsible for a violation of
subsection (A) of this section, the court may require the person to surrender
his operator's or chauffeur's license, unless proof of insurance is submitted
to the court.
(1993 Code, § 66-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 257.328
§ 66-2 VALID REGISTRATION.
   (A)   A person shall not operate nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be
operated, on any highway, a vehicle required to be registered, unless there is
attached to and displayed on the vehicle a valid registration plate issued for
the vehicle for the current registration year. A plate is not required on any
wrecked or disabled vehicle being transported or towed.
   (B)   A person who violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by a fine
of not more than $100. However, if it is a commercial vehicle required to be
registered under the schedule of elected gross vehicle weights, the fine which
may be imposed shall not exceed $500.
(1993 Code, § 66-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 257.255
§ 66-3 SNOWMOBILE OPERATION.
   A person shall not operate a snowmobile upon a public highway, land used as
an airport or street or on a public or private parking lot not specifically
designated for the use of snowmobiles except under the following conditions and
circumstances.
      (1)   A snowmobile may be operated on the right-of-way of a public
highway, except a limited access highway, if it is operated at the extreme
right of the open portion of the right-of-way and with the flow of traffic on
the highway. Snowmobiles operated on the right-of-way of a public highway shall
travel single file and shall not be operated abreast except when overtaking and
passing another snowmobile.
      (2)   A snowmobile may be operated on the roadway or shoulder when
necessary to cross a bridge or culvert if the snowmobile is brought to a
complete stop before entering onto the roadway or shoulder and the driver
yields the right-of-way to an approaching vehicle on the highway.
      (3)   In a court action in this state where competent evidence
demonstrates that a vehicle which is permitted to be operated on a highway
pursuant to the Michigan Vehicle Act (M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 et seq.) is in a
collision with a snowmobile on a roadway, the driver of the snowmobile involved
in the collision shall be considered prima facie negligent.
      (4)   A snowmobile may be operated across a public highway, other than a
limited access highway, at right angles to the highway for the purpose of
getting from 1 area to another when the operation can be done in safety and
another vehicle is not crossing the highway at the same time in the same
general area. An operator shall bring his snowmobile to a complete stop before
proceeding across the public highway and shall yield the right-of-way to all
oncoming traffic.
      (5)   A duly constituted law enforcement officer of a city, village,
township, county or the state may authorize use of a snowmobile on a public
highway or street within his jurisdiction when an emergency occurs and
conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for transportation due to snow or
other extreme highway conditions.
      (6)   A snowmobile may be operated on a street or highway for a special
event of limited duration conducted according to a prearranged schedule only
under permit from the City Council. The event may be conducted on the frozen
surface of public waters only under permit from the department of natural
resources.
(1993 Code, § 66-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 324.82101 et seq.
§ 66-4 PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
   (A)   When signs are erected giving notice, a person shall not operate,
stop, stand or park any semi- tractor and/or semi-trailer on any of the streets
or parts of the streets on which such signs have been posted except for local
residential delivery of products or services.
   (B)   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, SEMI- TRACTOR and SEMI-TRAILER, as used in this
section, means those vehicles as defined in the Uniform Traffic Code of the
city.
   (C)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(1993 Code, § 66-4) (Ord. passed 8-26-1996)
§§ 66-5 -- 66-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
§ 66-31 CODE ADOPTED.
   The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (M.C.L.A.§§ 257.1
through 257.923), including all amendments effective as of the date of
publication of notice of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article,
and including all amendments thereafter made to the Michigan Vehicle Code, is
hereby re-adopted by reference as a traffic code of the city. Amendments made
to the Michigan Vehicle Code shall become effective as adopted by reference
herein, effective as the same day they become effective in the Michigan Vehicle
Code.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2008)
§ 66-32 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code adopted in this article to
"governmental unit" shall mean the City of Charlotte.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2008)
§ 66-33 ADOPTION OF THE MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE, M.C.L. § 257.625(1)(c).
   (A)   Adoption. The Michigan Vehicle Code, PA 1949 No. 300, as amended,
being § 257.625(1)(c) of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and the Michigan Uniform
Traffic Code (except when not in conformity with the Michigan Motor Vehicle
Code) pursuant to M.C.L. § 257.951 and pursuant to M.C.L. §§ 117.3(k) and
117.4i(k), is hereby adopted and amends the city motor vehicle ordinance.
   (B)   Penalties. A violation of the prohibited conduct in M.C.L. § 257.625
(1)(c), which has been adopted in this section and the city code, is a
misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
      (1)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.
      (2)   Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.
      (3)   A fine of not less than $200 or more than $700.
   (C)   Reference to local authorities. References in the Michigan Vehicle
Code to “local authorities” or “local units of government” or “police agency”
or any similar reference referring to local government shall be deemed to refer
to the city, its police officers and Police Department, and any other personnel
authorized to enforce the city motor vehicle ordinance.
   (D)   Copies of vehicle ordinance. At the time of adoption of the ordinance
adopted in this section, sufficient copies of the motor vehicle code adopted
hereby and amendments thereto shall be made available for public use at a
reasonable charge at the office of the city.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 2-6-2023)
§§ 66-34 -- 66-99 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
§ 66-100 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages, as promulgated
by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police, pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, M.C.L.A §§ 24.201 to
24.328, and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and
revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective
in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the provisions
of the Uniform Traffic Code, as hereafter modified by this article, the
provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control.
(1993 Code, § 66-31) (Ord. passed 2-14-2000(2); Ord. passed 9-22-2003; Ord.
passed 11-22-2004; Ord. passed 4-14-2008)
§ 66-101 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Uniform Traffic Code to a "governmental unit" shall mean
the City of Charlotte.
(1993 Code, § 66-32) (Ord. passed 11-22-2004; Ord. passed 4-14-2008)
§ 66-102 CHANGES IN CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code adopted
in this article are hereby amended or deleted as set forth in this section, and
additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section
numbers used in this article shall refer to the like-numbered section of the
Uniform Traffic Code.
   Section 28.1103 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1103. Authority of firefighters directing traffic. Members of the
fire department, when at the scene of a fire or in the immediate vicinity
thereof, or in the immediate vicinity of the fire station, may direct or assist
police in directing traffic.
      Section 28.1160 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160. Reports of stolen and recovered vehicles. A police agency,
upon receiving reliable information that any vehicle registered under this act
has been stolen, shall immediately report the theft through the law enforcement
information network. Upon receiving information that a vehicle previously
reported as stolen has been recovered, the police agency shall immediately
report the fact of the recovery through the law enforcement information
network.
      Section 28.1160a is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160a. Abandoned vehicle procedures.
      (1)   As used in this section, "abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle which
has remained on public property or private property for a period of 48 hours
after a police agency or other governmental agency designated by the police
agency has affixed a written notice to the vehicle.
      (2)   If a vehicle has remained on public or private property for a
period of time so that it appears to the police agency to be abandoned, the
police agency shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)   Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall
contain the following information:
            (i)   The date and time the notice was affixed.
            (ii)   The name and address of the police agency taking the action.
            (iii)   The name and badge number of the police officer affixing
the notice.
            (iv)   The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and
stored at the owner's expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed.
            (v)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle, if available.
      (3)   If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours after the date the
notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the police agency may
have the vehicle taken into custody.
      (4)   A police agency which has a vehicle taken into custody shall do all
of the following:
         (a)   Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)   Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the
vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information network.
         (c)   Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to
the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the
secretary of state, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished
by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following
information:
            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle if available.
            (ii)   The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iii)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iv)   The name and address of the police agency which had the
vehicle taken into custody.
            (v)   The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
            (vi)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
            (vii)   The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been
deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage
fees.
            (viii)   A form petition which the owner may file in person or by
mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's
action.
            (ix)   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
request a hearing, within 20 days after the date of the notice, may result in
the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the
secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale.
      (5)   The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle has been
deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage
fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a
petition with the court specified in the notice within20 days after the date of
the notice.
If the owner requests a hearing, the mattershall be resolved after a hearing
conductedpursuant to sections 28.1160e and28.1160f. An owner who requests a
hearingmay obtainrelease of the vehiclebyposting a towingand storage bond in an
amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner
of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying
the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If
the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police
agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and
storage fees.
      (6)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (7)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing
within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle and the police agency for its accrued costs.
      (8)   Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing
described in subsection (5) or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20
days after the date of the notice, the police agency shall offer the vehicle
for sale at a public sale pursuant to section 28.1160g.
      (9)   If the ownership of a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under
this section cannot be determined, either because of the condition of the
vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the
secretary of state does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the
vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 28.1160g, not less than 30 days
after public notice of the sale has been published.
   Section 28.1160b is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160b. Abandoned scrap vehicle procedures. 
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   "Registered abandoned scrap vehicle" means a vehicle which meets
all of the following requirements:
            (i)   Is on public or private property.
            (ii)   Is seven or more years old.
            (iii)   Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the
extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and
safe, as required by section 683, would exceed the fair market value of that
vehicle.
            (iv)   Is currently registered in the State of Michigan or displays
current year registration plates from another state.
            (v)   Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice, as
described in section 28.1160a(2)(h), is affixed to the vehicle.
         (b)   "Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle" means a vehicle which
meets all of the following requirements:
            (i)   Is on public or private property.
            (ii)   Is seven or more years old.
            (iii)   Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the
extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and
safe, as required by section 683, would exceed the fair market value of that
vehicle.
            (iv)   Is not currently registered in this state and does not
display current year registration plates from another state.
            (v)   Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice, as
described in section 28.1160a(2)(b), is affixed to the vehicle.
      (2)   A police agency may have an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle
taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)   Take two photographs of the vehicle.
         (c)   Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered
abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:
            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number if
available.
            (ii)   The date of abandonment.
            (iii)   The location of abandonment.
            (iv)   A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
            (v)   The reporting officer's name and title.
            (vi)   The location where the vehicle is being held.
         (d)   Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the
vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
      (3)   Within 24 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays,
after taking the vehicle into custody, the police agency shall complete a
release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or a used vehicle
parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then transmit that
release form to the secretary of state and apply for a certificate of the title
or a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form and
application, the secretary of state shall issue a certificate of title or a
certificate of scrapping.
      (4)   The release form described in subsection (3) shall be furnished by
the secretary of state and shall include a certification executed by the
applicable police agency when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released. The
certification shall state that the police agency has complied with all the
requirements of subsection (2)(b) and (c).
      (5)   The secretary of state shall retain the records relating to an
abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two years. The two photographs taken
pursuant to subsection (2)(b) shall be retained by the police agency for not
less than two years. After the certificate of scrapping has been issued, a
certificate of title for the vehicle shall not be issued again.
      (6)   A police agency may have a registered abandoned scrap vehicle taken
into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been stolen.
         (b)   Take two photographs of the vehicle.
         (c)   Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered
abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:
            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number if
available.
            (ii)   The date of abandonment.
            (iii)   The location of abandonment.
            (iv)   A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
            (v)   The reporting officer's name and title.
            (vi)   The location where the vehicle is being held.
         (d)   Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the
vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
         (e)   Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to
the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the
secretary of state, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished
by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following
information:
            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle if available.
            (ii)   The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iii)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iv)   The name and address of the police agency which had the
vehicle taken into custody.
            (v)   The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
            (vi)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
            (vii)   The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been
deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage
fees.
            (viii)   A form petition which the owner may file in person or by
mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's
action.
            (ix)   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
request a hearing, within 20 days after the date of the notice, may result in
the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the
vehicle.
      (7)   The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may
contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the
reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a
hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition, with the
court specified in the notice, within 20 days after the date of the notice. If
the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing
conducted pursuant to sections 28.1160e and 28.1160f. An owner who requests a
hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond
with the court, in an amount as determined by the court. The owner of a vehicle
who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing
and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court
finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency
shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage
fees.
      (8)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (9)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing
within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (10)   Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing
described in subsection (7), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20
days after the date of the notice described in subsection (6)(e), the police
agency shall follow the procedures established in subsections (3) to (5).
   Section 28.1160c is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160c. Vehicle removed from private property.
      (1)   When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction of
a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a police agency, the
custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the police agency from whose
jurisdiction the vehicle was towed. The custodian shall supply that information
which is necessary for the police agency to enter the vehicle into the law
enforcement information network.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection (1), the
police agency immediately shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)   Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
      (3)   The owner of the vehicle removed as described in subsection (1) may
obtain release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing and storage fees to
the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the vehicle, the custodian shall
notify the police agency of the disposition of the vehicle.
      (4)   If the vehicle described in subsection (1) is not claimed by the
owner within seven days after the police agency has been notified by the
custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle is deemed abandoned
and the procedures prescribed in section 28.1160a(4)(c) to (9) shall apply.
   Section 28.1160d is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160d. Vehicle removed by police.
      (1)   A police agency or a governmental agency designated by the police
agency may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from public or
private property to a place of safekeeping, at the expense of the registered
owner of the vehicle, in any of the following circumstances:
         (a)   If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued
operation of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard
to the public.
         (b)   If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the highway in such a
manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic.
         (c)   If a vehicle is parked in a posted towaway zone.
         (d)   If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any
part of the vehicle is stolen.
         (e)   If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime,
or when there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the
commission of a crime.
         (f)   If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because
of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or manmade disaster, or other emergency.
         (g)   If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the
owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which
impedes the movement of another vehicle.
         (h)   If the vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked in a space
designated for handicapped parking and is not permitted by law to be stopped,
standing, or parked in a space designated for handicapped parking.
         (i)   If the owner of a vehicle or trailer has received and failed to
answer six or more parking notices or citations, the vehicle may be impounded
or immobilized and not released to owner until all fines, costs and towing
charges associated with the parking violation have been paid.
      (2)   A police agency which authorizes the removal of a vehicle under
subsection (1) shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)   Within 24 hours after removing the vehicle, enter the vehicle
into the law enforcement information network if the vehicle has not been
redeemed. This subsection does not apply to a vehicle that is removed from the
scene of a motor vehicle traffic accident.
         (c)   If the vehicle has not been redeemed within ten days after
moving the vehicle, send to the registered owner and the secured party, as
shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first class mail or personal
service, a notice that the vehicle has been removed; however, if the police
agency informs the owner or operator of the vehicle of the removal and the
location of the vehicle within 24 hours after the removal, and if the vehicle
has not been redeemed within 30 days and upon complaint from the towing
service, the police agency shall send the notice within 30 days after the
removal. The notice shall be by a form furnished by the secretary of state. The
notice form shall contain the following information:
            (i)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle.
            (ii)   The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iii)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iv)   The name and address of the police agency which had the
vehicle taken into custody.
            (v)   The location where the vehicle is being held.
            (vi)   The procedure vehicle.
            (vii)   The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle was
properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing and daily storage fees.
            (viii)   A form petition which the owner may file in person or by
mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's
action.
            (ix)   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
request a hearing, within 20 days after the date of the notice, may result in
the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the
secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale, or to both the
vehicle and the proceeds.
      (3)   The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle was
properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage
fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a
petition, with the court specified in the notice, within 20 days after the date
of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved
after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 28.1160e and 28.1160f. An owner
who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing
and storage bond with the court in an amount equal to the accrued towing and
storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release
of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the
towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly
removed, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the
accrued towing and storage fees.
      (4)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (5)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing
within 20 days, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by
paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle prior to the date of
the sale.
      (6)   Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing
described in subsection (3), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20
days after the date of the notice described in subsection (2)(c), the police
agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale unless the vehicle is
redeemed. The public sale shall be held pursuant to section 28.1160g.
      (7)   If the ownership of a vehicle which has been removed under this
section cannot be determined, either because of the condition of the vehicle
identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of
state does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the vehicle at
public sale pursuant to section 28.1160g, not less than 30 days after public
notice of the sale has been published.
   Section 28.1160e is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160e. Abandoned vehicle, jurisdiction of court.
      (1)   The following courts shall have jurisdiction to determine if a
police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under section
28.1160a, 28.1160b(6) to (10), 28.1160c, or 28.1160d:
         (a)   The district court.
         (b)   A municipal court.
         (c)   The common pleas court of the City of Detroit.
      (2)   The court specified in the notice prescribed in section 28.1160a(4)
(c), 28.1160b(6), 28.1160c(4), or 28.1160d(2)(c) shall be the court which has
territorial jurisdiction at the location from where the vehicle was removed or
deemed abandoned.
      (3)   If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the
towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure release of the vehicle
under section 28.1160a, 28.1160b, 28.1160c, or 28.1160d shall be used to pay
the towing and storage fees.
   Section 28.1160f is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160f Abandoned vehicle, duties of court.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a petition prescribed in section 28.1160a,
28.1160b, 28.1160c, or 28.1160d, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has
been taken into custody, the court shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Schedule a hearing within 30 days for the purpose of determining
whether the police agency acted properly.
         (b)   Notify the owner and the police agency of the time and place of
the hearing.
      (2)   At the hearing specified in subsection (1), the police agency shall
have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it has
complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned vehicle
or vehicle removed pursuant to section 28.1160d.
      (3)   After the hearing, the court shall make a decision which shall
include one or more of the following:
         (a)   A finding that the police agency complied with the procedures
established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed
under section 28.1160d, and an order providing a period of 20 days after the
decision for the owner to redeem the vehicle. If the owner does not redeem the
vehicle within 20 days, the police agency shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant
to section 28.1160b or 28.1160g.
         (b)   A finding that the police agency did not comply with the
procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle
removed pursuant to section 28.1160d. After making such a finding, the court
shall issue an order directing that the vehicle immediately be released to the
owner, and that the police agency is responsible for the accrued towing and
storage charges.
         (c)   A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were
reasonable.
         (d)   A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were
unreasonable, and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction.
   Section 28.1160g is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1160g. Abandoned vehicle, public sale.
      (1)   A public sale for a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under
section 28.1160a or 28.1160c, or removed under section 28.1160d, shall be
conducted in the following manner:
         (a)   It shall be under the control of the police agency or agent of
the police agency.
         (b)   It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction
bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person
submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police agency
or agent of the police agency.
         (c)   Except as provided by sections 28.1160a(9) and 28.1160d(7), it
shall be held not less than five days after public notice of the sale has been
published.
         (d)   The public notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle
was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for
sale and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale.
      (2)   The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be
applied in the following order of priority:
         (a)   Towing and storage charges.
         (b)   Expenses incurred by the police agency.
         (c)   To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the debt
outstanding on the vehicle.
         (d)   Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to
mail the remainder to the registered owner. If delivery of the remainder cannot
be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the unit of
government that the police agency represents.
      (3)   If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police agency may do
one of the following:
         (a)   Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges
against the vehicle.
         (b)   Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of
government the police agency represents, by doing the following:
            (i)   Paying the towing and storage charges.
            (ii)   Applying for title to the vehicle.
         (c)   Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (1).
      (4)   A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (1)
or (3), which vehicle has been designated as a distressed vehicle, shall make
application for a salvage certificate of title within 15 days after obtaining
the vehicle.
      (5)   Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall cancel the
entry into the law enforcement information network.
   Section 28.1161 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1161. Current regulations. All intersection stops and yield
right-of-way requirements; regulations on stopping, standing or parking; one-
way streets, roadways and alleys; crosswalks; restricted turns; through
streets; play streets; angle parking zones; all- night parking restrictions;
curb loading zones; public carrier stands; parking meter zones and spaces;
weight restrictions; no passing zones; speed limits and traffic-control devices
heretofore established and effective on the effective date of this Code shall
be deemed established hereunder, and shall remain effective until rescinded or
modified as herein provided.
   Section 28.1162 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1162. Safety belt required; enforcement.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to a driver or passenger of:
         (a)   A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1965.
         (b)   A bus.
         (c)   A motorcycle.
         (d)   A moped.
         (e)   A motor vehicle, if the driver or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician that the driver or passenger is unable to wear a
safety belt for physical or medical reasons.
         (f)   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety
belts under federal law.
         (g)   A commercial or United States Postal Service vehicle which makes
frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of goods or services.
         (h)   A motor vehicle operated by a rural carrier of the United States
Postal Service while serving his or her rural postal route.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to a passenger of a school bus.
      (3)   Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on
a street or highway in this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened
safety belt, except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected
as required in MCL257.710d, MSA9.2410(4).
      (4)   Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of
age or more, but less than 16 years of age, in a motor vehicle shall secure the
child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. If the motor vehicle is
transporting more children than there are safety belts available for use, all
safety belts available in the motor vehicle are being utilized in compliance
with this section, and the driver and all front seat passengers comply with
subsection (3), then the driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four
years of age or more, but less than 16 years of age, for which there is not an
available safety belt is in compliance with this subsection, if that child is
seated in other than the front seat of the motor vehicle. However, if that
motor vehicle is a pickup truck without an extended cab or jump seats, and all
safety belts in the front seat are being used, the driver may transport such a
child in the front seat without a safety belt.
      (5)   Enforcement of this section by state or local law enforcement
agencies shall be accomplished only as a secondary action, when a driver of a
motor vehicle has been detained for a suspected violation of another section of
this act.
      (6)   Failure to wear a safety belt in violation of this section may be
considered evidence of negligence and may reduce the recovery for damages
arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
However, such negligence shall not reduce the recovery for damages by more than
five percent.
      (7)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   Section 28.1163 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1163. Automobile parking system.
      (a)   Supervision of system. The automobile parking system of the city
shall be under the supervision and direction of the police department.
      (b)   Rates and lime limits. The rates and time limits for parking in
off-street parking lots and structures, operated as a part of the automobile
parking system, shall be established by resolution of the city council from
time to time, upon recommendation of the city manager. Such rates and time
limits need not be uniform throughout the system, but shall be based upon
demand for parking in the area which the lot or structure serves and such other
considerations as the city manager and the council shall deem pertinent. No
person shall park any vehicle for a period of time longer than permitted by the
regulation pertaining to the lot where such vehicle is parked.
      (c)   Park in designated spaces. No person shall park any motor vehicle
in any parking lot or structure other than within the boundaries of the space
designated as allocated for the parking of a single meter vehicle, by
appropriate lines or other markings. Any person parking any motor vehicle in
any parking lot or structure otherwise than as prescribed in this subsection
shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and, in parking structures and
in parking lots other than metered parking lots, any person who shall park a
motor vehicle so as to occupy or encroach upon more than one designated parking
space shall pay the full rate or charge for each parking space occupied or
encroached upon, in addition to being guilty of a violation of this section.
      (d)   Vehicle abandonment. Any motor vehicle parked for over 48 hours in
any parking lot of the system shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed by
the city and impounded. Any motor vehicle otherwise parked in violation of this
section may be removed by the city from the parking lot or structure in which
it is parked and impounded. Any vehicle so impounded by the city shall not be
released to the owner until all parking charges, storing and towing charges
shall have been paid by the owner. MCL257.252 et seq., MSA9.1952 et seq., shall
be followed for the disposition of the vehicle if not claimed within the time
allowed.
      (e)   Presumption from ownership. In any proceeding for violation of the
provisions of this section relative to parking, the registration plate
displayed on the motor vehicle parked in violation of this section shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the point where such
violation occurred.
   Section 28.1202 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1202. Obedience to police and fire department officials.  No
person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer or member of the fire department, at the scene
or in the immediate vicinity of a fire or in the immediate vicinity of the fire
station, who is vested with authority under this code to direct, control or
regulate traffic.
   Section 28.1304 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1304. Steady red indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or at a
limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and
shall remain standing until a green indication is shown, except as provided in
subsection (c)(2).
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal, after stopping before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or at a limit line
when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, shall be
privileged to make a right turn from a one-way or two-way street into a two-way
street or into a one-way street carrying traffic in the direction of the right
turn; or a left turn from a one-way or two-way street into a one-way street
carrying traffic in the direction of the left turn, unless prohibited by sign,
signal, marking, light, or other traffic-control device. The vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
   Section 28.1500 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1500. Mandatory child restraints.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise provided by
law, a rule promulgated pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969,
Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq., MSA
3.560(101) et seq.), as amended, or federal regulation, each driver
transporting a child in a motor vehicle shall properly secure each child in a
child restraint system as follows:
         (a)   Any child less than one year of age in a child restraint system
which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, except as provided in
subsection (6).
         (b)   Any child one year of age or more but less than four years of
age, when transported in the front seat, in a child restraint system which
meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, except as provided in
subsection (6).
         (c)   Any child one year of age or more but less than four years of
age, when transported in the rear seat, in a child restraint system which meets
the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, unless the child is secured by a
safety belt provided in the motor vehicle, except as provided in subsection
(6).
      (2)   This section does not apply to any child being nursed.
      (3)   This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being driven is a
bus, school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not
required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law or regulations.
      (4)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
      (5)   Points shall not be assessed for a violation of this section.
      (6)   The secretary of state may exempt by rules a class of children from
the requirements of this section, if the secretary of state determines that the
use of the child restraint system required under subsection (1) is impractical
because of physical unfitness, a medical problem, or body size. The secretary
of state may specify alternate means of protection for children exempted under
this subsection.
   Section 28.1702 is added to read as follows:
   Sec. 28.1702. Pedestrian or bicyclist; right-of-way in crosswalks; violation
as a civil infraction.
      (1)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to every
pedestrian or bicyclist within a marked crosswalk.
      (2)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to every pedestrian or bicyclist within an unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection. A “crosswalk” is defined as set forth at the
Uniform Motor Vehicle Code, § 27.10.
      (3)   A pedestrian or bicyclist shall not suddenly leave a curb or other
place of safety and walk, run or ride into the path of a vehicle that is so
close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
      (4)   A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   Section 28.1706 is added to read as follows:
   Sec. 28.1706. Pedestrians or bicyclists yielding right-of-way: violation as
a civil infraction.
      (1)   Every pedestrian or bicyclist crossing a roadway at any point other
than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles on the roadway.
      (2)   A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   Section 28.1708 is added to read as follows:
   Sec. 28.1708. Pedestrians and bicyclists; yielding right-of-way to emergency
vehicles; violation of civil infraction.
      (1)   Any pedestrian or bicyclist crossing a roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to an authorized emergency vehicle sounding an audible signal,
unless engaging in an emergency run in which silence is required and displaying
a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light.
      (2)   A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   Section 28.1825 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1825. All-night parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to stop, stand or park a vehicle, or to cause or to
permit a vehicle to be parked or left unattended, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day on any of the streets or highways of the city or
on any of the city parking lots.
   Section 28.1826 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1826. Parking on parkways. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park any motor vehicle or trailer in any parkway of any street within the city
without permission of the city council. The term "parkway" shall mean that area
between the curb, or curbline in the absence of a curb, in the inside sidewalk
line. "Motor vehicle" shall have the meaning as defined in the Uniform Traffic
Code. "Trailer" includes housetrailers, trailers and semitrailers.
   Section 28.1827 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1827 Yard parking; violation as civil infraction.
      (a)   No motor vehicle shall be parked in any yard, as defined by §
82-4 of the Charlotte City Code, except entirely upon a driveway or parking
space designated and constructed according to the standards of
Chapter 52 of the Charlotte City Code.
      (b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction. A parking violation notice charging a violation of this section may
be issued by a police officer, including a limited duty or parking enforcement
officer, also by any city housing, building, or zoning director or building
official, in the form and manner provided by MCL 257.742(6),(7), and (8).
   Section 28.1906 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1906. Parking violations bureau. Pursuant to section 8:395 of the
Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by Act No. 154 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 600.8395, MSA 27A.8395), as amended, a
parking violations bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking
violations within the city, is hereby established. The parking violations
bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer.
   Section 28.1907 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1907. Location, employees, rules. The city treasurer shall,
subject to the approval of the city council, establish a convenient location
for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to
administer the bureau, and adopt rules and regulations for the operation
thereof.
   Section 28.1908 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1908. Violation handled. No violation not scheduled in section
28.1911 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a
particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to
disposition of the violation at the bureau, and in any case the person in
charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which case
any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any
court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law.
   Section 28.1909 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1909. Jurisdiction. No violation may be settled at the parking
violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No
penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having
committed the offense, and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the
bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to
dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau, and all
persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court
having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person
to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not
prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection
accorded to him by law.
   Section 28.1910 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1910. Parking tickets. The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice
of violation by a police officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a
parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate
the length of time in which the person to whom the ticket or notice was issued
must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the
address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of
the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued, and
advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was
issued will be sought if such person fails to respond within the time limited.
   Section 28.1911 is added to read as follows:
      Sec. 28.1911. Schedule.
      Uniform Traffic Code Violations
      (a)   Fine schedule. Fines shall he paid in accordance with a schedule to
be adopted by resolution of the city council.
      (b)   All fines provided in this section will double if not paid within
72 hours of the date and time issued.
(1993 Code, § 66-33) (Ord. passed 4-27-1992; Ord. passed 8-24-1998; Ord. passed
7-4-1999; Ord. passed 7-12-1999; Ord. passed 12-13-1999; Ord. passed 12-27-
1999; Ord. passed 2-14-2000(2); Ord. passed 6-12-2000(2); Ord. passed 6-10-
2002; Ord. passed 8-14-2006; Ord. passed 4-14-2008; Ord. 2019-05, passed 9-9-
2019)
§ 66-103 PENALTY.
   The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages are adopted by reference.
(Ord. passed 11-22-2004; Ord. passed 4-14-2008)
ARTICLE IV. MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT
§ 66-200 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT ADOPTED.
   The Motor Carrier Safety Act, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11
et seq.), including all amendments effective as of the date of publication of
notice of adoption of this article, including all amendments thereafter made to
the Motor Carrier Safety Act, is hereby adopted by reference as in this chapter
modified. Amendments made to the Motor Carrier Safety Act shall become
effective as adopted by reference herein, being effective the same day they
became effective in the Motor Safety Carrier Act.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-11-2010)
§ 66-201 LOCAL AMENDMENTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to the Motor Carrier Safety Act, as
adopted in this article, and additional sections and subsections are added as
indicated:
   (A)   Government unit as defined. References in the Michigan Motor Carrier
Safety Rules to the term “governmental units” shall mean the City of Charlotte.
   (B)   Enforcement. Authority for the enforcement of this article and any
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified herein shall
be vested in the police officers of the City of Charlotte.
   (C)   Sanctions. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the
Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act as adopted by reference herein, or the
Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, for any particular provision or section, the
sanction for a violation shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by
imposition of a civil fine which shall not be more than $250 plus costs. The
fine schedule shall be as provided herein and allocation as provided in
M.C.L.A. § 257.909. In addition to the sanctions authorized by this section,
any individual or entity authorized to enforce this article may remove or
provide for the removal of vehicles or equipment which have been placed within
the right-of-way of a roadway. The costs related to removal, as well as any
storage expenses, shall be borne by the party responsible for placement of the
vehicle or equipment within the right-of-way. For purposes of this section,
RESPONSIBLE PARTY shall include the property owner, vehicle owner, or equipment
owner and/or the vehicle or equipment operator.
   (D)   Term of incarceration. Notwithstanding the term of imprisonment as set
forth in any provision within the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act, as
incorporated by reference herein, no sentence imposed under this article shall
exceed 93 days.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-11-2010)
CHAPTER 67: RESERVED
CHAPTER 68: UTILITIES
Section
Article I. In General
   
68-1   Definitions
   
68-2   Administration
   
68-3   Operation and maintenance; control
   
68-4   Fiscal year, records, funds and accounts
   
68-5   Utility Board of Appeals
   
68-6   Power and authority of inspectors
   
68-7   Penalties
   
68-8   Protection from damage
Article II. Water
Division 1. Generally
   
68-26   Water supply
   
68-27   Additional regulations
   
68-28   Service connections
   
68-29   Turning on service
   
68-30   Hydrant use
   
68-31   Use restrictions
   
68-32   Injury to facilities
Division 2. Meters
   
68-46   Meters required
   
68-47   Access
   
68-48   Reimbursement for damage
   
68-49   Meter failure
   
68-50   Accuracy required
   
68-51   Inaccurate meters
   
68-52   Bill adjustment
   
68-53   Remote readers – generally
   
68-54   Same – installation
Division 3. Cross Connections
   
68-66   Cross connections prohibited
   
68-67   Rules adopted; inspections; violations
   
68-68   Implementation of program
   
68-69   Local authority
   
68-70   Local inspection
   
68-71   Schedule for inspections
   
68-72   Schedule for reinspection
   
68-73   Protective devices
   
68-74   Compliance time
   
68-75   Annual report and record keeping
Article III. Water and Sewer Rates
   
68-96   Fixing rates
   
68-97   Purpose of sewer and water rates; establishment of cost of service
   
68-98   Service to city
   
68-99   Billing and collection
   
68-100   Allocation of costs of service
   
68-101   Specific rates and charges
   
68-102   Delinquencies; liens on property
Article IV. Sewers
Division 1. Generally
   
68-120   Industrial use of system
   
68-121   Connection of privately constructed sanitary sewer systems
Division 2. Use of Public Sewers Required
   
68-141   Connection
   
68-142   Connection procedures
   
68-143   Private sewage disposal
Division 3. Building Sewers and Connections
   
68-156   Building sewers
   
68-157   Connections and permits
Division 4. Public Sewer Use
   
68-171   Stormwater, groundwater and unpolluted water
   
68-172   Prohibited discharges
   
68-173   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps
   
68-174   Preliminary treatment
   
68-175   Industrial wastes
   
68-176   General/specific prohibitions
Division 5. Pretreatment
   
68-186   Purpose and policy
   
68-187   POTW inspection, surveillance and monitoring authority; right of entry
   
68-188   Limitation on wastewater strength
   
68-189   POTW’s right to refuse or condition discharge; pollutant reduction
plans, best management practices
   
68-190   Spill prevention
   
68-191   Funding of pretreatment program
   
68-192   Wastewater discharge and wastewater contribution permits
   
68-193   Confidential information and public records
   
68-194   Enforcement
   
68-195   Penalties
   
68-196   Upset
Charter reference:
   Utility franchises and municipal ownership, see Charter,
Chapter 14
Cross-reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Chapter 14;
   Planning, see
Chapter 42;
   Streets, sidewalks and other public places, see
Chapter 58;
   Subdivision regulations, see
Chapter 62;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Editor's note:
   Ord. of January 22, 2001, adopted on same date, repealed the former Chapter
68, §§ 68-1 through 68-194, and enacted a new
Chapter 68 as set out herein. The former Chapter 68 pertained to similar
subject matter.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 68-1 DEFINITIONS.
   ACT.  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water
Act), 33 USC 1251, et seq., as amended.
   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT.  An enforcement mechanism intended to allow for
flexibility in developing a plan between the POTW and a user discharging to the
POTW for taking measures to correct a violation or violations of this article.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY . The Director in an NPDES state with an approved state
pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or
an NPDES state without an approved pretreatment program.
   ATTORNEY . The City Attorney.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER . A person who is:
      (1)   If the user is a corporation, a principal executive officer of at
least the level of Vice-President;
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner
or proprietor, respectively;
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental entity, the
principal executive officer, ranking elected official, or director having
responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility;
      (4)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this definition if the representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the
discharge to the POTW originates.
         (a)   To be considered “duly authorized,” the authorization must be
made in writing by an individual designated in (1), (2) or (3) above. The
authorization must specify either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility (such as the position
of plant manager, operator of a well or well field, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters
of the company or entity). The written authorization must be submitted to the
POTW superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the
authorized representative.
         (b)   If an authorization under division (4)(a) above is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company or entity, a new written authorization must be
submitted to the POTW superintendent prior to or together with any reports to
be signed by the newly authorized representative.
   AVAILABLE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM . A public sanitary sewer system
located in a right-of-way, easement, highway or public way which crosses,
adjoins, abuts, or is contiguous to the realty involved and passes not more
than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary, sewage
originates, or, in the case of all other real estate or land, a sewer which is
located in a street, road, highway, right-of-way, easement, or public or
private way crossing, adjoining, abutting or contiguous to any real estate or
land within a special assessment district hereafter created, on which is
located a structure in which sanitary sewage originates.
   BACKFLOW . Water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
   BASE CHARGE . The charge calculated on the basis of meter capacity ratio in
accordance with § 68-101 of this chapter.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD . The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biological oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
5 days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed as milligrams per liter as required by
EPA approved methods under 40 CFR Part 136.
   BONDS . At any time, bonds issued by or on behalf of the city for purposes
of financing improvements to the system and outstanding, secured by or payable
from the revenues of the system.
   BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT . The separate account in the Redemption Fund required
to be established and maintained in accordance with the terms of any bonds
issued by the city and secured by the net revenues of the system.
   BUILDING SEWER . The sewer that connects the building in which the sanitary
sewage originates to the public sewer or other place of disposal and conveys
the sewage of only 1 building.
   BYPASS . The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an
industrial user’s treatment facility.
   CAPITAL EXPENSES . Includes:
      (1)   Normal annual replacement of existing facilities;
      (2)   Normal annual extensions and improvements; and
      (3)   Major capital replacements and improvements.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER.  A non-domestic user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD . Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users
that appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1 Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   CITY-TOWNSHIP CONTRACT . The agreement between the city and the Township of
Eaton, dated March 12, 1979, and its amendments or the agreement between the
city and the Township of Carmel, dated August 28, 2000, and its amendments and
any future intergovernmental agreements between the city and the Township of
Eaton and/or the Township of Carmel.
   COMBINED SEWER . A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm
sewer or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer.
   COMMERCIAL USERS . Any establishment being involved in a commercial
enterprise, business or service. Any commercial user which discharges any waste
other than normal strength domestic waste or has the reasonable potential, as
determined by the POTW superintendent, to discharge any waste other than normal
strength domestic waste into the POTW shall be deemed a non-domestic user for
purposes of this article.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT . A regulated pollutant which, as determined by the
POTW superintendent at the superintendent’s sole discretion, is susceptible to
effective treatment by the POTW as designed, and which will not interfere with,
or pass through the POTW.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A series of individual samples taken at regular
intervals, collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis, over a
specific time period and combined into a single sample (formed either by
continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples) representative of the
average stream during the sampling period.
   CONSUMPTION CHARGE . The charge calculated on the basis of metered gallons
per day of water consumed as described in § 68-101.
   COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling purposes only, including both contact
and non-contact cooling water.
   COOLING WATER (CONTACT).  Water used for cooling purposes only that may
become contaminated or polluted either through the use of water treatment
chemicals (such as corrosion inhibitors or biocides) or by direct contact with
process materials and/or wastewater.
   COOLING WATER (NON-CONTACT).  Water used for cooling purposes only that has
no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, final product,
or waste, and that does not contain a detectable level of contaminants
(including water treatment chemicals or any other substance) higher than that
of the intake water (for example, the water discharged from uses such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat).
   COVERAGE REQUIREMENT . The promise to bondholders to maintain net revenues
at annual amounts at a percentage of debt service greater than 100%.
   CROSS CONNECTION . A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances
through which a backflow could occur.
   DEBT SERVICE EXPENSES . The principal and interest payments on any
outstanding bonds of the system, including mandatory redemption requirements,
mandatory deposits into the Bond Reserve Account, if any, plus the amount
necessary to meet any coverage requirements then in effect, and any amounts
necessary and permitted to pay debt service on any general obligation bonds of
the city incurred for system purposes.
   DIRECTOR . The Director of the Department of Works.
   DIRECT CONNECTION . The connection of a premises wherein sanitary sewage
originates directly to sewer lines constructed by the city.
   DOMESTIC WASTE.  Water-carried waste of human origin generated by personal
activities from toilet, kitchen, laundry, or bathing facilities, or by other
similar facilities used for household or residential dwelling purposes
(“sanitary sewage”). Domestic waste may not include any waste resulting from
industrial or commercial processes, including, but not limited to, any
hazardous or toxic pollutants. Wastes emanating from sources other than
residential dwelling units which are to be considered domestic wastes shall be
of the same nature and strength and have the same flow rate characteristics as
waste from residential dwelling units. The determination of whether or not a
waste is domestic waste shall be made by the POTW superintendent at the
superintendent’s sole discretion as determined necessary by the superintendent
to achieve the purposes and objectives of this article.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA.  The United States Environmental
Protection Agency or its duly authorized officials and representatives.
   EXCESSIVE.  At such a flow, rate, magnitude or amount that, in the judgment
of the POTW superintendent, it may cause damage to any facility or the POTW;
may be harmful to the wastewater treatment processes; may adversely affect the
management or operation of the POTW or POTW sludge management or disposal; may
cause pass through or interference; may violate any pretreatment standard or
requirement; may adversely affect the quality of the receiving waters or the
ambient air quality; may endanger worker health and safety; may constitute a
public nuisance; may be inconsistent with the requirements, purposes or
objectives of this article; or may otherwise adversely impact the public
health, safety or welfare or the environment.
   EXISTING SOURCE.  Any source of discharge that is not a new source as
defined by this article.
   FATS.  Fats, oil or grease (FOG) consisting of any hydrocarbons, fatty
acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other non-volatile or semi-volatile
materials of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by
solvents in accordance with methods approved by EPA under 40 CFR Part 136.
   FEDERAL GRANT . The grant to be made for the construction of wastewater
collection, transportation and treatment works provided under Pub. L. 92-500 or
subsequent amendments.
   FLOOR DRAIN.  Piping that collects and conveys non-stormwater waste from the
interior of a building to a building sewer.
   FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE.  A composite sample taken with regard to the flow
of the waste stream.
   GARBAGE . Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce or from the preservation or
packaging of food. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and its
natural or added moisture content.
   GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT FUND . The separate fund established from time to
time by the city to pay debt service on presently existing or future general
obligation bond issues of the city or presently existing or future general
obligations or contractual obligations of the city incurred or to be incurred
for system expenses.
   GRAB SAMPLE.  An individual sample that is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes, and which reasonably reflects the
characteristics of the waste stream at the time of sampling.
   GRINDER PUMP.  Any electric motor-driven, submersible, pump amounts of
macerating all materials found in normal domestic sanitary sewage, including
reasonable amounts of objects such as plastics, sanitary napkins, disposable
diapers, rubber and the like, to fine slurry and pumping this material through
a small diameter discharge.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER . A federal, state or local governmental facility or the
facility of any political subdivision thereof not otherwise defined in this
section.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any substance discharged or proposed to be discharged into
the POTW that (1) if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261 or under the rules promulgated under the State Hazardous Waste
Management Act (part 111 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, M.C.L.A. §§
324.1101 et seq., as amended); or (2) is otherwise a waste or a combination of
waste and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous material that because of its quantity, quality,
concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contributed to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may
pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health of the
environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed, as determined by the POTW.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT . Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant;
or any pollutant which may adversely affect the POTW’s treatment process,
effluent, or sludge disposal practices; impact worker health and safety; or
cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. The determination of whether or not
a pollutant is incompatible shall be made by the POTW superintendent at the
superintendent’s sole discretion as determined necessary by the superintendent
to achieve the purposes and objectives of this article.
   INDIRECT CONNECTION . The connection of any premises to any sewer lines not
originally comprising the sewer system constructed by the city but connecting
thereto; for example, premises served by subdivision and mobile home park
sanitary sewers which in turn connect to public sewers.
   INDUSTRIAL USER . Any nondomestic user that contributes, causes or permits
the contribution, introduction or discharge of wastewater or pollutants into
the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether directly or
indirectly.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES . The wastewater discharges from industrial, trade or
business processes as distinct from their employees’ domestic waste or waste
from sanitary conveniences.
   INFILTRATION.  Any waters entering the POTW from the ground, through means
such as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls.
   INFLOW.  Any waters entering the POTW from sources such as, but not limited
to, roof leaders; cellar, yard, and area drains; foundation and footing drains;
cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers;
cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers; catch basins; storm
waters; surface runoff; street wash waters; or drainage.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION.  The maximum concentration of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in time (independent of the
flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the concentration determined
by analysis of any grab sample, composite sample, or discrete portion of a
composite sample exceeds the instantaneous maximum concentration, the
instantaneous maximum concentration shall be deemed to have been exceeded. Any
discharge of a pollutant at or above a specified instantaneous maximum
concentration is a violation of this article.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER . A school, hospital, sanatorium, clinic or like user.
   INTERFERENCE . A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources: (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
process or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (2) causes
or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation), or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following
statutory provisions or regulations or permits issue thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations as applicable): § 405 of the Clean Water
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly
referred to as RCRA, and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean
Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research,
and Sanctuaries Act.
   IPA.  Industrial Pretreatment Administrator.
   LOCAL LIMIT.  A specific enforceable prohibition, standard or requirement
(numerical or non-numerical) on discharges by user established by the POTW to
meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter and to comply with applicable
state and federal laws and regulations.
   MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, or dialysis
wastes, and includes any medical or infectious wastes as defined by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
   Mg/l . Milligrams per liter.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE.  The sum of the daily maximums divided by the number of
days sampled during that month.
   MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DWELLING . A residence in which more than 1 family
resides.
   NATURAL OUTLET . Any naturally formed outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.   
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1317) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge at an
existing source; or
         (c)   The production of waste generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment. Commencement of construction of a new
source shall be determined in a manner consistent with 40 CFR 403.3(k)(3).
      (3)   Construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
         (a)   Begun or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
   NON-DOMESTIC USER.  Any user that discharges anything other than normal
strength domestic waste into the POTW (i.e., any user other than a domestic
user). The determination of whether or not a user is a non-domestic user shall
be made by the POTW superintendent at the superintendent’s sole discretion as
determined necessary by the superintendent to achieve the purposes of
objectives of this article. Any user that has the reasonable potential, as
determined by the POTW superintendent, to discharge any waste other than normal
strength domestic waste into the POTW, may be deemed a non-domestic user for
purposes of this article.
   NON-DOMESTIC WASTE.  Any waste which is not entirely composed of normal
strength domestic waste. The determination of whether or not a waste is a non-
domestic waste shall be made by the POTW superintendent at the superintendent’s
sole discretion as determined necessary by the superintendent to achieve the
purposes and objectives of this chapter. Any waste which has the reasonable
potential, as determined by the POTW superintendent, to be not entirely
composed of normal strength domestic waste may be deemed non-domestic waste for
purposes of this article.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER . A sewage or other wastewater effluent
which shall be a compatible pollutant and with BOD of 300 milligrams per liter
or less, suspended solids of 350 milligrams per liter or less and total
phosphorus of 10 milligrams per liter or less.
   NPDES PERMIT . A permit issued pursuant to the national pollution discharge
elimination system prescribed in 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE EXPENSES . Includes, but is not limited to,
salaries, wages and fringe benefits for system employees, purchased power,
purchased services, chemicals, other materials and supplies, small equipment
that does not extend the useful life of the major facilities of the system, and
the system’s percentage of general overhead of city administration and support
services provided by city employees other than system employees.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND . The fund of the system established by the
city for purposes of paying the expenses of administration and operation of the
system and current expenses for the maintenance of the system.
   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the state (or
waters of the United States) in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes or
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit or of
any requirement of applicable local, state or federal laws and regulations
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation); causes or
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Act, or detrimental
impacts the receiving stream.
   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
   POLLUTANT.  Includes (but is not limited to) any of the following:
      (1)   Any material that is discharged into water or other liquid,
including, but not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste.
      (2)   Properties of materials or characteristics of wastewater, including
but not limited to, pH, heat, suspended solids, dissolved solids, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor.
      (3)   Substances regulated by categorical standards.
      (4)   Substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored
by a user under this article, are limited in the POTW’s NPDES permit, or
required to be identified in the POTW’s application for an NPDES permit.
      (5)   Substances for which control measures on users are necessary to
avoid restricting the POTW’s residuals management program; to avoid POTW
operational problems; to avoid degradation of water quality; or to avoid POTW
worker health and safety problems as determined at the discretion of the POTW
superintendent.
   PRETREATMENT (OR THE TREATMENT).  The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater, before or instead of discharging or otherwise
introducing the pollutants in the POTW. The reduction or alteration may be
obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; process changes; or
other means, except for the use of dilution (unless dilution is expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement and by the
POTW). Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as
equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug
loadings.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT.  Any substantive or procedural related to
pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on a non-
domestic user.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act or Part
31 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101 et
seq., that applies to non-domestic users including general and specific
prohibitive discharge limits and local limits established in this chapter
pursuant to MAC R 323.2303, and categorical standards.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS . Any septic tanks, lagoons, cesspools or
other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage other
than via the public sanitary sewer.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE . The waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PROPERTY OWNER . The person having legal title to the premises according to
the city’s tax records and includes, in the case of a land contract sale, the
land contract vendee, provided that the city has been furnished with a copy of
the land contract or assignment thereof.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW.  The complete sewage disposal system
and treatment works owned, operated, or controlled by the city as defined by
the Act, including any devices, processes and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling or reclamation of wastewater, sewage or sludge, as well as
sewers (including all mains and intercepting sewers), pipes, pumps, lift
stations, and other conveyances used to collect or convey wastewater or sewage
to the treatment works, as now or hereafter added to, extended or improved. The
term POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW
from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city,
users of the POTW. References in this article to approvals, determinations,
reviews, and the like., BY THE POTW  shall mean by the POTW superintendent or
the superintendent’s designated representative. The term  POTW may also be used
to refer to the city as the municipality that has jurisdiction over the
discharges to, and discharges from, the treatment works, or to the wastewater
treatment plant and its designated representatives as appropriate to the
context in which the term is used.
   PUBLIC SEWER or PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER . A sanitary sewer constructed, used
or intended for use by the public for the collection and transportation of
sanitary sewage for treatment or disposal and owned or operated or controlled
by the city or any other political subdivision of the state or connected to
such system or in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights.
   RECEIVING FUND . The fund established on the books and accounts of the city
into which all revenues of the system shall be deposited.
   REDEMPTION FUND . The fund established on the books and accounts of the city
from which the city shall pay principal and interest on all bonds of the city
secured by a lien on the net revenues of the system.
   REPLACEMENT . The obtaining and installing of any equipment, accessories and
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the system to
maintain the capacity and performance to which such system was designed and
constructed and to preserve its financial integrity.
   REPLACEMENT AND IMPROVEMENT FUND . The fund established on the books and
accounts of the city from which the city shall pay the costs of making repairs,
replacements, improvements or enlargements to the system.
   RESERVE AMOUNT . The amount required to be held in the Bond Reserve Account
in accordance with any ordinances pertaining to outstanding bonds secured by or
payable from the revenues of the system.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT or EQUIVALENT   UNIT . The factor representing a
ratio of the estimated sewage generated by each user class to that generated by
the normal single-family residential user.
   RESIDENTIAL USER . The user of the system whose premises or building is used
primarily as a residence for 1 or more persons, including dwelling units such
as detached, semidetached townhouses, mobile homes, apartments or permanent
multifamily dwellings. For purposes of this article, transient lodgings shall
be considered to be a commercial use.
   SANITARY SEWAGE . The liquid or water carried waste discharge from sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, including apartments, houses, motels and hotels,
office buildings, factories or institutions.
   SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM . All sewers, pumps, lift stations,
treatment facilities and other facilities and appurtenances used or useful in
the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial
or industrial wastes, and all easements, rights and land for such easements and
rights, and including all extensions and improvements thereto which may be
acquired or constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER . The sewer which carries sanitary sewage and industrial
waste or either of them into which stormwater, surface water and groundwater
are not intentionally admitted.
   SANITARY SEWER PERMIT.  The permit required for connection to the POTW. The
sanitary sewer permit charge is comprised of an inspection, a capacity charge
and the costs of labor and material associated with extending a lead from the
sewer main to the property line.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sanitary sewage or wastewater from holding tanks
such as vessels, chemical toilets, capers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE . Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass.
   SEWAGE . Any combination of sanitary sewage, stormwater, industrial waste
and uncontaminated industrial waste or any of them.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT . Any arrangement of
devices or structures used for the treating of sewage.
   SEWER . A pipe or conduit and appurtenances for transmitting or carrying
sanitary sewage, including any device necessary for pumping, lifting or
collecting such sewage.
   SEWER LEAD.  A sewer pipe extension from the sewer main that receives
wastewater from a building or house.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER   OR SIU . An industrial user (i.e., any non-
domestic user):
      (1)   Subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      (2)   Any other industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges to the POTW an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and broiler
blow-down wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream that makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is otherwise designated by the POTW as a significant industrial
user on the basis that the industrial user (either singly or in combination
with other users) has a reasonable potential to
adversely affect the operation of the POTW, the quality of the sludge, or the
POTW’s effluent or air emissions; to violate any pretreatment standard or
requirement; or because the POTW determines that a wastewater discharge permit
for the user’s discharge is otherwise required for any reason to meet the
purposes and objectives of this article.
      (3)   The POTW may determine that a user that meets the criteria of
divisions (2)(a) and (b) of this definition, above, is not currently a
significant industrial user, if the superintendent finds that the user has no
reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate
any pretreatment standard or requirement, or that a permit is not required to
meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter. A determination that a user
is not a significant industrial user (or that a permit is therefore not
required) shall not be binding and may be reversed by the superintendent at any
time based on changed circumstances, new information, or as otherwise
determined necessary by the superintendent to meet the purposes and objectives
of this article.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE .
      (1)   Chronic violations of discharge limits, defined here as those in
which 66% or more of fill of the measurements taken during a 6 month period
exceed (by any magnitude)the daily maximum limit or average limit of a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) for the same pollutant parameter.
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a 6 month period equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants, except pH).
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum, or longer-term average) standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR
403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the control authority POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance.
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules.
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the control authority POTW
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING . A residence in which only 1 family resides.
   SLUG, SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE.  Any discharge of non-routine, episodic
nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary
batch discharge.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) . A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
   STRUCTURE IN WHICH SANITARY SEWAGE ORIGINATES . A building in which a
toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facility which generates water-
carried sanitary sewage is used or is available for use for household,
commercial, industrial or other purposes.
   SURCHARGE . The additional charge which a user discharging wastewater having
strength in excess of the limits set by the city for transmission and treatment
within the sanitary sewage system will be required to pay to meet the cost of
treating such excessively strong wastewater.
   SUPERINTENDENT OR POTW SUPERINTENDENT.  The person designated by the city to
supervise the operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the
POTW and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by the
chapter, or the superintendent’s designated representatives.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS . Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in the water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filter.
   SYSTEM . The complete city water supply system and sanitary sewage disposal
systems.
   TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS . The table of unit factors on file with the Director,
as amended from time to time, based on a unit equaling 250 gallons of water
consumed per day per year.
   TOWNSHIP . The Township of Eaton or the Township of Carmel, Eaton County,
Michigan, and any other townships which may connect with the city.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is or can
potentially be harmful to the public health, the POTW, or the environment,
including, but not limited to, those listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401.15 under the
provisions of the Clean Water Act, or in the critical materials register
promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or as provided
by local, state or federal laws, rules or regulations.
   TRADE SECRET.  The whole or any portion or phrase of any manufacturing
proprietary process or method which is not patented, which is secret, which is
useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and the
secrecy of which the owner has taken reasonably measure to prevent from
becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have
access for limited purposes. Trade secret shall not be construed, for purposes
of these rules, to include any information regarding the quantum or character
of waste products or their constituents discharged, or sought to be discharged,
into the publicly owned treatment works.
   TRUCKED OR HAULED WASTE OR POLLUTANTS.  Any waste proposed to be discharged
to the POTW from a mobile source, including, but not limited to, holding tank
waste.
   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonably control of the non-domestic user. An upset does
not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   USER . Any premises receiving water and/or sewage disposal service from the
system, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether directly or
indirectly, including all premises owned or occupied by the city. In addition,
USER includes each fire hydrant for which the city shall be deemed to be the
owner or occupier.
   USER CLASS OR CUSTOMER CLASS.  The category assigned to each user connected
to the POTW, as identified in the table of unit factors, including, but not
limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and
governmental.
   WASTEWATER . The liquid and water-carried domestic and non-domestic waste
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions
(including, but not limited to, contaminated groundwater and landfill
leachate), whether treated or untreated, that is contributed, introduced or
discharged, directly or indirectly, and whether intentionally or
unintentionally, into the POTW. The term includes any water that has in any way
been used and degraded, or physically or chemically altered, or to which
pollutants have been added. Sometimes generically referred to as SEWAGE .
   WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT . As set forth in §
68-192.
   WATERCOURSE . An open channel, either natural or artificial, in which a flow
of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
   WATER CONNECTION . That part of the water distribution system connecting the
water main with the premises serviced, from the main to the curbstop.
   WATER MAIN . That part of the water distribution system located within the
easement lines of streets designed to supply more than 1 water connection.
   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM . All storage facilities, transmission lines, mains,
pumps and other facilities and appurtenances used or useful in the delivery of
potable water to all users of the water supply system, including all easements,
rights and land for such easements and rights, and including all extensions and
improvements thereto which may be acquired or constructed.
   WATER TREATMENT FACILITY.  Location and/or structures where a water supply
is treated by chemical or physical processes to produce a finished water
meeting state drinking water standards and to provide safe water for use by the
public.
(1993 Code, § 68-1) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-2 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of the Department of Public Works is charged with the
responsibility of administering the system.
(1993 Code, § 68-2) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-3 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE; CONTROL.
   The operation and maintenance of the system shall be under the supervision
and control of the city. The city retains the exclusive right to establish,
maintain and collect rates and charges for use of the system, and in such
capacity, the City Council may employ such person in such capacity as it deems
advisable and may make such rules or regulations as it deems advisable and
necessary to ensure the efficient establishment, operation and maintenance of
the system to comply with the terms of the NPDES permit and the Safe Drinking
Water Act, and to discharge its financial obligations.
(1993 Code, § 68-3) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-4 FISCAL YEAR, RECORDS, FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the system shall begin July 1 and
shall end on June 30 in each year.
   (B)   Records and accounts. The city shall maintain the Water Supply and
Sewage Disposal Fund as an enterprise fund within the books and accounts of the
city. The Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Fund shall be used to account for
the operation of the water distribution, water treatment, sewage disposal and
sewage treatment systems, the construction and acquisition of additions and
improvements to those systems, and contributions toward the payment of interest
and principal on general obligation bonds issued to help finance the
construction projects undertaken by the system. The city shall cause an annual
audit of such books and records and accounts of the preceding operating year to
be made by a recognized independent certified public accountant and will make
such audit available to the public upon proper request.
   (C)   Establishment and maintenance of separate funds and accounts within
the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Fund. The city has established and shall
maintain and use the following funds and accounts.
      (1)   Receiving fund. All revenues of the system shall be credited
initially to the Receiving Fund, and shall be transferred or debited from the
Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the times and in the order of
priority described in this article.
      (2)   Operation and Maintenance Fund. Out of the revenues credited to the
Receiving Fund, at least monthly the City Manager shall first set aside in, or
credit to, the Operation and Maintenance Fund an amount sufficient to provide
for the payment of the next month's expenses of administration and operation of
the system and such current expenses for the maintenance of the system as may
be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order.
      (3)   Bond and Interest Redemption Fund; Bond Reserve Account. Out of the
revenues remaining in the Operation and Maintenance Fund, the City Manager
shall set aside each month an amount equal to the amounts specified in each
bond ordinance applicable to outstanding bonds secured or payable from revenues
of the system. In addition, if required by any bond ordinance, the City Manager
shall set aside the amounts required to establish and maintain the Bond Reserve
Account. Money in the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund shall be used
exclusively for payment of the principal of redemption premiums, if any, and
interest on the bonds as they come due. Money in the Bond Reserve Account shall
be used solely for the payment of the principal of redemption premiums, if any,
and interest on the bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at
any time it is necessary to use money credited to the Bond Reserve Account for
such payment, then the City Manager shall replace the money used from the net
revenues next received that are not needed for current principal and interest
requirements, until the amount on deposit equals the reserve amount.
      (4)   Replacement and Improvement Fund. Out of the revenues and moneys of
the system remaining in the Receiving Fund at the end of each month, after
provision has been made for credits or deposits to the Operation and
Maintenance Fund and the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund, the City Manager
may deposit such additional funds into the Replacement and Improvement Fund
such amounts as the City Manager shall determine advisable, not to exceed the
amounts budgeted for such purpose. The money in the Replacement and Improvement
Fund shall be used solely for the purpose of making repairs, replacements,
improvements, or enlargements of the system, including any buildings or
structures related to the system. If at any time it shall be necessary to use
the money in the Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement
Fund was established, the City Manager shall replace those amounts from any
money in the Receiving Fund which is not required to be used for the Operation
and Maintenance Fund or the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund, including the
Bond Reserve Account.
      (5)   General Obligation Debt Fund. Out of the remaining revenues in the
Receiving Fund each month, the City Manager shall credit to the General
Obligation Debt Fund such sums as shall be necessary to pay debt service on
outstanding general obligation bonds or contractual obligations of the city
issued or incurred for system purposes.
   (D)   Surplus revenues. All money remaining in the Receiving Fund after
satisfying all of the requirements of this section may, at the option of the
City Council, be used for any purpose directly relating to the system,
including credit or transfer to the Replacement Fund or the general obligation
debt, or for the purchase of bonds on the open market at not more than the fair
market value thereof, or for the redemption of bonds prior to maturity.
   (E)   Priority of funds. If the money in the Receiving Fund is insufficient
to provide for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund
or the Redemption Fund, any money or securities in other funds of the system,
except the proceeds of the sale of bonds, shall be credited or transferred,
first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second to the Bond and
Interest Redemption Fund.
   (F)   Depository. Money credited to the several funds and accounts of the
system, except money in the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve
Account) may be kept in 1 or more bank accounts at a bank or banks designated
by resolution of the City Council, and if kept in 1 bank account, the money
shall be allocated on the books and records of the city in the manner and at
the times provided in this section.
   (G)   Deficiencies in cash accounts. If the money in the Operation and
Maintenance Fund is insufficient to provide the current requirements of the
operation and maintenance of the system, the city may transfer any money or
securities from any other fund of the system to the extent of the deficiency.
   (H)   Insurance. The city shall maintain and carry insurance on all physical
properties of the system of a kind and in the amounts normally carried by
public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of water
supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems. All money received from losses
under any such insurance policy shall be applied solely to the replacement and
restoration of the property damaged or destroyed.
   (I)   Proceeds of system equity charge. The city shall deposit the proceeds
of all system equity charges into the Replacement and Improvement Fund.
(1993 Code, § 68-4) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-5 UTILITY BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Creation. The City Council hereby establishes a Utility Board of
Appeals, consisting of 5 members, to hear and consider all properly submitted
appeals of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Meetings and membership. The Utility Board of Appeals shall meet as
frequently as is necessary to hear all appeals properly submitted to it. All
matters relating to the meetings, qualifications for membership, appointment to
office, term of office and all other organizational matters of the Board shall
be determined by resolution of the City Council.
      (1)   City Manager. Jurisdiction shall not vest in the Utility Board of
Appeals until such time as the matter at issue has been submitted to the City
Manager for his review and decision.
   (C)   Jurisdiction. The Utility Board of Appeals shall hear, consider and
make recommendations to the City Council on the following matters:
      (1)   Appeals of all charges imposed on a user when the correctness of
the billing is disputed;
      (2)   Appeals pursuant to §
68-142(C) to allow the property owner additional time in which to connect to
the system without penalty or legal action, because of adverse weather
conditions;
      (3)   Appeals to review the unit factor assigned to a property;
      (4)   Applications for deferring partial or total payment of connection
charges in the cases of undue hardship.
   (D)   Final action. After hearing and considering an appeal, the Utility
Board of Appeals shall submit its recommendations as to granting, denying or
modifying the decision appealed or relief being sought to the City Council, and
the decision of the City Council on the matter shall be final.
(1993 Code, § 68-5) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. passed 10-14-2002; Ord. 2014-
01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-6 POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Users shall permit duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification to enter upon their property for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)    Duly authorized employees of the city may enter at all reasonable
times in or upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions or practices that may be in violation of this chapter
or detrimental to the system.
   (C)   Duly authorized employees of the city shall inspect onsite work
occurring by reason of any system permit. Such person shall have the right to
issue a cease and desist order on the site upon finding a violation of the
permit or of this chapter. The order shall contain a statement of the specific
violation and the appropriate means of correcting the violation and the time
within which corrections shall be made.
   (D)   Users shall permit duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of copying records relevant to the pretreatment program.
(1993 Code, § 68-6) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-7 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violation. The failure to perform any act required by this chapter or
the performance of an act prohibited by this chapter shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. In addition, the failure, neglect or refusal to
comply with a cease and desist order of the Department shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Criminal proceedings. Unless otherwise provided, a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed
$500 and costs of prosecution, by confinement in the county jail for a period
not exceeding 90 days or both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court. Each day that a violation continues or is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense, except that no person shall be confined or
jailed for a single but continuing violation for a period longer than 90 days.
(1993 Code, § 68-7) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-8 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with the system or any component of the
system.
(1993 Code, § 68-8) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-9 – 68-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. WATER
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 68-26 WATER SUPPLY.
   The city shall offer potable water to any property located within the city,
upon application by the property owner for connection to the water supply
system, in exchange for the payment of the fees and charges established by the
City Council from time to time, and subject to the rules and regulations
adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1993 Code, § 68-26) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-27 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager may recommend additional rules and regulations concerning
the water supply system, connection to the water supply system, meter
installation and maintenance, hydrants and water mains and appurtenances
thereto, not inconsistent with this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall
be effective upon approval by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 68-27) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-28 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Applications for water service connections shall be made to the Department
on forms prescribed and furnished by the Department. Service connections and
meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the
Department and upon payment of the required fee set by resolution of the City
Council from time to time in accordance with Article III. All meters shall be
the property of the system. The system shall be responsible for installation
and maintenance of all meters.
(1993 Code, § 68-28) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-29 TURNING ON SERVICE.
   Except as provided in this section, only authorized employees of the
Department shall turn on or off any water service. Licensed plumbers may turn
on water service for testing their work, when the service must be immediately
turned off, or upon receiving a written order from the Department. Upon written
permit from the Department, water may be turned on for construction purposes
only prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the premises and
upon payment of all required charges.
(1993 Code, § 68-29) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-30 HYDRANT USE.
   Except in cases of emergency, only employees of the city or persons having a
written permit from the Department may open or use a fire hydrant, and then
only in the performance of their duties. Any such hydrant use shall require the
use of an approved backflow prevention device.
(1993 Code, § 68-30) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-31 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   The city may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water for any purpose as
determined by the City Council to be in the best interests of the longevity and
safety of the water supply system. Such regulations shall restrict less
essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to ensure an adequate
supply for domestic and commercial needs and for firefighting. No such
regulation, limitation or prohibition shall be effective until 24 hours after
publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Any
person violating such regulation or rule shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as prescribed in §
1-16.
(1993 Code, § 68-31) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-32 INJURY TO FACILITIES.
   Only employees of the city, in the course of the performance of their
duties, may break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the water supply
system.
(1993 Code, § 68-32) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-33 – 68-45 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. METERS
§ 68-46 METERS REQUIRED.
   All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in
this Code. Only Department employees may break or injure the seal or change the
location of a meter, or otherwise alter or interfere with it in any way.
(1993 Code, § 68-46) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-47 ACCESS.
   The Department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any
premises where the Department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any
qualified employee of the Department shall at all reasonable hours have the
right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of
reading, testing, removing or inspecting the meter, and no person shall hinder,
obstruct or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his duties
in respect to the care and maintenance of such meter.
(1993 Code, § 68-47) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-48 REIMBURSEMENT FOR DAMAGE.
   (A)   The owner of a property served by the water supply system shall
reimburse the city for any damage that a water meter may sustain resulting from
carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant or from neglect by any of them to
properly secure and protect the meter, as well as for any damage that may be
caused by frost, hot water or steam backing from a boiler. If the owner fails
to pay the reimbursement within the time required in the bill, the Department
may shut off the water service until all charges have been paid to the city.
   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a shut off date by which the bill must be paid
to prevent discontinuation of service for non-payment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by
counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in
writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility
billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer’s service
not be discontinued and shall have the authority to revise the amount of the
customer’s bill.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge of such amount as is authorized from time to time by Council by
resolution.
(1993 Code, § 68-48) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-49 METER FAILURE.
   If any water meter shall fail to register properly, the Department shall
estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill
accordingly.
(1993 Code, § 68-49) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-50 ACCURACY REQUIRED.
   A water meter shall be considered to be accurate if, when tested, it
registers not more than 2% more or 2% less than the actual quantity of water
passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of 2% more than the actual
quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered fast to that
extent. If a meter registers more than 2% less than the actual quantity of
water passing through it, it shall be considered slow to that extent.
(1993 Code, § 68-50) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-51 INACCURATE METERS.
   A user may request the Department to test the meter. If the meter is
accurate, the user requesting the test shall pay the inspection charge. If the
meter is defective, the Department shall repair it or shall install a new meter
at no charge to the user, unless the Department determines that the meter
failed because of damage caused to the meter in violation of §
68-48.
(1993 Code, § 68-51) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-52 BILL ADJUSTMENT.
   If a water meter has been tested at the request of a user and has been found
to be fast, the Department shall credit the user with a sum equal to the
percent fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the user within
the 3 months prior to the test. If a meter so tested is found to be slow, the
Department may collect from the user a sum equal to the percent slow multiplied
by the amount of all bills incurred by the user for the prior 3 months. When
the Department tests a meter on its own initiative, the test shall be done
without cost to the user, other than the user's paying the amount due the city
for water used but not metered as provided in this section.
(1993 Code, § 68-52) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-53 REMOTE READERS – GENERALLY.
   The installation of remote readers for measuring water usage is required.
Water service shall not be turned on unless and until the premises is equipped
with a remote reader.
(1993 Code, § 68-53) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-54 SAME – INSTALLATION.
   No person shall install a remote reader for water use except in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Department.
(1993 Code, § 68-54) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-55 – 68-65 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. CROSS CONNECTIONS
§ 68-66 CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   As required by state law, the city hereby prohibits the installation of
cross connections, except as expressly permitted in writing by the Department
in accordance with the provisions of state law.
(1993 Code, § 68-66) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-67 RULES ADOPTED; INSPECTIONS; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The city adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules
of the State Department of Public Health, being R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the
Michigan Administrative Code.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Department to cause inspections to be made
of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connection with
the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Department and as approved by the State Department of Public
Health.
   (C)   Representatives of the Department shall have the right to enter after
reasonable notice at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the
piping systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessee or
occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any
pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The
refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be
deemed evidence of the presence of cross connection.
   (D)   The Department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water
service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this
section.
   (E)   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by
the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this section and by the State Plumbing Code. Any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
   WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING
   (F)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, but is
supplementary to it.
   (G)   Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions
of this section or any written order of the Department in pursuance thereof,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 for
each violation. Each day upon which a violation shall occur shall be deemed a
separate and additional violation.
(1993 Code, § 68-67) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-68 IMPLEMENTATION OF PROGRAM.
   In accordance with the requirements set forth by the State Department of
Public Health, the city has officially adopted the state cross connection
control rules to protect the city public water supply system. The cross
connection control program will take effect immediately upon approval of the
State Department of Public Health.
(1993 Code, § 68-68) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-69 LOCAL AUTHORITY.
   The authority to carry out and enforce a local cross connection control
program will be in accordance with this Code.
(1993 Code, § 68-69) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-70 LOCAL INSPECTION.
   The Department Superintendent or his designated agent shall be responsible
for making the initial cross connection inspections and reinspections to check
for the presence of cross connections with the city water supply system.
Individuals responsible for carrying out the cross connection inspections and
reinspections shall have obtained necessary training through any available
manuals on cross connection prevention, including the Cross Connection Rules
Manual as published by the State Department of Public Health, and attendance of
any cross connection training sessions sponsored by the State Department of
Public Health or other recognized agencies.
(1993 Code, § 68-70) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-71 SCHEDULE FOR INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The schedule for inspections for cross connections shall be in
accordance with the following general outline:
      (1)   Known or suspected secondary water supply cross connections shall
be inspected first; (Surface water, class 3 wells, recirculated water, and the
like.)
      (2)   Known or suspected submerged inlet cross connections will be
inspected next.
   (B)   In general, emphasis will be placed on making inspections initially of
all industrial and commercial establishments or where cross connections are
known or suspected to exist. A general review will follow in a logical sequence
as time permits.
(1993 Code, § 68-71) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-72 SCHEDULE FOR REINSPECTION.
   In order to ensure against the hazards of cross connections, it will be
necessary to periodically and systematically reinspect for the presence of
cross connections. The schedule for reinspection shall be in accordance with
the schedule noted in the Cross Connection Rules Manual. Whenever it is
suspected or known that modifications have taken place with piping systems
serving a particular water customer, reinspections of the premises will be
made.
(1993 Code, § 68-72) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-73 PROTECTIVE DEVICES.
   The method to protect against the hazards of cross connections as outlined
in the Cross Connection Rules Manual are incorporated by reference into the
City Cross Connection Control Program. Whenever any deviation from the
recommended methods of protection is contemplated, approval from the State
Department of Public Health shall be first obtained.
(1993 Code, § 68-73) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-74 COMPLIANCE TIME.
   The time allowed for correction or elimination of any cross connection found
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Cross connections which pose an eminent and extreme hazard shall be
disconnected immediately and so maintained until necessary protective devices
or modifications are made;
      (2)   Cross connections which do not pose an extreme hazard to the water
supply system but nevertheless constitute a cross connection should be
corrected within a reasonable period of time. The length of time allowed for
correction should be reasonable and may vary depending on the type of device
necessary for protection. The water utility shall indicate to each customer,
where a cross connection is found to exist, the time period allowed for
compliance.
(1993 Code, § 68-74) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-75 ANNUAL REPORT AND RECORD KEEPING.
   Sufficient data to complete an annual report to the State Department of
Public Health and to monitor the program adequately for city purposes will be
maintained by the City Water Department and its responsible agents. An
inspection form will be used during the initial inspection procedure.
Inspection forms will be used to monitor the status of the protective device as
well as the test results reported by a qualified backflow preventer tester.
Inspection forms will also be used for reinspection for cross connection.
(1993 Code, § 68-75) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-76 – 68-95 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. WATER AND SEWER RATES
§ 68-96 FIXING RATES.
   The City Council has determined that, in order to provide safe, adequate
water to the users of the system, and to assure safe transportation and
treatment of sewage discharged into the system by all users of the system, the
system must receive sufficient total annual revenue to ensure the proper
operation and maintenance of the system, the development and perpetuation of
the system, and the preservation of the financial integrity of the system. The
City Council has also determined that the system shall be self- sustaining,
supported solely by the revenues of the system and not dependent upon the
property tax payers of the city. To meet those ends, City Council shall
annually fix the rates and charges to be imposed on all users of each component
of the system in accordance with the principles and standards set forth in this
article.
(1993 Code, § 68-96) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-97 PURPOSE OF SEWER AND WATER RATES; ESTABLISHMENT OF COST OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The City Council has determined that the purpose of sewer and water
rates is to produce sufficient revenues each year to pay the costs of service.
The City Council has found that annual revenues and expenditures of the system
can fluctuate as much as 25% from year to year. Based on the recommendations of
the city's engineers, City Council has determined that, in order to provide
adequate, but not excessive, annual adjustments in revenue levels in a timely
manner, the Department shall develop the costs of service based on 5 year
projections of cash needs, adjusted for inflation, and shall base rates each
year on the estimated needs for those 5 year periods, adjusted annually.
   (B)   The costs of service to be paid from revenues shall include all of the
following:
      (1)   Operation and maintenance expenses;
      (2)   Debt service expenses; and
      (3)   Capital expenses not funded from bonded indebtedness.
(1993 Code, § 68-97) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-98 SERVICE TO CITY.
   (A)   The city shall pay the same water and sewer rates for service to the
city as would be payable by a private user for the same service.
   (B)   In addition, in recognition of the capacity requirements of fire
hydrants, the city shall pay a fee equal to 5% of the annual budgeted revenues
of the water supply system.
(1993 Code, § 68-98) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-99 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Charges for water and sewer usage shall be paid within 30 days of the
date which they are billed. Payments shall be deemed made when they are
received in the Treasurer's office or a city authorized depository. If payment
is not made as provided in this section, a penalty of 10% shall be added to the
bill. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the customer from the
responsibility for payment.
   (B)   Such charges shall constitute a lien upon the respective properties
served and if any charge is not paid before it becomes delinquent it may be
recovered by the city in an action in assumpsit against the owner of the
property served as well as any tenant supplied with such water, or such charges
may be certified to the City Treasurer by the City Council and assessed against
the property on the next city tax roll, in which event such charge shall be
collected and returned in the same manner as other city taxes are collected and
returned; provided that any charge shall not be so certified which has not been
delinquent for a period of a least 6 months. The effective date of
certification by City Council shall be May 1 of each year. In addition to any
other remedy provided in this chapter or by law, if such charges for water
consumed is not paid as provided in this section, the City Treasurer shall have
the authority to shut off the supply of water to any such premises, provided:
      (1)   Delinquent notice is provided by first class mail to the account
holder, which shall serve as due process, prior to the water being shut off;
      (2)   Shut off notice is provided to any occupant(s) of the property by
posting notice of same at the premises at least 3 days prior to the water being
shut off;
      (3)   After shut off, such connection shall not thereafter be reconnected
until all such water charges and penalties shall be paid, together with turn-on
charges.
   (C)   If the city shuts off the water supply by mistake, the City Manager or
his designee is authorized to credit the property owner an amount equal to the
shut-off fee.
   (D)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by
counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in
writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility
billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer’s service
not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination
of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge of such amount as is authorized from time to time by Council by
resolution.
(1993 Code, § 68-99) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. passed 1-14-2002; Ord. 2014-
01, passed 1-27- 2014; Ord. 2021-10, passed 8-2-2021)
§ 68-100 ALLOCATION OF COSTS OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The City Council has determined that not all classes of users of the
system cause the same costs of service. Based on the recommendations of
independent engineering consultants to the city, City Council has determined
the following:
      (1)   The commodity costs of water supply and some portions of the costs
of sewage disposal are uniform among users in accordance with the volume of
use;
      (2)   Indirect costs of water supply and sewage transportation, including
size of service pipe, materials used, locations of meters, size of storage and
treatment facilities, and maintenance, billing and collection costs vary
according to the size of meters;
      (3)   While all users benefit equally from capital improvements to the
system, users taking possession of previously undeveloped properties, and users
changing the nature and amount of use of the system at renovated or expanded
properties would not bear equally the cost of those capital improvements unless
required to pay a system equity charge;
      (4)   Certain types of property uses require a reservation of a greater
capacity of the system than others;
      (5)   At least 50% of the costs of service to all customers is related to
the indirect costs of service;
      (6)   Current technology does not support the efficient and cost
effective metering of sanitary sewage discharged into the sanitary sewage
disposal system. As a result, the city has determined that the most equitable
measure of the volume of sanitary sewage discharged into the system is the
amount of water consumed;
      (7)   The city will offer service to properties located outside the city
limits only pursuant to city-township contract.
   (B)   The City Council has therefore developed the following classes of
users.
      (1)   For meters of the following sizes, the following meter equivalency
ratios for purposes of allocating the base amount of the indirect costs of
service and calculating the quarterly base rate per meter size:
Meter Size (inches) AWWA Meter Capacity Ratio
Meter Size (inches) AWWA Meter Capacity Ratio
5/8 and 3/4         1.0
1                   1.6
1-1/2               3.3
2                   5.3
3                   10.0
4                   15.5
6                   33.3
 
      (2)   All classes of users shall pay the same rate per gallon of metered
water for water supply and sewage transportation services.
      (3)   For purposes of calculating the system equity charge, City Council
has decided to use a table of unit factors, a copy of which is on file with the
Director, based on a unit equaling 250 gallons of water consumed per day per
year, as recommended by the city's consulting engineers.
      (4)   The base charge shall be calculated so as to produce no less than
50% of the annual budgeted expenditures of the system.
      (5)   The amount of water consumed is generally an appropriate and fair
indicator of the amount of sanitary sewage discharged into the sanitary sewage
disposal system.
      (6)   Where a user discharges sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewage
disposal system but does not use the water supply system, or where a property
uses large quantities of water that are not disposed of through the sanitary
sewage system, the Department shall propose and the City Council shall adopt,
methods of allocating the costs of service to those properties based on the
estimated use of the sanitary sewage system.
(1993 Code, § 68-100) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-101 SPECIFIC RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Consumption charge. Every user shall pay a consumption charge
calculated on the basis of metered gallons per day of water consumed at a rate
determined by City Council to produce an estimated 45% of the annual budgeted
revenues of the system.
   (B)   Base charge. Every user shall pay a base charge calculated on the
basis of meter capacity ratio in an amount determined by Council to produce an
estimated 50% of the annual budgeted revenues of the system.
   (C)   System equity charge. The purpose of the system equity charge is to
recover certain of the capital costs incurred to provide sufficient capacity to
all users from those users that have not previously paid their share of those
costs. Every person seeking to utilize the system for a use estimated to demand
the reservation of greater capacity of the system shall pay a system equity
charge established and managed as provided in this section.
      (1)   Calculation of estimated demand on capacity. The estimated demand
on capacity of the system shall be based on the unit factor assigned to the
type of use described in the table of unit factors approved by City Council
from time to time, based on historic average use for each type of use.
      (2)   Calculation of system equity. System equity shall be determined
annually on the basis of the value of system assets comprising the backbone
facilities of the system, including, but not limited to, wells, reservoirs,
treatment plants, mains, distribution mains and high service pumps, plus funds
in the Replacement and Improvement Fund, plus accumulated depreciation, less
the amount of any grants received to fund system assets, and less the principal
amount of bonds remaining outstanding and incurred to finance those assets.
      (3)   Calculation of system equity charge. The system equity charge shall
be determined each year as follows:
   System Equity x residential equivalent unit factor
                            Total number of existing Meter Equivalent Units
      (4)   Credits. If the system equity charge relates to an increase in
demand on capacity, the city shall provide residential equivalent unit credits
in the following order:
         (a)   The number of documented residential equivalent units previously
paid for connection of that property to the system;
         (b)   If the number of residential equivalent units paid for
previously can not be identified, the residential equivalent units shall be
determined by the latest 2 year average billable flow divided by 250 gallons
per day per year;
         (c)   If the latest 2 year average billable flow cannot be determined,
the residential equivalent units shall be determined by the table of unit
factor based on the properties' previous use.
      (5)   Use of proceeds of the system equity charge. Proceeds of the system
equity charge shall be used exclusively to pay for replacements and
improvements to the system, other than extensions of service to new users.
      (6)   Appeals. A person may challenge the unit factor applicable to the
property being connected to the system, or the amount of the system equity
charge by bringing an appeal to the Utility Board of Appeals within 24 months
of payment of the charge and after review of the City Manager. In considering
the appeal, the Utility Board of Appeals shall take into account the historical
volume of use by the appellant for the previous 24 months.
   (D)   System equity charges for buildings built before 1960. The purpose of
this section amendment is to encourage the redevelopment of structures
originally constructed before December 31, 1959. For all structures built
before this date which: 1) involves a change of use and 2) which use is
estimated to demand a greater reservation of capacity, the equity investment
fee shall be half of the fee set by resolution of the City Council for new
construction. By resolution of the City Council, payment for the equity
investment charge can be deferred for a period of up to 2 years. Any deferrals
shall be filed as a lien on the property.
   (E)   Tap fee. Each person connecting to the system shall pay the actual
costs of the material, meter, labor, equipment and supervision related to the
installation of the connection and the meter, plus an administrative charge
equal to 10% of the actual costs of the connection.
   (F)   Inspection fee. Each person connecting to the system shall also pay a
fee for inspection of the premises during connection to the system, which fee
shall be set from time to time by City Council by resolution.
(1993 Code, § 68-101) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. passed 1-13-2003(1); Ord.
2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-102 DELINQUENCIES; LIENS ON PROPERTY.
   As authorized by the provisions of Public Act 94 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§
141.101 through 141.138, as amended, if a user shall fail to pay a bill within
6 months of the date on which the bill is due and payable, the delinquent bill
and all penalties thereon shall become a lien on the premises served. The City
Assessor shall place such charges on the next general tax roll, and the charges
shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for
the collection of taxes by the city.
(1993 Code, § 68-102) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-103 – 68-119 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. SEWERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 68-120 INDUSTRIAL USE OF SYSTEM.
   Any industry or structure discharging or desiring to discharge industrial
waste to the wastewater treatment and collection system shall provide the city
with the following information or material and do the following:
      (1)   A written statement setting forth the nature of the enterprise, the
source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be discharged, with its
present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical, radio-active or other
pertinent characteristics of the wastes;
      (2)   A plan map of the building, works or complex with each outfall to
the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural watercourse or ground
waters noted, described and the waste stream identified;
      (3)   A test sample and file reports with the city and the appropriate
state agencies on appropriate characteristics of wastes on a schedule, at
locations and according to methods approved by the city;
      (4)   Place waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams
or other potential waste problems under the specific supervision and control of
persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as properly
qualified to supervise such facilities;
      (5)   A report on raw materials entering the processor support systems,
intermediate materials, final products and waste byproducts, as these factors
may pertain to waste control;
      (6)   Maintain records and file reports on the final disposal of specific
liquid, solid, sludges, oils, radioactive materials, solvents or other waste;
      (7)   If any industrial process is to be altered as to include or negate
a process waste or potential waste, written notification shall be given to the
city, subject to approval of the waste product.
(1993 Code, § 68-120) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-121 CONNECTION OF PRIVATELY CONSTRUCTED SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS.
   Before any sanitary sewer system shall be permitted to connect to the
wastewater treatment and collection system, except those sanitary sewer systems
constructed by or on behalf of the city, the owner or developer of such system
shall do and provide the city with the following.
      (1)   Provide the city with the developer's plans and specifications for
construction, an estimate of the cost of construction and a performance bond
and deposit with the city the estimated cost of review of construction plans
covering the cost of hiring a registered professional engineer to review plans
and specifications, which monies shall be placed by the city in an escrow
account in the name of the developer.
      (2)   Obtain approval of the city of the plans and specifications.
      (3)   Secure all necessary permits for construction.
      (4)   Upon commencement of construction of the private sanitary sewer,
deposit with the city in the escrow account referred to in subsection (1) of
this section a sum of 4% of the cost of construction of the waste-water system
improvements to cover the anticipated cost of inspection of construction and
payment of connection charges.
(1993 Code, § 68-121) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-122 – 68-140 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 68-141 CONNECTION.
   (A)   Required. Each and every owner of property on which is located a
structure in which sanitary sewage originates shall, at his own expense,
install suitable toilet facilities in such structure and shall cause such
facilities to be connected to the available public sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   Penalties for late connection. Failure or refusal to connect to the
system within the time prescribed in §
68-142 shall result in the property being charged a penalty of $100 for each
single-family residential unit multiplied by the number of units or multiplying
factors as established by the table of unit factors.
   (C)   Civil penalties. If any structure wherein sanitary sewage originates
is not connected to the system 90 days after the date of mailing or otherwise
serving notice to connect set forth in §
68-142, the city may bring an action for mandatory injunction or injunctive
order in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county to compel the owner
of the property on which the structure is located to connect to the system. The
city may charge in such action any number of owners of such properties to
compel the persons to connect to the system.
(1993 Code, § 68-141) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-142 CONNECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The connection required in §
68-141 shall be completed promptly but in no case later than 90 days from the
date of the occurrence of the last of the following events:
      (1)   Publication of a notice by the City Clerk of the availability of
the public sanitary sewer system in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city and the mailing of written notice indicating the availability of the
public sanitary sewer to the owner or any of the owners in the case of co-
ownership of the property in question;
      (2)   Modification of a structure so as to become a structure where
sanitary sewage originates;
      (3)   Improvement of land with building or structures from which sanitary
sewage originates.
   (B)   If the owner of property on which is located a structure in which
sanitary sewage originates does not complete connection to an available
sanitary sewer within the 90 day period described in subsection (A) of this
section, the City Clerk shall notify such person by written notice that
connection to the system is required forthwith. The giving of notice shall be
made by first class mail to the owner of the property on which the structure is
located or by posting such notice on the property. Notice shall provide the
owner with the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer system which
is available for connection of the structure involved and shall advise the
owner of the requirements and the enforcement provisions of this Code.
   (C)   If the property owner is unable to connect to the system within the
time prescribed by this section because of inclement or adverse weather
conditions, the property owner may appeal to the utility board of appeals,
established pursuant to §
68-5, to allow the person additional time in which to connect without penalty
and without civil and criminal proceedings being initiated against him. The
appeal shall be made in writing within 10 days of notice of sanitary sewer
availability as set forth in this section.
(1993 Code, § 68-142) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-143 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited upon any public or private property within the city or any area under
its jurisdiction any human excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary
sewage, industrial waste or other polluted water except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage or industrial waste.
   (D)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§§
68-141 and
68-143, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sanitary sewer
disposal system which shall be approved by the County Health Department.
   (E)   At such time as the public sanitary sewer system becomes available to
premises served by a private sanitary sewage disposal system, connection to the
public system shall be made in compliance with this article, and any septic
tank, cesspool and similar private disposal facilities located thereon shall be
abandoned in accordance with County Health Department regulations and
discontinued for sanitary sewage disposal use.
   (F)   All private sanitary sewage disposal systems maintained in compliance
with this article shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at the
sole expense of the owner thereof.
   (G)   All abandoned private sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be
completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete or other approved
material. Upon the abandonment or discontinuation of use of a septic tank or
privy, the sewage and sludge contents thereof shall be completely removed and
disposed of by a septic tank cleaner who is duly licensed. The tank or the pit,
in the instance of a privy, shall be treated with at least 10 pounds of
chlorinated lime or other chemical or disinfectant acceptable to the health
officer, and the tank or pit shall be completely backfilled with approved
material and made safe from the hazard of collapse or entrapment.
(1993 Code, § 68-143) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-144 – 68-155 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 68-156 BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer (lead) shall be provided for
every building.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the building
sewer and the connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be
borne by the property owner.
   (C)   All building sewers (leads) shall meet or exceed the requirements of
this Code.
   (D)   Building sewers shall consist of pipes and fittings of the following
types and sizes:
      (1)   Pipe must be of sufficient diameter to carry the estimated volume
of discharge. Minimum pipe size permitted is 4 inch ID;
      (2)   Pipe must be 1 of the following materials and cannot be mixed in
the connection lines to include the fittings:
         (a)   Cast iron with rubber-type gaskets;
         (b)   Cast iron NH pipe with neoprene stainless couplings;
         (c)   Ductile iron with rubber-type gaskets, slip joint or mechanical
joint;
         (d)   Vitrified clay tile with ASTM C425 joints;
         (e)   Reinforced concrete with ASTM C443 joints;
         (f)   PVC plastic, schedule 40 or better;
      (3)   No tees, double tees, or crosses or double hub pipes shall be
permitted; and
      (4)   All changes in grades or direction shall be made with appropriate
fittings.
   (E)   Cleanouts shall be installed every 50 feet of straight run and at each
45 degree direction change, and all cleanouts shall be plugged. All cleanouts
shall be the same diameter as the pipe they serve.
   (F)   All lines shall be laid at a minimum slope of 1/8 inch per foot grade
and a maximum slope of ½ inch per foot grade for 4 inch lines and a minimum of
1/8 inch per foot grade and a maximum ½ inch per foot grade for 6 inch lines.
   (G)   The method to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the
Plumbing Code rules (Part 7) issued by the State Department of Labor
Construction Code Commission and the regulations of the city, where applicable.
   (H)   No building sewer shall be laid within 3 feet of any bearing wall. The
depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   (I)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall
be lifted by a pumping system and discharged to the building sewer.
   (J)   All excavation for building sewer installation and connection shall be
adequately guarded by barricades and lighting so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the installation and connection work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(1993 Code, § 68-156) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-157 CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereto without first
obtaining a written connection permit from the city. Each non-domestic user
shall be required to submit to the POTW superintendent in such form as the
superintendent shall require a baseline monitoring report.
   (B)   The fee, if any, for the connection permit shall be an amount
established by resolution of the City Council from time to time to recover the
actual costs to city of the granting and administration of the permit.
   (C)   The owner or contractor applying for a connection permit will provide
the city a sketch of the installation showing all dimensions, direction and
such other information concerning the installation as shall be requested by the
city. The owner or contractor will receive one copy of the connection permit. A
second copy will remain the property of the city.
   (D)   No connection to the system will be permitted unless there is capacity
available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage
treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids.
   (E)   All connections to the system will be made by a licensed contractor or
plumber; provided, however, that a property owner may make his own installation
and connection in accordance with the requirements of this article and law so
long as he has secured a connection permit.
   (F)   All licensed contractors and plumbers making connections to the
systems shall file with the city a copy of their plumbers’ or contractors’
license from the state and a copy of their liability insurance prior to
performing any connections to the system.
   (G)   No person shall connect roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway
drains or any sources of surface water or groundwater to a building sewer which
in turn is connected to the system.
   (H)   No building sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected
and approved by authorized personnel of the city or its designee. No building
sewer may be used until finally approved after the trench is backfilled and an
air test is conducted.
(1993 Code, § 68-157) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-158 – 68-170 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. PUBLIC SEWER USE
§ 68-171 STORMWATER, GROUNDWATER AND UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater or roof water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater, groundwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged into storm drains or to a natural outlet approved by the city.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon
application to and approval by the city, to a storm drain or natural outlet.
(1993 Code, § 68-171) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-172 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   The following discharges to the public sewer system shall be prohibited.
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit or of a temperature which causes the influent to the treatment plant
to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit, whichever is lower.
   (B)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, petroleum oil, non-
biodegradable cutting oil products or mineral oil in amounts that would cause
interference or pass through, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas.
   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
   (D)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
   (E)   Discharges greater than the following concentrations of specific
pollutants:
Daily Maximum (24-hour composite) - unless otherwise specified below
Daily Maximum (24-hour composite) - unless otherwise specified below
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) 1600 mg/l
Total suspended solids          2200 mg/l
Total phosphorus                30 mg/l
Fats, total (grab)              250 mg/l*
Fats, non-polar (grab)          50 mg/l
Phosphorus                      30 mg/l
Ammonia-N                       22 mg/l
pH (grab)                       Lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0*
Inorganics
Inorganics
Aluminum                  34.2 mg/l
Arsenic                   0.26 mg/l
Beryllium                 0.01 mg/l
Cadmium                   0.032 mg/l
Chromium                  1.2 mg/l
Copper                    0.9 mg/l
Available cyanide1 (grab) 0.03 mg/l*
Lead                      0.16 mg/l
Total mercury3            Non-detect
Molybdenum                0.18 mg/l
Nickel                    0.25 mg/l
Selenium                  0.09 mg/l
Silver                    0.014 mg/l
Zinc                      1.4 mg/l
 
Notes:
1   Nondetectible per U.S. EPA method 245.
2   Nondetectible per U.S. EPA method 608.
3   Nondetectible per U.S. EPA method 245.1 at a detection level of 0.2 µg/l.
*   Based on daily mean calculated from a minimum of four appropriately spaced
grab samples in lieu of 24-hour composite.
      A user shall comply with all categorical pretreatment standards and any
other pretreatment requirements established under §§ 307(b), 307(c), or 402(b)
(8) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) that are applicable to that user. If a
categorical pretreatment standard and another limit contained in this article
regulate any same pollutant, then the more restrictive of the two shall apply.
      Future conditions imposed on the city by government agencies with proper
jurisdiction may require subsequent amendment of this subsection by the city.
Where federal- or state-promulgated pretreatment standards require limits on
parameters not covered in this subsection or limits more stringent than those
specified in this subsection, the state or federal limits shall have precedence
and take effect with respect to the applicable user on the later of: (i) their
promulgation date, or (ii) the date specified for compliance with such
standards.
   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant.
   (G)   Any pollutants to the POTW that result in toxic gases, vapors, and
fumes in quantities that might cause worker health and safety problems, or any
malodorous gas or liquid substances capable of creating a public nuisance.
   (H)   No industrial waste that may cause a deviation from the NPDES permit
requirements, pretreatment standards and all other state and federal
regulations.
   (I)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater system.
   (J)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in
compliance with the applicable state or federal regulations.
   (K)   Any discharge to the sewer which will result in a nuisance or
contamination or pollution of receiving waters.
   (L)   Any discharge which would violate any statute, rule, EPA regulation or
ordinance of any public agency.
   (M)   Any pollutants with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees
Fahrenheit.
   (N)   Any trucked or hauled wastes to POTWs, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW. Any truck waste which is targeted for discharge into
the POTW system must receive written permission from the city prior to
discharge. A report must be prepared indicating what type of waste is going to
be discharged and in what condition the pollutant will be.
(1993 Code, § 68-172) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014;
Ord. 2025-03, passed 4-28-2025)
§ 68-173 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS OR TRAPS.
   (A)   Interceptors/traps required.
      (1)   Grease interceptors/traps shall be provided and maintained in
proper operating condition at all times at the expense of the property owner
for the proper handing of liquid waste containing grease. Grease interceptors/
traps shall be required for all food service establishments and may be required
for other users as determined necessary by the POTW superintendent. Grease
interceptors shall be sized, constructed, and installed as required by the
city’s specifications and subject to the POTW superintendent’s approval. At a
minimum, grease interceptors, traps shall be cleaned and maintained per the
manufacturer’s specifications and as provided by this section at the property
owner’s expense.
      (2)   Oil and sand interceptors/traps may be required in any
establishment where sand, oil, and flammable wastes or other harmful
ingredients could enter the wastewater. If a plug or backup occurs and is
directly caused by sand and/or oil, the POTW superintendent may require the
establishment to install an oil and sand interceptor/trap. Oil and sand
interceptors/traps are required for establishments engaged in the washing of
motor vehicles.
      (3)   All interceptors/traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed
of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers which, when bolted into place, shall be gas tight
and watertight. Grease interceptors shall provide a minimum capacity of 750
gallons.
      (4)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors/traps shall
be cleaned and maintained by the owner, at the owner’s sole expense, and shall
be kept in continuously efficient operation at all times. At a minimum, any
user required to install an interceptor shall comply with the best management
practices as provided.
   (B)   Best management practices (BMPs).
      (1)   Any user required to install and maintain an interceptor (trap) of
any kind shall develop and carry out a system of maintenance and clean out of
such device(s) and shall document and keep:
         (a)   A maintenance schedule;
         (b)   The identity of the person(s) who cleaned and maintained the
interceptor; and
         (c)   The method and location of grease, oil and sand disposal.
      (2)   Any problems with or damage to an interceptor/trap shall be
reported immediately to the owner and the POTW superintendent.
      (3)   Any damage to an interceptor/trap shall be immediately repaired.
      (4)   No interceptor/trap clean out material shall be discharged into a
sewer.
      (5)   No bacteria or enzyme products shall be used in the maintenance of
the interceptor/traps.
      (6)   All users shall implement BMPs for grease management to minimize
the discharge of food grease to the POTW.
      (7)   Specific BMPs for grease interceptors/traps. All users required to
install and maintain grease interceptors (traps) shall comply with the
following minimum requirements:
         (a)   Under sink grease traps shall be cleaned at least weekly.
         (b)   Clean outs of all other interceptor/traps shall be scheduled
such that the interceptor/trap does not exceed 25% solids content (including
both the top and bottom layers of solids) and there is no visible discharge of
grease or oil. At a minimum, an interceptor/traps shall be cleaned out at least
once every 3 months.
         (c)   The cleanout shall be accomplished by pumping to remove the
entire grease mat, liquids, sludges, and solids from screens, baffles, air-
relief chambers, and wash down of interior walls. The interceptor/trap shall be
refilled with clear water before being returned to service.
         (d)   The user shall witness all clean out and maintenance of
interceptor/traps.
   (C)   Documentation available for review. The documentation required by this
section shall be available for review by the POTW and copies shall be provided
to the POTW upon request.
   (D)   Right to inspect. The POTW shall have the right to inspect a
restaurant (or other establishment where an interceptor/trap is required) at
any time for any reason.
   (E)   Failure to comply. The failure of a restaurant (or other establishment
where an interceptor/trap is required) to comply with this section may subject
the violator to enforcement action and remedies as may be available by law and
the terms of this article.
   (F)   Failure to maintain required interceptor/trap. If a user fails to
provide or maintain a required interceptor/trap, the city may do so (or cause
the same to be done) and charge the costs to the user.
(1993 Code, § 68-173) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-174 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   (A)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes:
      (1)   Containing a 5 day BOD greater than 300 mg/l or containing more
than 350 mg/l of suspended solids or 10 mg/l of phosphorus;
      (2)   Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics
described in §
68-172; or
      (3)   Having any average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
flow of the city shall be subject to review and approval of the city.
Preliminary treatment shall be provided, at no expense to the city, as may be
necessary to reduce the BOD to 300 mg/l and suspended solids to 350 mg/l or to
reduce objectionable characteristics of the effluent to within the maximum
limits provided for in §
68-172 or to control the quantity and rates of discharges of such waters or
wastes. On direction of the city, a person may be required to remove, exclude,
or require pretreatment of any industrial waste, in whole or in part, for any
reasons deemed to be in the city’s interest. Where preliminary treatment
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in
satisfactory and effective operation at no expense to the city. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval to the city,
and no construction of such facility shall be commenced until the approvals are
obtained in writing. The city may elect to treat industrial wastes discharged
in excess of normal domestic concentrations on a basis prescribed by written
agreement and for an established surcharge to cover the added cost. All such
preliminary treatment or pretreatment shall be in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations, including §§
68-186 et seq. All expenses of city services of such preliminary treatment
facilities, plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner.
   (B)   Grinder pump station required.
      (1)   Grinder pump station shall be provided and maintained in the proper
operating condition at all times at the expense of the property owner for the
proper handling of liquid waste containing any materials which would be capable
of causing an obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
      (2)   Grinder pumps will be required for any non-domestic user whom may
have the potential of discharging any material which may cause obstruction to
sewer flow. Grinder pumps may be required for other users as determined
necessary by the POTW superintendent.
      (3)   Grinder pump stations shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning, inspection, and maintenance.
      (4)   Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall close the sewage
system and cease operation during any period when the grinder pump and/or low
pressure system serving a property is inoperable.
      (5)   Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full
responsibility for providing, installing, using, operating, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, and replacing his or her grinder pump and/or its low
pressure force main or lateral, unless otherwise set forth herein.
(1993 Code, § 68-174) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-175 INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
   (B)   All measurements, test and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which references are made in §§
68-172 and
68-174 shall be determined in accordance with Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, Federal Regulation, 40 C.F.R. 136, as
amended, published in the Federal Register, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided for in subsection (A) of this section or upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (C)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city, subject to payment of surcharge by the industrial
concern.
(1993 Code, § 68-175) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-176 GENERAL/SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Allowable bypasses. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur
which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (C) and (D) of
this section.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass if possible.
      (2)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within 5 days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-
case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (C)   Conditions.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The industrial user submitted notices as required under
subsection (C) of this section.
      (2)   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the 3 conditions
listed in subsection (C)(1) of this section.
(1993 Code, § 68-176) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§§ 68-177 – 68-185 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5. PRETREATMENT
§ 68-186 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This division sets forth requirements for dischargers into the POTW
wastewater collection systems, treatment systems, surface waters, groundwaters,
storm sewers, septic systems, dry wells or on the ground and enables the city
POTW to protect public health, the environment and the POTW in conformity with
all applicable local, state and federal laws relating thereto.
   (B)   The objectives of this division are to:
      (1)   Control or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of
the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
      (2)   Control or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW
and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere
or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system;
      (4)   Control or prevent discharges or potential discharges (storage of
materials) to systems or areas under the jurisdiction of this city that may
impair the environment.
   (C)   The city will be responsible for the monitoring of the pretreatment
program, unless the industrial user has written permission from the city to
perform its own monitoring. If the city performs the monitoring, it has the
right to demand reimbursement of all labor, maintenance and lab fees associated
with the monitoring period. If the industrial user has written permission to
perform its own monitoring, the industrial user must notify the POTW within 24
hours of a violation. It is also required that the industrial user resample and
resubmit the results within 30 days to the POTW.
(1993 Code, § 68-186) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-187 POTW INSPECTION, SURVEILLANCE AND MONITORING AUTHORITY; RIGHT OF
ENTRY.
   (A)   In general. The POTW is authorized to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, sampling and monitoring activities and procedures as necessary to
determine, independent of information supplied by users or any other persons,
compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements, with this article, and with other applicable laws and
regulations. This authority includes but is not limited to the authority:
      (1)   To verify the completeness, accuracy and representativeness of
self-monitoring data submitted by users.
      (2)   To determine compliance with the requirements of this article or
with wastewater discharge permits.
      (3)   To support enforcement actions taken by the POTW against non-
compliant users.
      (4)   To determine if users have corrected problems identified in
previous inspections.
      (5)   To identify which (and to what degree) users influence the quality
of the POTW’s influent, effluent and sludge quality.
      (6)   To evaluate the impacts of the POTW’s influent on its treatment
processes and receiving stream.
      (7)   To evaluate the need for revised local limits.
      (8)   To maintain current data on each user.
      (9)   To assess the adequacy of each user’s self-monitoring program and
wastewater discharge permit.
      (10)   To provide a basis for establishing sampling and monitoring
requirements for users.
      (11)   To evaluate the adequacy of each user’s operation and maintenance
activities on its pretreatment system.
      (12)   To assess the potential for spills and/or slug discharge control
measures, and evaluate the effectiveness of spill and slug discharge control
measures.
      (13)   To gather information for user permit development.
      (14)   To evaluate compliance with existing enforcement actions.
      (15)   To require any user to submit one or more representative samples
of the wastewater discharged or that the user proposes to discharge into the
POTW.
   (B)   Right of entry. The POTW superintendent and other authorized
representative of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are
authorized to enter any premises which is connected to the POTW to conduct
inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities as necessary to determine
compliance with this article, and in that regard shall have, but shall not be
limited to, the following authority:
      (1)   To enter into any premises of any user in which a discharge source,
treatment system or activity is located or in which records are required to be
kept as provided by this article, for the purpose of inspecting, observing,
measuring, sampling and testing the wastewater discharge, removing samples of
wastewater for analysis, and inspecting and making copies of required records.
This shall include the right to take photographs.
      (2)   To set up and maintain on the discharger’s property such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations, or to require the discharger to do so, at the discharger’s
sole expense.
      (3)   To randomly sample and analyze the effluent from users and conduct
surveillance activities to identify occasional and continuing noncompliance
with applicable standards and requirements. The POTW shall inspect and sample
the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year.
      (4)   To inspect any production, manufacturing, fabrication, or storage
area where pollutants, subject to regulations under this article, could
originate, be stored, or be discharged to the POTW.
      (5)   To enter all private properties through which the city or other
governmental agency holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the POTW or wastewater transmission facilities lying with the
easement.
      (6)   City representatives entering a user’s premises for purposes
authorized by this article shall comply with the user’s plant safety
requirements regarding such matters as entry into confined spaces, use of
safety glasses, and hearing protection requirements, as requested by the user.
Entry shall be commenced and completed as expeditiously as practicable.
   (C)   Access without delay required. Users shall allow the POTW ready access
to all reasonably times to all parts of the user’s facility where wastewater
governed by this article is created, handled, conveyed, treated or discharged,
or where any production, manufacturing, fabrication, or storage area where
pollutants regulated under this article could originate, be stored, or be
discharged to the POTW, or where wastewater records are kept, for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, records examination, or in the performance of any of
the POTW’s duties. If a user has security measures in force that would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises by the POTW,
the user shall make necessary arrangements in advance with its security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, authorized
representatives of the POTW (or authorized state or federal personnel) will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Upon arrival at the user’s premises, POTW
representatives shall inform the user or its employees that inspections,
sampling, compliance monitoring, metering or other POTW procedures are to be
performed and that the user has the right to accompany the POTW employee/
representative during the performance of his or her duties.
   (D)   Refusal to allow entry. If a user refuses to permit access (or
unreasonably delays access) to an authorized POTW representative or to permit
the representative to obtain, take, and remove samples or make copies of
documents or undertake other authorized inspection, surveillance and monitoring
activities as provided by this article, the POTW superintendent may order the
termination of the discharge of wastewater to the POTW; order the user to
permit access within a certain time, issue the user a notice of violation of
this section, or take other appropriate action as provided by this article and
other applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, obtaining
a court order.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-188 LIMITATION ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards. National categorical
pretreatment standards, as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345 et seq.) and as adopted as
Appendix C to this article, which appendix is on file in the office of the City
Clerk, shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories.
An application for modification of the national categorical pretreatment
standards may be considered for submittal to the regional administrator by the
approval authority, when the approval authority’s wastewater treatment system
achieves consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.7.
   (B)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards
in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in this or any other applicable ordinance.
   (C)   Right of revision. The approval authority reserves the right to amend
this article to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set
forth in §
68-186.
   (D)   Dilution. No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process
water in any way nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the standards set forth in this article.
   (E)   Notice of potential problems. All categorical and noncategorical
industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could
cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, as defined by 40
C.F.R. 403.5(b), by the industrial user.
   (F)   Net/gross and federal categorical pretreatment standards. A user may
apply to the city for an adjustment in a federal categorical pretreatment
standard to reflect the presence of pollutants in the user’s intake water in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.15. If such an adjustment is made, the adjusted
federal categorical pretreatment standard shall apply, provided the adjustment
will not result in interference or pass through.
   (G)   Removal credits. Removal credits will be awarded to those POTWs who
follow the requirements set in 40 C.F.R. 403.7.
   (H)   RCRA notification. It is the responsibility of the industrial user to
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Director, and the state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. 261.
(1993 Code, § 68-187) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-189 POTW’S RIGHT TO REFUSE OR CONDITION DISCHARGE; POLLUTANT REDUCTION
PLANS, BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   In general. The POTW may refuse to accept, or may condition the
acceptance of, all or any portion of any proposed or existing discharge to the
POTW, regardless of whether or not a wastewater discharge permit has been
issued for the discharge, if the POTW superintendent determines that the
discharge has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the
POTW; result in pass through or interference; violate any pretreatment standard
or requirement; cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit; or if the impacts
of the discharge on the POTW or the POTW’s discharge are uncertain or unknown
(because, for example, no local limits or headworks analysis has been conducted
for particular pollutants in the discharge). If the POTW superintendent denies
any person permission to commence or continue all or any portion of a discharge
or shall immediately terminate the discharge to the POTW, the person shall
refrain from commencing to discharge or shall immediately terminate the
discharge to the POTW and shall not thereafter recommence discharge without
written authorization from the POTW superintendent. Similarly, if the POTW
superintendent denies any person permission to commence or continue all or any
portion of a discharge to the POTW except subject to conditions determined
necessary and appropriate by the POTW superintendent, the person shall refrain
from commencing or continuing the discharge except in full compliance with
those conditions. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
imposition of surcharges, pretreatment requirements, reduction plans, best
management practices, and any other conditions or requirements, or combination
thereof, determined necessary by the POTW superintendent to comply with the
purposes and requirements of this article. The failure to comply with any
condition or requirement imposed under this section or other provisions of this
article constitutes a separate violation and shall be subject to fines,
penalties and other sanctions as provided by this article.
   (B)   The POTW authority and the industry may enter into an agreement under
which the authority may treat a particular waste, subject to payment therefor
by the industry, unless prohibited by state or federal law.
   (C)   Pollutant reduction plans. If determined necessary by the POTW
superintendent to prevent interference or pass through, to protect the POTW, to
comply with applicable federal or state laws or regulations, to comply with the
POTW's NPDES permit, or to otherwise meet the purposes and objectives of this
article, any user determined by the POTW superintendent to have a reasonable
potential to discharge any regulated pollutant (including, but not limited to,
mercury or PCBs) to the POTW may be required to develop, submit for approval,
and implement a reduction plan ("RP") for the pollutant, as provided by this
section. The RP may be imposed as a condition to a wastewater discharge permit,
or may be required independently by order of the superintendent and even if a
wastewater discharge permit has been issued to the user.
      (1)   At a minimum, the RP shall contain such requirements and
conditions, as determined necessary by the POTW superintendent to ensure that
the pollutant reduction efforts will be effective in achieving the goals of
this article (including, but not limited to, requirements and conditions
regarding user source identification; best management practices; schedules of
compliance; monitoring, sampling and analysis; reporting; treatment system for
removal of the pollutant from the discharged wastewater; written procedures for
disposal of contaminated wastes and wastewater; employee training, and ongoing
employee training requirements regarding pollutant related issues; elimination,
if feasible, of any purchased materials containing the pollutant; and any other
elements determined necessary and appropriate under the circumstances by the
POTW superintendent).
      (2)   The goals of an RP shall be to maintain the amount of one or more
pollutants or substances at or below the applicable discharge limits or levels,
to minimize discharge of a pollutant as much as possible, or such other goals
as required by the POTW. The POTW superintendent may, in the superintendent's
discretion, consider cost-effectiveness during the development and
implementation of an RP.
      (3)   The POTW superintendent may require any user to submit an RP that
describes the control strategy designed to proceed toward achievement of the
specified goal and which shall at a minimum include, but shall not be limited
to, all of the following as determined necessary by the POTW superintendent on
a case-by-case basis;
         (a)   Periodic monitoring for the pollutant in the user's discharge.
         (b)   Periodic monitoring of the potential sources of the pollutant in
the user's discharge.
         (c)   A commitment by the user that reasonable control measures and/or
best management practices will be implemented when sources of the pollutant are
discovered. Factors to be considered by the POTW may include the following:
            1.   Significance of sources.
            2.   Economic considerations.
            3.   Technical and treatability considerations.
            4.   Such other factors as determined appropriate by the POTW
superintendent.
         (d)   An annual status report. The report shall be sent by the user to
the POTW and shall include, at a minimum, all of the following:
            1.   All RP monitoring results for the previous year.
            2.   A list of potential sources of the pollutant in the user's
discharge.
            3.   A summary of all actions taken by the user to reduce or
eliminate the identified sources of the pollutant or substance.
      (4)   As determined necessary by the POTW superintendent, the
superintendent may require a user to develop, submit and implement an RP for
any pollutant or substance regulated by this article.
      (5)   Failure to submit an approvable RP within the specified deadlines
or to fully and timely comply with any condition or requirement of an approved
RP shall constitute a violation of this article, subject to the fine, penalty,
and other enforcement provisions of this article.
      (6)   Holding enforcement action in abeyance. If the effluent sample
analysis results in a user's discharge exceeding the applicable discharge
limit, detection level, or quantification level for a pollutant, the POTW
superintendent may, in the POTW superintendent's sole discretion, nevertheless
allow that discharge to continue and may hold any enforcement action regarding
the prohibited discharge in abeyance, subject to the terms, conditions, and
requirements of this subsection as follows:
         (a)   If an approved RP is already in place: If effluent sample
analysis results exceed the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or
quantification level for a pollutant for which an approved RP is already in
place, then the POTW superintendent may, in the POTW superintendent's sole
discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any
enforcement action regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance for the
period that the sample represents if the RP (and all terms, conditions and
requirement thereof) is being fully and continually performed in good faith by
the user, as determined by the POTW superintendent, and subject to all of the
requirements and conditions of this section.
         (b)   If an approved RP is not already in place: If effluent sample
analysis results exceed the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or
quantification level for a pollutant for which an approved RP is not already in
place, then the POTW superintendent may, in the POTW superintendent's sole
discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any
enforcement regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance, subject to all of
the requirements and conditions of this section, and provided further as
follows: The user with the non-compliant discharge shall develop and implement
an RP approved by the POTW superintendent to minimize the user's discharges of
the pollutant in question to the POTW. The RP shall meet all of the
requirements of this section.
         (c)   The following requirements and conditions shall apply to any
situation under this subjection in which an enforcement action is held in
abeyance as provided by this subsection (regardless of whether or not an RP was
in place at the time of the non-compliance):
            1.   The user with the non-compliant discharge shall have a POTW-
accessible point for monitoring all discharges from the user to the POTW. All
costs and expenses for and related to the installation and maintenance of this
monitoring point and any required sampling devices shall be paid for solely by
the user.
            2.   The user with the non-compliant discharge shall routinely
self-monitor its discharges and report results to the POTW for the pollutant in
question using the sampling methods, procedures, preservation and handling, and
analytical protocol required by the POTW superintendent and at the frequency
specified by the POTW superintendent. All costs and expenses of this sampling
and analysis shall be paid for solely by the user.
            3.   The POTW may collect any additional samples of the user's
discharge as determined necessary by the POTW superintendent, all costs and
expenses to be paid for by the user.
            4.   If the user complies with all of the requirements and
conditions for the RP as specified by the POTW superintendent, and if the POTW
superintendent determines that all reasonable and cost-effective actions based
on the economic, technical, and treatability consideration, including, but not
limited to, all elements of the user's RP, have been, and continue to be, fully
and satisfactorily implemented by the user, then the POTW may, in its
discretion, hold enforcement action in abeyance and allow the user to continue
the non-compliant discharge.
            5.   Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the
contrary, and regardless of whether a user fully complies with all requirements
and conditions of this section and/or of an approved RP, the POTW
superintendent shall have the unconditional right to prohibit and terminate any
non-compliant discharge at any time and without prior notice, and to take any
enforcement action in response thereto, including any enforcement action that
had previously been held in abeyance under this subsection.
            6.   Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the
contrary, the POTW superintendent shall not hold an enforcement action in
abeyance as provided by this subsection unless the POTW superintendent has
first obtained approval from MDEQ to do so for the specific pollutant parameter
in question; provided, that such prior approval shall not be required for
discharges of mercury or PCBs.
   (D)   Best management practices.
      (1)   The POTW superintendent may require any user to develop and
implement best management practices to control, contain, treat, prevent, or
reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other substances from the
user's premises to the POTW, as determined necessary by the superintendent.
      (2)   In addition, the POTW superintendent may require a user to develop
and submit a Best Management Practices Plan ("BMPP"), including an enforceable
implementation schedule, for review and approval by the superintendent. The
BMPP shall be submitted within 30 days after notification by the superintendent
or as otherwise required by a wastewater discharge permit or order. The BMPP
shall be directed at preventing the entrance of pollutants, directly or
indirectly, into the POTW. The BMPP shall be available for inspection at all
times at the user's premises. At a minimum, a user's BMPP shall contain all of
the following elements, as determined necessary by the POTW superintendent, at
a level of detail and in units and terms as determined necessary by the
superintendent to adequately evaluate the plan:
         (a)   A statement of the purpose and objectives of the plan.
         (b)   A description of the strategies, methods, policies and
procedures to prevent, minimize or reduce the introduction of pollutants into
the user's discharge and to minimize waste generation.
         (c)   A description of the options available to the user to control
accidental spillage, leaks and drainage.
         (d)   A description of best available or practicable control
technologies available for the user's specific circumstances.
         (e)   A detailed facility layout and site diagram showing points of
entry in the POTW.
         (f)   A description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge
disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics.
         (g)   A description of operating and maintenance processes and
procedures.
         (h)   An inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources,
including a list of all chemicals used or stored at the facility.
         (i)   A description of employee training programs, policies and
procedures; continuing education programs; and participation.
         (j)   A description of documentation, including record keeping and
forms.
         (k)   A description of monitoring activities.
         (l)   An information log of facility personnel, organization chart,
emergency phone numbers, contact person and maintenance or service
representatives.
         (m)   Certification by a qualified professional that the plan is
adequate to prevent spills, leaks, slug loads, or non-customary discharges of
regulated substances, directly or indirectly, to the POTW.
         (n)   Such other information, documents or diagrams as require by the
POTW superintendent, including, but not limited to, any of the information
required under §
68-191 of this article.
      (3)   The BMPs or BMPP required of a user or approved for a user may be
incorporated into a wastewater discharge permit issue to the user. If the user
already has a wastewater discharge permit, the existing permit may be modified
to incorporate the BMP requirements. If the user does not currently have a
wastewater discharge permit, a permit may be issued for that purpose.
Alternatively, BMPs or a BMPP may be required of a user independently by order
of the superintendent and even if a wastewater discharge permit has not been
issued to the user.
      (4)   The POTW superintendent may require revisions to users' BMPP if the
superintendent determines that the plan contains elements that are inadequate,
or as otherwise determined necessary by the superintendent to ensure compliance
with applicable requirements of this article. Review of a BMPP by the
superintendent shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its
facility as necessary to comply with local, state and federal laws and
regulations.
   (E)   Mercury discharge limits.  The instantaneous maximum concentration,
daily maximum and monthly average discharge limits for mercury are non-detect
when utilizing U.S. EPA Method 245.1 with a detection limit of 0.0002 mg/L.
      (1)   Discharge of detectable mercury prohibited; determining compliance.
To determine compliance with the instantaneous maximum concentration, daily
maximum and monthly average discharge limits for mercury a user's discharge
shall be sampled and analyzed for detectable mercury. For the purpose of this
article DETECTABLE MERCURY  is defined to mean any wastewater, pollutant or
substance containing mercury at or above the quantification level of the
minimum mercury sampling and analytical protocol and methods required by this
article or other more stringent methods required by the POTW superintendent.
      (2)   Minimum sampling and analytical protocol and methods.
         (a)   Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and
analytical protocol for compliance monitoring of a user's discharge shall be in
accordance with the U.S. EPA Method 245.1.
         (b)   For Method 245.1, the quantification level shall be 0.0002 mg/l,
unless higher quantification levels are determined appropriate by the POTW
superintendent because of sample matrix interference. Any discharge of mercury
at or above 0.0002 mg/l using U.S. EPA Method 245.1 is prohibited as a
discharge of detectable mercury.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-190 SPILL PREVENTION.
   (A)   Required. Each sewer system user shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide for this protection shall be approved by the city before construction
of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW shall be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this article. Copies of the user’s spill prevention control and
countermeasure (SPCC) and the pollution incidence prevention plan (PIPP) shall
be filed with the city. Each user required to develop a PIPP as provided by
Part 5 of the Michigan Water Resources Commission Rules, 1979 ACR 323.1151 et
seq., as amended (promulgated pursuant to Part 31 of Act 451 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1994 MCLA §§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended), shall submit a copy
of that plan to the POTW superintendent. The PIPP shall be submitted to the
superintendent within 60 days of the effective date of this article for an
existing source, or 30 days prior to the date of discharge for a new source.
   (B)   Secondary containment requirements.
      (1)   Each user must provide and maintain at the user’s sole expense
secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing or other
appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from accidental
spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or discharges regulated by
this article.
         (a)   The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid
polluting material can escape from the area by gravity through the building
sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into the POTW.
         (b)   The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less
than 10% of the total volume of the tanks or containers within the secondary
containment structure or provide a capacity of 100% of the largest single tank
or container within the secondary containment structure, whichever is larger,
unless a lesser containment area or alternate control measures are approved in
advance by the POTW superintendent.
         (c)   The containment structure must accommodate “squirt distance.”
Containers within the containment structure must be able to be placed
sufficiently back from the edge of the structure so if punctured, the resulting
leak will be contained.
         (d)   The containment structure must be designed or operated to
prevent run-on or infiltration of precipitation into the secondary containment
system unless the collection system has sufficient excess capacity to contain
run-on or infiltration. Such additional capacity must be sufficient to contain
precipitation from a 25 year, 24-hour rainfall event.
         (e)   The containment structure shall be constructed with chemical-
resistant water stops in place at all joints (if any) and be free of cracks or
gaps.
         (f)   The containment structure shall be designed and installed to
completely surround the tank or containers and to cover all surrounding earth
likely to come into contact with the waste if released from the tank(s) or
containers (i.e., capable of preventing lateral as well as vertical migration
of the material).
         (g)   All floor drains found within the containment area must be
plugged and sealed.
      (2)   Spill troughs and stumps within process areas must discharge to
appropriate pretreatment tanks.
      (3)   Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks that
may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage areas.
      (4)   Solid pollutants shall be located in secure areas designed to
prevent the loss of the materials in the POTW.
      (5)   Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide the protection required by this section shall be submitted to the POTW
superintendent for review, and shall be approved by the superintendent before
construction. Construction of approved containment for existing sources shall
be completed within the time period specified by the POTW superintendent.
      (6)   No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until
emergency containment facilities have been approved and constructed as required
by this section.
      (7)   The POTW superintendent may order a user to take interim measures
for emergency containment as determined necessary by the superintendent under
the circumstances.
   (C)   Immediate notice. For an accidental discharge, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the
incident. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions.
   (D)   Written notice. Within 48 hours following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the manager a detailed written report describing the cause
of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
   (E)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
if a dangerous discharge occurs. Employers shall ensure that all employees who
may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (F)   Defense. A documented and verified, bona fide operating upset shall be
an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the city POTW
against a discharger for any noncompliance with this article or any wastewater
discharge permit, contract or waiver, pursuant to this article, which arises
out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset.
(1993 Code, § 68-189) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-191 FUNDING OF PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.
   To pay the costs of operating the city’s pretreatment program, the city
shall adopt charges and fees in accordance with the standards set forth in
Article III. The fees and charges may include the following:
   (A)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s
pretreatment program;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
   (C)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
   (D)   Fees for permit applications;
   (E)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (F)   Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards;
   (G)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of this division.
(1993 Code, § 68-190) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-192 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural
outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city or to
the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the Director in accordance with
this article.
   (B)   All major contributing industries proposing to connect to or
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
   (C)   Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the
city and accompanied by a fee. Proposed new users shall apply for a wastewater
contribution permit at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to
the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the information required. The following
information shall also be submitted:
      (1)   A base line monitoring report (BMR) must be submitted at least 90
days prior to commencement of the discharge. The required sampling, for BMRs,
will be based on both grab samples and composite samples. If known pollutants
which are limited by the city, state, or federal agency are discovered in the
discharge, a statement must be prepared regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
      (2)   If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment shall be submitted to the
Director. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, and the like);
         (b)   No increment referred to in subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section
shall exceed 9 months;
         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
superintendent, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the
steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. No more than 9 months shall elapse between such progress reports
to the manager.
      (3)   Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary
to evaluate the permit application.
   (D)   Within 9 months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within
the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater contribution permit as required by this section, the user
shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In
addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit
to the superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by this
section.
   (E)   Permits may contain the following:
      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
      (2)   Limits on the maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards of tests and
reporting schedule;
      (6)   Compliance schedules;
      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording the city access
thereto;
      (9)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater system;
      (10)   Requirements for notification of sludge discharges;
      (11)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this article.
   (F)   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed 3
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than 1 year or may be stated to
expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum
of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the
term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just
cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit
at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
   (G)   Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation without the approval of the city. If a transfer is granted, a
copy of the existing control mechanism must be provided to the new owner or
operator.
   (H)   Any user, categorical or noncategorical, issued a wastewater discharge
permit shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent and any other information the
superintendent deems necessary as listed in §
68-174.
   (I)   The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users in cases where
they are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (H) of
this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the effluent of the user.
   (J)   Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to
the city before construction of the facility. The review of plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under
the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
city prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
   (K)   A user to which a promulgated federal categorical pretreatment
standard applies shall achieve compliance with such standard within the
shortest time feasible, not to exceed 90 days.
   (L)   The surveillance reports referred to in this article shall be signed
as follows:
      (1)   By a responsible corporate officer, if the user submitting the
reports is a corporation. The term “responsible corporate officer” means:
         (a)   A President, Secretary, Treasurer or Vice-President of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of 1 or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons, if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
      (2)   By a general partner or proprietor, if the user submitting the
reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively.
      (3)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subsection (L)(1) or (2) of this section, if:
         (a)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described
in subsection (L)(1) or (2) of this section;
         (b)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager or a position of
equivalent responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
         (c)   The written authorization is submitted to the superintendent.
      (4)   If an authorization under this subsection is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this
subsection must be submitted to the superintendent prior to or together with
any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
      (5)   Compliance reports by non-domestic users must contain the
certification statement requried by 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
   (M)   It is the responsibility of the permitter to notify the new permittee,
at the time that the permit is granted, of all specifications and regulations
that the permittee is responsible to comply with.
(1993 Code, § 68-191) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-193 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Information and data furnished to the city POTW with respect to the nature
and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the discharger specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city POTW that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary
information of the discharger. When requested by a discharger furnishing a
report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be
made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit,
state disposal system permit or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
discharger furnishing the report. Any request that data be kept confidential
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information. Information accepted by the city POTW as confidential
shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public in
the city until and unless a 10 day (optional) notification is given to the
discharger.
(1993 Code, § 68-192) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-194 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. The city POTW
may for good cause shown suspend the wastewater treatment service, the water
supply service, electrical service, and/or the wastewater discharge permit of a
discharger when it appears to the city POTW that an actual or threatened
discharge presents or threatens:
      (1)   A violation of the NPDES permit;
      (2)   An imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of
persons;
      (3)   An adverse impact to the environment;
      (4)   Interference with the operation of the POTW;
      (5)   Violation of any pretreatment limits imposed by the city pursuant
to this article; or
      (6)   Violation of any wastewater discharge permit issued by the city
pursuant to this article.
   Any discharger notified of the suspension of the city POTW wastewater
treatment service, the water supply service, the electrical service, the
discharger’s wastewater permit, contract or waiver shall, within a period of
time as determined by the approval authority, cease all discharges or be
subject to utility cutoff or sewer blockage by the approval authority. If the
discharger fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the
specified time, the city POTW shall notify the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality and commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter
to compel the discharger’s compliance with such order. The city POTW shall
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit, contract or waiver or the wastewater
treatment service and terminate judicial proceedings upon proof by the
discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions
creating the threat as set forth in this subsection.
   (B)   Revocation of permit, contract or waiver. The city POTW may revoke the
permit, contract or waiver of any discharger which fails to:
      (1)   Factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of
its discharge;
      (2)   Report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics;
      (3)   Refuses reasonable access to the discharger’s premises by
representatives of the POTW or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
      (4)   Violates the condition of its permit, contract, waiver or this
article or any final judicial order entered with respect thereto.
   (C)   Notice of violation. Upon determination by the POTW that a user has
violated any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the POTW
shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice, either
personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
stating the nature of the alleged violation.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified by the NOV, the following provisions
shall apply: within 30 days of the date of the NOV, the user shall submit to
the POTW an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions.
Submission of the required plan shall not in any way relieve the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after the receipt of the
notice of violation. The POTW shall approve or reject the user’s proposed plan
after receipt thereof.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
      (3)   Failure to comply with any requirement of a notice of violation
shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
   (D)   Orders. The POTW superintendent may issue an order to any user as
determined by the superintendent to be appropriate under the circumstances, as
provide by this section. Multiple orders may be issued simultaneously or in
combination as a single order with respect to a single discharger.
Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the POTW
superintendent may issue any type of order or orders as determined necessary by
the superintendent to comply with the intent and purposes of this article or
other applicable laws and regulations.
      (1)   Service. An order shall be served upon a user and shall contain the
information as provided in § 68-194(E)(2) of this article. However, orders to
immediately cease and desist discharge, or to terminate sewer services, or
other emergency orders where delay might endanger human health, the environment
or the POTW, may be oral and may be served by telephone to be followed within 5
days by written confirmation of the order by the POTW superintendent.
      (2)   Types of orders. The POTW superintendent may issue the following
types of orders:
         (a)   Order to immediately cease and desist discharge. The POTW
superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist from discharging any
wastewater, pollutant, or discharge not in compliance with this article. The
order shall have immediate effect if the actual or threatened discharge to the
POTW presents, or may present, imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or causes, or may cause,
interference or pass through. The POTW superintendent shall implement whatever
action is necessary to halt the illegal discharge. The user shall be assessed
for any penalties, fines, charges, surcharges, expenses, or losses incurred due
to the actual or threatened discharge or pollutants as provided by this
article.
         (b)   Order to cease discharge within a certain time. The POTW
superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist from discharging any
wastewater, pollutant, or discharge not in compliance with this article by a
certain time and date. The proposed time for remedial action shall be specified
in the order. In addition to other circumstances as determined appropriate by
the POTW superintendent, the failure to pay applicable permit fees or to comply
with any term of a wastewater discharge permit constitutes sufficient cause to
issue an order under this section.
         (c)   Order to effect pretreatment. The POTW superintendent may issue
an order to a user requiring the user to pretreat its discharge in accordance
with this article. Any user subject to an order to pretreat shall prepare a
plan to pretreat its discharge so that the discharge complies with the
requirements of the order and this article. The plan shall be submitted to the
POTW superintendent within a reasonable period as specified in the order. The
plan shall be prepared in accordance with good engineering practice and shall
state whether construction is necessary, as well as identify measures that can
be completed without construction. The plan shall contain a schedule of
compliance for completion of each of the various phases necessary to implement
full pretreatment. The schedule of compliance must be approved by the POTW
superintendent. The schedule of compliance shall consist of one or more
remedial measures, including enforceable timetables for a sequence of actions
or operations leading to compliance with an effluent standard, or other
prohibition or standard. The following steps or phases shall be included in the
schedule of compliance as determined necessary by the POTW superintendent.
            1.   Retain a qualified engineer and/or consultant.
            2.   Obtain any engineering or scientific investigation or surveys
deemed necessary.
            3.   Prepare and submit a preliminary plan to achieve pretreatment.
            4.   Prepare plans and specifications, working drawings, or other
engineering or architectural documents that may be necessary to effect
pretreatment.
            5.   Establish a time to let any contract necessary for any
construction.
            6.   Establish completion times for any construction necessary.
            7.   Establish a time limit to complete full pretreatment pursuant
to the final order.
            8.   If a phase or unit of construction or implementation may be
effected independently of another phase or unit, establish separate timetables
for the phase or unit.
         (d)   Order to perform affirmative action. The POTW superintendent may
issue an order requiring a user to perform any action determined necessary by
the POTW superintendent under this article, including, but not limited to,
requiring a user to submit samples.; to install sampling, metering and
monitoring equipment; to submit reports; to permit access for inspection,
sampling, testing, monitoring and investigations; to reduce or eliminate a
discharge or pollutants in a discharge; or to pay permit fees or other
applicable charges.
         (e)   Order to terminate sewer services. The POTW superintendent may
issue an order to terminate the sewer services of a user, including physical
blockage of the user's sewer connection, for reasons including, but not limited
to, the following:
            1.   A discharge that violates any general or specific discharge
prohibition, including any pretreatment standard or requirement, and that
reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to human health, the
environment or the POTW.
            2.   Failure of a user to notify the POTW of any discharge as
described in §
68-172 of which the user was aware or reasonably should have been aware.
            3.   Failure of a user to sample, monitor, pretreat, report, or
failure to install monitoring or pretreatment facilities, as required by an
order of the POTW superintendent.
            4.   A knowing, willful violation of any term, condition or
requirement of an order or wastewater discharge permit, or any provision of
this article.
            5.   A negligent violation of any major term, condition or
requirement of an order or wastewater discharge permit. For purpose of this
section, a "major" term, condition or requirement is one the violation of which
is reasonably likely to endanger human health, the environment or the POTW. It
shall be a violation of this article for any person to remove or tamper with
any physical blockage or bulkhead installed pursuant to an order under this
article.
            6.   The POTW superintendent's determination that such an order is
necessary to comply with the intent and purposes of this article or other
applicable laws and regulations.
      (3)   Immediate response to order may be required. Any user issued an
order as provided by this section to immediately suspend it discharge to the
POTW shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge using whatever means are
necessary to do so, or take any other action as required by the order. If the
user fails to comply voluntarily with the order to immediately suspend its
discharge, the city shall take any action determined necessary as authorized by
this article, including, but not limited to, immediate suspensions of water
service and/or severance of the sewer connection or commencement of judicial
proceedings, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or endangerment to
public health, safety or the environment. The city may reinstate the wastewater
treatment service and terminate any judicial proceedings, as applicable, upon
satisfactory proof or other demonstration by the user that the noncomplying
discharge has been eliminated or will not reoccur. A detailed written statement
submitted by the user describing the causes of the noncomplying discharge and
the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence shall be submitted to the
POTW superintendent within 15 days of the occurrence.
      (4)   Noncompliance due to factors beyond user's control. If
noncompliance with an order is unintentional and temporary and due to factors
beyond the reasonable control of a user, and the user can demonstrate the
conditions necessary for demonstration of an upset as provided by § 68-196(A),
the POTW superintendent may modify the order or take other actions as
determined appropriate. However, a user shall not be relieved of liability for
noncompliance with an order to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      (5)   Amendment, suspension and revocation of orders. An order shall be
subject to amendment, suspension or revocation as determined appropriate by the
POTW superintendent. Notice of the amendment, suspension or revocation shall be
served upon the user in the same manner as notice was provided for the original
order. An amendment, suspension or revocation of an order shall be subject to
the same procedures for review and appeal as the original issuance of the
order, as provided by this article.
      (6)   Consent orders and agreements. The POTW superintendent may enter
into a consent order or agreement with a user to resolve disputed claims and
address identified and potential deficiencies in the user's compliance status.
The order or agreement shall be in the form of a written agreement with the
user and may contain appropriate provisions, including, but not limited to,
compliance schedules and stipulated fines and remedial actions.
      (7)   POTW authority to require finance assurances. The POTW may require
a noncompliant user to post a performance bond (or other form of surety
acceptable to the POTW superintendent) sufficient to cover expenses that might
reasonably be incurred as a result of future violations. Users that have in the
prior 2 years been responsible for causing interference or pass through at the
POTW may be required to obtain liability insurance sufficient to cover the
reasonable costs of responding or restoring the POTW in the event of a second
such incident. These requirements may also be made conditions of a user's
permit.
   (E)   Service of notices of violations, orders and notices of assessments.
Except as otherwise expressly provided by this article, all orders, notices of
violations and notices of assessments shall be served upon persons and shall
contain the information as provided by this section.
      (1)   Service. Service shall be by personal delivery or certified mail
(return receipt requested), addressed to the user, alleged violator or other
person, as applicable, at the person's last known address as shown by city
records. The person served shall sign and date the order or notice and shall
return the signed original copy to the POTW; provided, that the failure to do
so shall not affect the person's obligation to comply with the order or notice.
Further a notice or order served by mail may not actually be received, but this
shall not nullify any enforcement action subsequently taken by the POTW under
authority of this article.
      (2)   Contents. All orders and notices shall contain at least the
following information, as applicable to the situation and to the extent know by
the POTW:
         (a)   The name and address of the violator;
         (b)   The location and time that the violation occurred or was
observed, and the duration of the violation;
         (c)   The nature of the violation, including the provisions of this
article or of any permit, order, decision, determination or agreement violated;
         (d)   The basis for determining that a violation has occurred
(personal observation, pollutant analysis, and the like);
         (e)   The amount of the fine, penalty or charge assessed or due, if
any;
         (f)   The manner in which, and time and date by which, any fine,
penalty or charge must be paid, including any penalty or charge for late
payment;
         (g)   The remedial action ordered, the time within which require
actions must be taken, and any consequences for failure to do so;
         (h)   The right to appeal the issuance of the order or notice and a
summary of the procedures for appeal, or other applicable administrative
procedures;
         (i)   The date and time the order or notice was issued.
      (3)   Request for additional information. A person served may request
additional information from the POTW superintendent regarding the contents or
requirements of any order or notice. However, a request for additional
information shall not extend the time for compliance with an order or notice.
   (F)   Show cause hearing. Where the violation of subsection (B) of this
section is not corrected by timely compliance by means of administrative
adjustment, the POTW may order any discharger which causes or allows conduct
prohibited by subsection (B) of this section to show cause before the POTW or
its duly authorized representative why the proposed revocation should not be
taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service,
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and
place of a hearing to be held by the POTW or its designee regarding the
violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action and directing the discharger to show cause before the POTW
or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served no less than 10 days before the hearing.
Service may be made on any agency, officer or authorized representative of a
discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall be conducted by the city POTW
which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper
activities of the discharger. Appeal of such orders may be taken by the
discharger in accordance with applicable local or state law.
   (G)   Judicial proceedings. Following the entry of any order by the city
POTW with respect to the conduct of a discharger contrary to the provisions of
subsection (B) of this section, the attorney for the POTW may, following the
authorization of such action by the POTW, commence an action for appropriate,
equitable relief in the appropriate court.
   (H)   Publication of users in significant non-compliance. The POTW shall
publish once per year in the largest daily newspaper in the city a list of
categorical industrial users that, at any time during the previous 12 months,
were in significant non-compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements. The POTW may similarly publish a list of non-categorical users
found to be in significant non-compliance as determined appropriate by the POTW
superintendent. For the purposes of this section, a user shall be considered to
be in significant non-compliance if its violations meet one or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Chronic violation of discharge limits, defined here as those in
which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a 6-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit of a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) for the same pollutant parameter;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants, except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum, or longer-term average) standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR
403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the control authority POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   (I)   Criminal investigation; imprisonment. The city may initiate a criminal
investigation which involves the study of facts used to identify, locate and
prove the guilt of a criminal. A criminal investigation may include searches,
interviews, interrogations, evidence collection and preservation, and various
methods of investigation. The following provide the basis for a criminal
investigation. Any person who:
      (1)   At the time of the violation knew or should have known that a
pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this article
or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this article;
      (2)   Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or
certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a
notice, report, or record required by this article, or in any other
correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the POTW regarding
matters regulated by this article;
      (3)   Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any
sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this
article;
      (4)   Maliciously or willfully breaks, damages, destroys, uncovers,
defaces or tampers with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is part
of the POTW; or
      (5)   Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by
imprisonment for more than 93 days.
      (6)   Such person shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of $500 per violation per day or imprisonment for up to 93
days or both in the discretion of the court.
(1993 Code, § 68-193) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-195 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Civil penalties. Any discharger who is found to have violated an order
of the POTW or who has failed to comply with any provision of this article and
the regulations or rules of the POTW or orders of any court of competent
jurisdiction or permits issued under this article may be subjected to the
imposition of a civil penalty of $500 per day for each day the violation occurs
and a penalty of double any economic gain made by continuing operations during
a violation.
   (B)   Recovery of costs incurred by city. Any discharger violating any of
the provisions of this article or who discharges or causes a discharge
producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or impairs the POTW
stormwater or wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the POTW for any
expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The POTW shall
bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the POTW for any supervision,
investigation, sampling, administration, cleaning, repair or replacement work
caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall
constitute a violation of this article enforceable under the provisions of this
article. In addition, the charges which are made pursuant to this article are
hereby made a lien on all premises served thereby, subject to the remedies
described in §
68-102 of this chapter.
(1993 Code, § 68-194) (Ord. passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 68-196 UPSET.
   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if all of the
requirements of §
68-196(A) below, are met. However, in the event of an upset, the user may still
be liable for surcharges for exceeding applicable discharge limitations as
provided by this article. In any enforcement proceedings, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (A)   Conditions necessary to demonstrate upset. A user seeking to establish
the affirmative defense of upset must demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, all of the
following:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
      (3)   The user submitted the following information to the POTW, within 24
hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a
written submission contain the same information must be provided within 5 days
of becoming aware of the upset:
         (a)   A description of the discharge and cause of non-compliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   The steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (B)   User responsibility in case of upset. The user shall control
production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable limits upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-27-2014)
CHAPTER 69: RESERVED
CHAPTER 70: VEGETATION
Section
Article I. In General
   70-1 – 70-25 Reserved
Article II. Trees
Division 1. Generally
   
70-26   Definitions
   
70-27   Applicability
   
70-28   Enforcement
   
70-29   Additional rules and regulations
   
70-30   Planting, care, removal
   
70-31   Public tree removal
   
70-32   Spacing of shade trees
   
70-33   Tree protection
   
70-34   Excavations near trees
   
70-35   Covering surface near trees
   
70-36   Gas leakage
   
70-37   Corner visibility
   
70-38   Lawn extensions
   
70-39   Trimming trees near overhead lines
Division 2. Private Trees
   
70-51   Clearance
   
70-52   Inspection
   
70-53   Diseases and infestations
   
70-54   Owner's failure to comply
Division 3. Tree Preservation in Samuel A. Combs Industrial Park
   
70-61   Title
   
70-62   Definitions
   
70-63   Cutting, harvesting, injuring, and the like of trees; exceptions
   
70-64   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 82
Statutory reference:
   Care of trees and shrubs, see M.C.L.A. §§ 247.241 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 70-1 – 70-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. TREES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 70-26 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
   PARK. Includes all public parks having individual names and all areas,
whether owned by the city or not, to which the public has free access as a
park.
   PROHIBITED SPECIES. Any tree of poplar (Populus sp.), willow (Salix sp.),
box elder (Acer negundo), silver maple (Acer saccharuim), locust (Robina sp.),
tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima), catalpa (Catalpa sp.), mulberry (Morus
sp.) and Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila).
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or
conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or
right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or
telegraph service.
   STREET. All the land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, highways and boulevards in the city.
   TREE.  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation.
(1993 Code, § 70-26)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2
§ 70-27 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this article, except as otherwise specifically stated,
shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land publicly
owned or controlled by the city.
(1993 Code, § 70-27)
§ 70-28 ENFORCEMENT.
   The director shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of
this article.
(1993 Code, § 70-28)
§ 70-29 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city manager shall make such rules and regulations supplementary to this
article and not in conflict with this article as he may from time to time deem
necessary, to be effective upon approval by the city council. No person shall
fail to obey any rule or regulation effective under this article.
(1993 Code, § 70-29)
§ 70-30 PLANTING, CARE, REMOVAL.
   (A)   The director shall have control over all trees located within the
street rights-of-way and parks in the city and the planting, care and removal
thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this article.
   (B)   The owner of land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior
written permission of the director, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that
part of the street abutting his land not used for public travel, but no person
shall otherwise prune, spray, plant or remove and tree in any street or park.
Every such permit shall specify the extent of the authorization and the
conditions to which it is subject.
   (C)   Where an owner of abutting property requests the removal of a tree,
the director is authorized, in his discretion, to require as a condition to
granting of approval for such removal that such property owner make the removal
in accordance with regulations established by the department and assume all or
any part of the costs of removing such tree.
(1993 Code, § 70-30)
§ 70-31 PUBLIC TREE REMOVAL.
   The department shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and
remove trees, plant and shrubs within the lines of all trees, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure safety or to
preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The director may
remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an
unsafe condition or which is of a prohibited species or is affected with any
injurious disease, fungus, insect or other pest. Whenever the department shall
remove any tree, plant or shrub solely for the purpose of constructing any
public work, the director shall, if practicable, replace the same at public
expense at some nearby location by planting another tree, plant or shrub, not
necessarily of the same type.
(1993 Code, § 70-31)
§ 70-32 SPACING OF SHADE TREES.
   Future plantings of shade and ornamental trees in the streets and parks of
the city will be done by the department in accordance with prescribed tree
planting practices. No trees shall be planted in the parkway between the curb
and sidewalk when that area is less than three feet wide. No tree shall be
planted nearer to the intersection of any streets than 25 feet from the corner
of such intersection.
(1993 Code, § 70-32)
§ 70-33 TREE PROTECTION.
   No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub
or set any fire within 25 feet of any tree or permit any fire or the heat
thereof to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other
injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or
about any tree. No electrical wires or any other lines or wires shall be
permitted to come in contact with any tree or shrub in any manner that shall
cause damage thereto, and no person shall attach any electric insulation to any
tree. No person shall use any tree as an anchor, except by special written
permit from the director, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any
tree. All persons having under their care, custody or control facilities which
may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree shall, after notice
thereof by the department, promptly abate such interference in such manner as
shall permit the trimming or removal of such tree by the department. The
director shall certify all city permits for construction, installation,
altering, moving or razing of all buildings, utilities, sidewalks, sewers or
other operations where trees or shrubs or parts thereof are involved.
(1993 Code, § 70-33)
§ 70-34 EXCAVATIONS NEAR TREES.
   Excavations and driveways shall not be places within five feet of any tree
without written permit from the director. Any person making such excavation or
construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good
substantial frame box to be approved by the department, and all building
material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree.
(1993 Code, § 70-34)
§ 70-35 COVERING SURFACE NEAR TREES.
   No person shall place within the street right-of- way any stone, brick,
sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free
passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a sidewalk
of authorized width and location.
(1993 Code, § 70-35)
§ 70-36 GAS LEAKAGE.
   Gas pipes or mains within any public rights-of- way or on any public
property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. If a leak
exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and main, and
the leak shall be repaired within 24 hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or
grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired,
and the cost of the work, including the cost of removal and the replacement of
any trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the
damage.
(1993 Code, § 70-36)
§ 70-37 CORNER VISIBILITY.
   All shrubs and bushes located on the triangle formed by two right-of-way
lines at the intersection of two streets and extending for a distance of 25
feet each way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines on any corner lot
within the city shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than 30
inches from top of curb at street level, in order that the view of the driver
of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed. Trees
may be planted and maintained on private property in this area, provided that
all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of 10
feet above the roadway surface. Any owner of any property failing to trim any
trees, shrubs or bushes in conformity with this section or §
70-51 shall be notified by the Director in the manner provided in §
1-15 to do so, and such notice shall require trimming in conformity with this
section within 10 days after the date of such notice. Upon the expiration of
such period, the Director may cause the trimming to be done and the cost
thereof may be collected from the owner of the property as a single lot
assessment in accordance with Charter, §
9.10.
(1993 Code, § 70-37)
§ 70-38 LAWN EXTENSIONS.
   On residence streets, the abutting owner or occupant may maintain a planting
strip on the lawn extension between the sidewalk and curb and may plant
flowers, trees and shrubbery therein in conformity with this article. No person
shall willfully injure or destroy any grass, flower, tree or shrub upon any
such planting strip or throw any papers, refuse or other thing thereon. No
person shall drive an automobile, bicycle or other vehicle upon or over any
such planting strip.
(1993 Code, § 70-38)
§ 70-39 TRIMMING TREES NEAR OVERHEAD LINES.
   The Director shall grant permission to public utilities to trim and keep
trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks and public places of the
city, in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines of such public
utilities safe and accessible. Such trimming shall be done in accordance with
approved practices and under the general direction of the Department. The
permission, as provided for in this section, shall require reasonable prior
notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder. However, in an
emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of such
public utilities, prior notice of commencing work under such permit shall not
be required. The word "emergency" as used in this section means the occurrence
or happening of an event which could not be foreseen by the exercise of
reasonable care and foresight, which might cause damage to the overhead lines
of the public utilities.
(1993 Code, § 70-39)
§§ 70-40 – 70-50 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. PRIVATE TREES
§ 70-51 CLEARANCE.
   Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street or right-
of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 10 feet above the
surface of the street or right-of-way. Such owners shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any
traffic- control device or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area
immediately above the right-of-way.
(1993 Code, § 70-51)
§ 70-52 INSPECTION.
   The Director and his assistants and employees shall have authority to enter
upon private premises for the purpose of examining any trees, shrubs, plants or
vines for the presence of destructive insects or plant diseases. No damages
shall be awarded for the destruction of any tree, shrub or plant or fruit or
injury to the tree, shrub, plant or fruit, if done by the Director or under his
direction in accordance with this article.
(1993 Code, § 70-52)
§ 70-53 DISEASES AND INFESTATIONS.
   When the Director shall discover that any tree growing on private property
within the city is afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect
infestation or tree disease, he shall serve a written notice upon the owner or
his agent or the occupant of the property, in the manner specified in §
1-15. Such notice shall describe the tree, its location and the nature of the
infestation or tree disease and order the owner, agent and occupant to take
such measures as may be reasonably necessary to curb such infestation or
disease and to prevent the spreading thereof, specifying the measures required
to be taken. Such order may require the pruning, spraying or destruction of
trees as may be reasonably necessary. Every such notice shall be complied with
within 10 days after service thereof upon the owner, agent or occupant of the
property on which the afflicted tree is located or within such additional time
as may be stipulated in such notice.
(1993 Code, § 70-53)
§ 70-54 OWNER'S FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the owner, agent and occupant of the property refuse to carry out the
order of the Director as stated in §
70-53 within the time limited or, in case of an appeal, within 5 days after the
Council shall have affirmed such order, the Director shall carry out the
pruning, spraying or destruction of the trees as deemed necessary by him and
shall bill the owner, agent or occupant of the property for the cost thereof.
If the owner of such property shall fail to pay such bill within 60 days after
the bill has been rendered, the Director shall report the nonpayment to the
City Council for collection as a single lot assessment against the property in
accordance with the Charter. The Director may, without serving the notice as
provided in this division, when the owner or occupant of any private property
shall consent thereto and pay the reasonable cost thereof, cause trees growing
on private property to be sprayed when he deems the spraying necessary because
of any infestation or disease or threat thereof.
(1993 Code, § 70-54)
§§ 70-55 – 70-60 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. TREE PRESERVATION IN SAMUEL A. COMBS INDUSTRIAL PARK
§ 70-61 TITLE.
   This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Charlotte
Samuel A. Combs Industrial Park Tree Preservation Ordinance."
(1993 Code, § 70-61) (Ord. passed 9-27-1993)
§ 70-62 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this division, words and phrases defined in this section
have the meaning ascribed to them as follows.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, state, trust, firm, joint stock
company, federal agency, corporation, including a government corporation,
association, municipality, commission, political subdivision of a state,
interstate body, or other public body created by or pursuant to any state law
or any combination of these.
   SAMUEL A. COMBS INDUSTRIAL PARK. The 189.268 acres of land, which was
donated by Samuel A. Combs to the City of Charlotte, and  located north of
Packard Highway between —50 and Benton Road as more fully described as:
      That part of the South ½ of Section 6, T2N, R4W, Eaton Township, Eaton
County, Michigan, beginning on the east-west 1/4 line of said Section 6 at a
point South 89 degrees 36'35" East 400.80 feet from the west 1/4 corner
thereof, thence along said 1/4 line South 89 degrees 36'35" East 3306.65 feet
to the Northeast corner of the West ½ of the Southeast 1/4 of said Section 6,
thence along the East line of said West ½ South 00 degrees 52'37" East 1906.58
feet to the northwesterly line of the Grand Trunk Western Railroad right-of-
way, thence along said Railroad right-of-way line the following two courses,
Southwesterly 387.72 feet along the arc of a 9225.50 foot radius curve to the
left whose cord bears South 38 degrees 31'26" West 387.69 feet to point of
tangency; thence South 37 degrees 19'12" West 540.35 feet to the South line of
said Section 6, thence North 89 degrees 44'38" West 743.27 feet to the South 1/
4 corner of said Section 6; thence continuing along the South Section line
South 89 degrees 49'52" West 1482.20 feet; thence North 00 degrees 51'38" West
600.00 feet; thence South 89 degrees 49'52" West 500.00 feet; thence parallel
with the West Section line North 00 degrees 54'90" West 2064.76 feet to the
point of beginning, subject to the right-of-way of Packard Highway, Benton Road
and any other right- of-way or easements of record, described parcel containing
189.268 acres of land, more or less.
   TREES. The natural grove of mature hickory and hard maple trees that are
located in the center of the Samuel A. Combs Industrial Park described as
follows:
      A parcel of land in the SW 1/4, of Sec. 6, T2N, R4W, City of Charlotte,
Eaton County, Michigan, the surveyed boundary of said parcel described as: Com.
At the SW corner of said Sec. 6; then N89°49'52" E along the S line of said Sec
1305.60 ft to the E line of Lipsey Drive; thence N00°10'08" W along said E line
1112.25 ft to the point of beginning of this description, thence N00°10'08" W
continuing along said E line 236.33 ft; thence N89°49'54" E 795.35 ft; thence
S01°27'01"W 236.42 ft, thence S89°49'52"W parallel with said S line 788.67 feet
to the point of beginning; said parcel containing 4.29 acres more or less; said
parcel subject to all easements and restrictions if any.
(1993 Code, § 70-62) (Ord. passed 9-27-1993; Ord. passed 5-24-1999)
§ 70-63 CUTTING, HARVESTING, INJURING, AND THE LIKE OF TREES; EXCEPTIONS.
   On the date of passage of this division by the City Council, no person shall
cut, harvest, injure or otherwise damage the trees located in the Samuel A.
Combs Industrial Park, as defined herein. Cutting, harvesting, injuring or
otherwise damaging does not include practices approved by the International
Society of Arboriculture for the purposes of preserving and protecting a tree.
(1993 Code, § 70-63) (Ord. passed 9-27-1993)
§ 70-64 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this division by cutting, harvesting, injuring or
damaging any trees in the Samuel A. Combs Industrial Park is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction for each violation. In addition, the City Attorney
may commence a civil action against any person for cutting, harvesting,
injuring or damaging any trees in the Samuel A. Combs Industrial Park, and if
such acts are willful, the City Attorney shall seek treble damages as provided
by law.
(1993 Code, § 70-64) (Ord. passed 9-27-1993; Ord. passed 2-26-1996)
CHAPTER 71: RESERVED
CHAPTER 72: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
Article I. In General
   
72-1   Name
Article II. Management and Control
   
72-10   City Manager duties relating to the airport
   
72-11   Airport Director
   
72-12   Employment and discharge of personnel
Article III. General Regulations and Fees
   
72-20   Promulgation of regulations
   
72-21   Fees for use of facilities
Article IV. Commercial Operations
   
72-30   Fixed based operators; commercial services
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 72-1 NAME.
   The municipal airport shall be known as the Fitch H. Beach Municipal
Airport.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§§ 72-2 –- 72-9 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
§ 72-10 CITY MANAGER DUTIES RELATING TO THE AIRPORT.
   The airport shall be managed and supervised by the City Manager or his or
her designee. The City Manager shall be charged with the care and preservation
of all the property and equipment belonging to the airport, whether located
within or without the limits of the city, and shall cause the airport to be
inspected on a regular basis relative to the storage of equipment and planes,
fire hazards, conditions of grounds, and such other matters as may be deemed
advisable. Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport shall be operated, and the business
of the airport conducted, in conformity with applicable state and federal laws,
and such rules and regulations as promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§ 72-11 AIRPORT DIRECTOR.
   The City Manager shall appoint an Airport Director, with the approval of
Council, who shall perform such duties as may be assigned to him by the City
Manager.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§ 72-12 EMPLOYMENT AND DISCHARGE OF PERSONNEL.
   The City Manager shall have the power to employ and discharge all personnel
he or she may deem necessary for operating, managing and regulating the
airport.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§§ 72-13 –- 72-19 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. GENERAL REGULATIONS AND FEES
§ 72-20 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the City Manager shall
make such regulations relative to the general control, supervision and use of
the airport as he or she shall deem necessary or advisable. Such regulations
shall comply with all rules and regulations made by the Michigan Department of
Transportation and the United States Department of Transportation pertaining to
air traffic and airports. Such regulations shall become effective upon filing
with the City Clerk and posting at the Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to violate or refuse to obey any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to this section. Violation of any of the rules
or regulations shall constitute a violation of this section, which violation
shall be a municipal civil infraction. In addition to the penalties for
municipal civil infractions, any person operating or handling any aircraft or
any airport property in violation of such rules or regulations, or refusing to
comply herewith, may be properly removed from the airport property or
temporarily "grounded" upon the order of the Airport Director or the City
Manager, and may be deprived of such further use of the airport and its
facilities for such time as may be required, at the sole discretion of the
Airport Director or the City Manager, to ensure the safeguarding of the airport
and all persons and property located thereon, and the safeguarding of the
public at large.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§ 72-21 FEES FOR USE OF FACILITIES.
   All rates or charges for use of airport property or equipment shall be those
fees or rates that have been prepared by the City Manager and filed with the
City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
§§ 72-22 –- 72-29 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS
§ 72-30 FIXED BASED OPERATORS; COMMERCIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   The City Council is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with
a fixed based operator (FBO), who will provide one or more aviation-related
commercial services, and whose primary base of operations is the Fitch H. Beach
Municipal Airport. The terms of the fixed operator agreement shall be as
mutually agreed by the parties and, consistent with 29U.S.C. § 40103, may
provide for some or all of the commercial services at the Fitch H. Beach
Municipal Airport, as the term "commercial services" is defined below.
   (B)   No persons or entities shall engage in commercial services at the
Fitch H. Beach Municipal Airport without prior written agreement with the City.
COMMERCIAL SERVICES offered to the public is defined as follows:
      (1)   Aircraft sales; new and/or used aircraft;
      (2)   Aircraft services:
         (a)   Maintenance, inspection and licensing of aircraft and aircraft
engines;
         (b)   Purchase and sale of parts, equipment and other accessories;
         (c)   Renovation and rebuilding of aircraft and aircraft engines;
      (3)   Radio sales and services; sale, installation and maintenance of
aviation-associated electronic equipment;
      (4)   Charter operations and related services:
         (a)   Flight ambulance services;
         (b)   Crop spraying;
         (c)   Pest control;
         (d)   Air taxi;
         (e)   Freight hauling;
         (f)   Other aviation flight and ground services;
      (5)   Aviation flight and ground schools and corresponding ratings
instruction; instruction of persons toward a license of rating as provided by
the Federal Aviation Agency;
      (6)   The furnishing of fuel and aviation lubricants.
(Ord. passed 3-24-2008)
CHAPTER 73: RESERVED
CHAPTER 74: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Article I. In General
   74-1 – 74-25 Reserved
Article II. Taxicabs
Division 1. Generally
   
74-26   Authority to make rules and regulations; reports
   
74-27   Rates
   
74-28   Lost articles
   
74-29   Cruising
   
74-30   Passengers
Division 2. Taxicab License
   
74-41   Required
   
74-42   Fees
   
74-43   Insurance
   
74-44   Transferability
   
74-45   Transfer between vehicles
   
74-46   Revocation for ceasing to operate
   
74-47   Miscellaneous unlawful acts
Division 3. Driver Permit
   
74-56   Required; certification; photographs; display
   
74-57   Renewal
   
74-58   Use by another
Cross reference:
   Streets, sidewalks and other public places, see
Chapter 58;
   Traffic and vehicles, see
Ch.66
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§§ 74-1 – 74-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. TAXICABS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 74-26 AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS; REPORTS.
   (A)   The City Council shall be empowered to make such rules and regulations
regarding the dress and conduct of drivers, and the maintenance and marking of
taxicabs, as may be necessary in the interest of providing safe and orderly
service to passengers, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rules
or regulations.
   (B)   The City Council may require periodic reports to be submitted by
operators and drivers in order to assist in the enforcement of such rules and
regulations or the terms of this article.
(1993 Code, § 74-26) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-27 RATES.
   All fares and charges for the use of taxicabs shall be determined by
resolution of the City Council following a hearing held by the Council at a
regular meeting. All taxicab licensees shall be notified of any such hearing by
mail.
(1993 Code, § 74-27) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-28 LOST ARTICLES.
   Every driver of a taxicab shall search the interior of such taxicab at the
termination of each trip for any article of value which may have been left in
such taxicab by a passenger. Any article found therein shall immediately be
returned to the passenger owning it, if he is known, otherwise it shall be
deposited with the owner of the taxicab at the conclusion of the driver's tour
of duty. A report of the finding of such article shall be made by the owner of
the taxicab within 24 hours to the Police Department.
(1993 Code, § 74-28) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-29 CRUISING.
   No driver of a taxicab shall cruise in search of passengers at any time.
Whenever a taxicab is not engaged by a customer, the driver shall proceed at
once by the most direct route to the garage where the taxicab is housed, or to
the taxicab stand customarily occupied by such taxicab.
(1993 Code, § 74-29) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-30 PASSENGERS.
   No driver or owner of a taxicab shall refuse or neglect to convey any
orderly person upon request by signal or telephone call, unless the taxicab is
previously engaged. When a taxicab has been engaged by a passenger, no
additional passengers shall be received therein except with the express consent
of the first passenger. No person other than passengers for hire, except
employees or members of the immediate family of any person licensed under this
article to engage in the business of operating a taxicab, shall be transported
therein.
(1993 Code, § 74-30) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§§ 74-31 – 74-40 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. TAXICAB LICENSE
§ 74-41 REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of operating, or causing to be
operated, any taxicab upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city
without having first obtained a license for each such taxicab. Exceptions to
these requirements may be granted by the Police Chief to taxicabs transporting
passengers whose trips originate from another community, and to those taxicabs
that are operating at the request of the local transportation authority in
conjunction with state or federally funded return-to-work programs. These
taxicabs must be currently licensed in another community, and provide proof of
licensing and certificates of insurance in the amounts required under §
74-43, to be able to operate in the city.
   (B)   No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the
Chief of Police and upon approval of the City Council.
   (C)   Upon application made for any new taxicab license, as distinguished
from any renewal thereof, the Council shall first consider the question of
whether public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicab.
The Council shall consider the number of taxicabs operating in the city and
whether the demands of the public require additional taxicab service; traffic
conditions on the streets of the city and whether the additional taxicab
service will result in a greater hazard to the public; and such other relevant
facts as the Council may deem advisable. The judgment of the Council on the
question of public necessity and convenience shall be conclusive.
   (D)   The fee for such license shall be as prescribed in §
74-42.
(1993 Code, § 74-41) (Ord. passed 2-25-2002; Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-42 FEES.
   Prior to the issuance of any taxicab license required in this division, a
fee of $25 shall be paid for each vehicle licensed.
(1993 Code, § 74-42) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-43 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Before any taxicab license is issued, the applicant therefor shall
furnish one or more policies of insurance, prepaid for at least the period of
the license, issued by responsible insurance companies providing indemnity for
the insured in the amounts specified in this section, and agreeing to pay,
within the limits of such amounts on behalf of the insured, all sums which the
insured shall become obligated to pay because of the liability imposed upon the
insured by law, for damages because of bodily injury, including death, at any
time resulting therefrom or for damages to property or both, sustained by any
person other than the employees of the insured, and caused by accident, and
arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the licensed taxicab.
   (B)   The minimum amount of such insurance coverage as to any one licensed
taxicab shall be the current industry standard as determined by the City Clerk
or other competent authority.
   (C)   Every such insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the
insurer or surety to give the City Clerk, by registered mail, at least 10 days
written notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse or other termination
of such insurance or bond, or the withdrawal of surety from any such bond.
(1993 Code, § 74-43) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-44 TRANSFERABILITY.
   When the ownership of any taxicab shall change, whether by operation of law
or otherwise, the taxicab license pertaining to such taxicab shall be
automatically revoked. Any transfer of or attempt to transfer a taxicab license
to any other person shall automatically revoke the license.
(1993 Code, § 74-44) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-45 TRANSFER BETWEEN VEHICLES.
   The owner of any licensed taxicab who desires to transfer such license to
another vehicle owned by him shall make application to the City Clerk, on forms
provided therefor, and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may
be required for or applicable to such transfer. Upon approval of the City
Clerk, such transfer shall be granted.
(1993 Code, § 74-45) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-46 REVOCATION FOR CEASING TO OPERATE.
   The fact that the owner shall cease to operate any taxicab for a period of
30 days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from
the city shall constitute an automatic revocation of the license for such
taxicab.
(1993 Code, § 74-46) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-47 MISCELLANEOUS UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To drive any taxicab while under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or drug, or to use or drink any intoxicating liquor or drug whatsoever while
engaged in operating such taxicab.
   (B)   To use any portion of the public street or alley in his/her charge to
stand upon any portion of the public street, except for such time as is
necessary to load or unload passengers, except in such portion of the street or
alley as shall have been designated by the Chief of Police as a taxicab stand.
   (C)   When such person is the licensee owner of a taxicab which is involved
in an accident, to fail to immediately notify the Chief of Police of such
accident, when the accident results in loss of life or injury to passengers,
employees, or other persons.
   (D)   To drive or permit any driver to be on duty for more than 12 hours in
1 day or more than 72 hours in 1 week.
   (E)   To allow any taxicab to be used for immoral purposes, or to procure or
aid in procuring any person for immoral purposes, or to allow any person in any
taxicab while the same is at any stand or upon any street waiting for
customers.
   (F)   To operate more than the number of taxicabs specified in the
application for license, or to operate taxicabs in excess of the number
authorized by the City Council.
   (G)   To drive any person in any taxicab to the place to which such person
wishes to go, except by the most direct and safe route.
(Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§§ 74-48 – 74-55 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. DRIVER PERMIT
§ 74-56 REQUIRED; CERTIFICATION; PHOTOGRAPHS; DISPLAY.
   (A)   No person shall drive a taxicab on the streets of the city without
first having obtained a chauffeur's license for the State of Michigan and
taxicab driver permit therefor.
   (B)   No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the
Chief of Police and unless a photograph and complete set of fingerprints of the
applicant therefor are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the
Police Department.
   (C)   Two photographic pictures of each applicant shall be furnished at the
time of application. The size and form thereof shall be prescribed by the City
Clerk.
   (D)   The license issued to a taxicab driver shall be conspicuously
displayed on the inside of the taxicab operated by him so that it may be easily
illuminated at night.
(1993 Code, § 74-56) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-57 RENEWAL.
   Upon any application for a taxicab driver permit from a person who then
holds such a permit, the physical examination required by §
74-57 shall not be required, unless no such examination shall have been had and
a report thereof furnished to the city for longer than 2 years immediately
preceding such application.
(1993 Code, § 74-58) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
§ 74-58 USE BY ANOTHER.
   No person having a taxicab driver permit shall allow any other person to use
or attempt to use such permit for any purpose. No person shall use or have in
his possession while operating a taxicab in the city any taxicab driver permit
which has been issued to any other person.
(1993 Code, § 74-59) (Ord. passed 6-26-2006)
CHAPTERS 75 – 81: RESERVED
CHAPTER 82: ZONING
Section
Article I. In General
   
82-1   Short title
   
82-2   Purpose
   
82-3   Construction of language
   
82-4   Definitions
   
82-5   Amendments
   
82-6   Zoning Commission
   
82-7   Interpretation
   
82-8   Vested rights
Article II. Administration
   
82-26   Violations of chapter
   
82-27   Enforcement
   
82-28   Duties of Building Official
   
82-29   Plot plan
   
82-30   Permits
   
82-31   Certificate of occupancy
   
82-32   Final inspection
   
82-33   Fees
   
82-33A   Notice
   
82-34   Planning Commission
   
82-35   Changes and amendments
   
82-36   Conditional rezoning
Article III. Board of Appeals
   
82-56   Creation; membership
   
82-57   Meetings
   
82-58   Appeal
   
82-59   Jurisdiction
   
82-60   Orders
   
82-61   Notice
   
82-62   Expiration of orders
Article IV. Establishment of Districts and Official Zone Map
   
82-81   Official zoning map
   
82-82   Interpretation of text
   
82-83   Zoning of vacated areas
   
82-84   Zoning of annexed areas
   
82-85   Districts
   
82-86   District requirements
Article V. R-1 and R-2 One-Family Residential Districts
   
82-106   Intent
   
82-107   Principal permitted uses
   
82-108   Conditional uses
   
82-109   Required conditions
   
82-110   Area and bulk requirements
Article VI. RT Two-Family Residential District
   
82-126   Intent
   
82-127   Principal permitted uses
   
82-128   Conditional uses
   
82-129   Required conditions
   
82-130   Area and bulk requirements
Article VII. RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts
   
82-146   Intent
   
82-147   Principal permitted uses
   
82-148   Conditional uses
   
82-149   Required conditions
   
82-150   Area and bulk requirements
Article VIII. RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
   
82-166   Intent
   
82-167   Principal permitted uses
   
82-168   Conditional uses
   
82-169   Required conditions
   
82-170   Area and bulk requirements
Article IX. MH Mobile Home Residential District
   
82-186   Intent
   
82-187   Principal permitted uses
   
82-188   Conditional uses
   
82-189   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article X. OS-1 Office-Service District
   
82-206   Intent
   
82-207   Principal permitted uses
   
82-208   Conditional uses
   
82-209   Required conditions
   
82-210   Area and bulk requirements
Article XI. B-1 Local Business District
   
82-226   Intent
   
82-227   Principal permitted uses
   
82-228   Required conditions
   
82-229   Conditional uses
   
82-230   Area and bulk requirements
Article XII. B-2 Community Business District
   
82-246   Intent
   
82-247   Principal permitted uses
   
82-248   Required conditions
   
82-249   Conditional uses
   
82-250   Area and bulk requirements
Article XIIA. Marginal Service Roads
   82-256 -- 82-265 Reserved
Article XIII. B-3 General Business District
   
82-266   Intent
   
82-267   Principal permitted uses
   
82-268   Required conditions
   
82-269   Conditional uses
   
82-270   Area and bulk requirements
Article XIV. CBD Central Business District
   
82-286   Intent
   
82-287   Principal permitted uses
   
82-288   Conditional uses
   
82-289   Area and bulk requirements
Article XV. C Conservancy District
   
82-306   Purpose
   
82-307   Definitions
   
82-308   Uses permitted by right in floodplain areas or groundwater recharge
areas
   
82-309   Uses permitted by right
   
82-310   Uses permitted by special use permit in floodplain or groundwater
recharge areas
   
82-311   Requirements for special use permits for uses in floodplain or
groundwater recharge areas
   
82-312   Setbacks from watercourses
   
82-313   Plans for control of soil erosions
   
82-314   Flood insurance study
   
82-315   Sewage disposal systems
   
82-316   Elevation and floodproofing records
   
82-317   New construction
   
82-318   Floodproofing
Article XVI. IRO Industrial Research Office District
   
82-336   Intent
   
82-337   Principal permitted uses
   
82-338   Conditional uses
   
82-339   Required conditions
   
82-340   Area and bulk requirements
Article XVII. I-1 Light Industrial District
   
82-356   Intent
   
82-357   Principal permitted uses
   
82-358   Conditional uses
   
82-359   Area and bulk requirements
Article XVIII. I-2 General Industrial District
   
82-376   Intent
   
82-377   Principal permitted uses
   
82-378   Area and bulk requirements
Article XIX. P-1 Vehicular Parking District
   
82-396   Intent
   
82-397   Principal permitted uses
   
82-398   Required conditions
   
82-399   Minimum distances and setbacks
   
82-400   Parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance
   
82-401   Side yards
   
82-402   Front yards
   
82-403   Screening and landscaping
   
82-404   Surface of parking area
   
82-405   Lighting
   
82-406   Approval and modifications
   
82-407   Access management standards
   
82-408   Marginal service roads; intent
   
82-409   Marginal service roads; required conditions
Article XX. Schedule of Regulations
   
82-426   Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district
   
82-427   Notes to schedule
   
82-428   Averaged lot size
   
82-429   Subdivision open space plan
   
82-430   Single-family clustering option
   
82-431   Condominium subdivision
Article XXI. Supplementary Regulations
   
82-451   Conflicting regulations
   
82-452   Scope
   
82-453   Nonconforming lots, uses of land, structures, and uses of structures
and premises
   
82-454   Accessory buildings and uses
   
82-455   Parking requirements
   
82-456   Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and
maintenance
   
82-457   Off-street loading and unloading
   
82-458   Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district
   
82-459   Reserved
   
82-460   Plant materials and landscaping requirements
   
82-461   Signs
   
82-462   Exterior lighting
   
82-463   Corner clearance
   
82-464   Residential entranceway
   
82-465   Fences
   
82-466   Fences, industrial
   
82-467   Walls
   
82-468   Use restriction
   
82-469   Frontage on a public street
   
82-470   Access to major thoroughfare or collector street
   
82-471   Site plan review for all districts
   
82-472   Performance standards
   
82-473   Environmental impact assessment
   
82-474   Wireless communication facilities
Article XXII. Exceptions
   
82-491   Area, height and use exceptions
Article XXIII. Planned Development District
   
82-496   Intent
   
82-497   Procedure for application
   
82-498   Preliminary approval
   
82-499   Final plan submittal
   
82-500   Final approval
   
82-501   Required conditions
   
82-502   Minimum development standards
Article XXIV. Neighborhood Commercial MX-1 Mixed-Use Overlay District
   
82-510   Mixed-Use Overlay District
   
82-511   Purpose and objectives
   
82-512   Definitions
   
82-513   Application to nonresidential districts
   
82-514   Uses
   
82-515   Required conditions
   
82-516   Area and bulk requirements
Article XXV. Commercial Cannabis Overlay Districts
   
82-517   Title; Commercial Cannabis Overlay Districts established
   
82-518   Purpose and objectives
   
82-519   Definitions
   
82-520   Limits on marihuana operations licenses and locations; other
requirements
   
82-521   Odor control
   
82-522   Prohibited acts
   
82-523   Compliance with law, environmental; other laws remain applicable
   
82-524   Violations and penalties
Appendices
   
A   Definition illustrations
   
B   Parking layouts
   
C   Distance spacing for multiple dwellings; side yards abutting a street
   
D   Cluster example
   
E   Condominium subdivision terminology
   
F   Landscape standards for parking areas
   
G   Corner clearance
   
H   Residential fence setbacks
   
I   Walls - transition details
Cross reference:
   Administration, see
Chapter 2;
   Buildings and building regulation, see
Chapter 14;
   Community development, see
Chapter 22;
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Chapter 30;
   Planning, see
Chapter 42;
   Streets, sidewalks and other public places, see
Chapter 58;
   Subdivision regulations, see
Chapter 62;
   Vegetation, see
Chapter 70;
   Utilities, see
Chapter 68
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 82-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City Zoning Ordinance."
(1993 Code, § 82-1) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-2 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public
Acts of the state in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of
promoting, and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city by protecting
and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the
residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; securing the most
appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access;
and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water,
sewers, schools, recreation and other public requirements, and by other means,
all in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan, and further in accord with the
provisions of the Urban Services District adopted by the Townships of Eaton and
Carmel and the city.
(1993 Code, § 82-2) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-3 CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.
   The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter.
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
      (3)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive.
      (4)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      (5)   The word "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
      (6)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for."
      (7)   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an unincorporated association, or any other similar entity.
      (8)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves 2 or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected
by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
         (a)   "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply;
         (b)   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination;
         (c)   "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      (9)   Terms not defined in this article shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them.
(1993 Code, § 82-3) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
Cross reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 82-4 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY. A use which is clearly incidental to,
customarily found in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot,
unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to which it is related. When
ACCESSORY is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as ACCESSORY
USE. An ACCESSORY USE includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers;
      (2)   Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of the
occupants of a residence or their guests;
      (3)   Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room or
similar accessory building or other structure;
      (4)   A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a
building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior
signs or displays;
      (5)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with
a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable
district regulations;
      (6)   Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related
activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district
regulations;
      (7)   Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to
the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the
zoning lot is located;
      (8)   Uses clearly incidental to a main use, such as, but not limited to,
offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the
commercial or industrial complex;
      (9)   Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located;
      (10)   Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district
in which the zoning lot is located;
      (11)   Common household gardening in a residential district when located
only in the rear yard and/or nonrequired side yard areas;
      (12)   Solar panels, wind generators, television reception antennas,
satellite dish antennas and air conditioning units.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. One or a combination of more than one of the
following types of businesses: adult bookstore, adult cabaret, or adult motion
picture theater.
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment as defined in §
15-26 of this Code.
      (2)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment as defined in §
15-26 of this Code.
      (3)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment as defined in §
15-26 of this Code.
      (4)   SUBSTANTIAL PORTION. A use or activity accounts for more than 20%
of any one or more of the following: stock-in-trade, display space, floor
space, or viewing time, movie display time, or entertainment time measured per
month.
      (5)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae; or
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (6)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any one or more of the following:
         (a)   The fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
         (b)   Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy;
         (c)   Human masturbation, actual or simulated;
         (d)   Human excretory functions, as part of or as related to, any of
the activities described above; and
         (e)   Physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape, actual or
simulated, as part of or as related to, any of the activities described above.
   ALLEY. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to
abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of
occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be
referred to herein as ALTERED or RECONSTRUCTED.
   APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room
in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities.
   APARTMENTS. A suite of rooms in a multiple-family building, arranged and
intended for use as a place of residence for a single family or a group of
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
   ARCADE. A building or structure, or any part thereof, which is devoted to
the commercial use of amusement devices, pinball machines, electronic tables
featuring pool, billiards, bowling, basketball, football, or the like, or
electronic games of skill or dexterity utilizing video tapes or video screen or
T.V. adaptations, and the like, automatic sport devices or tables or similar
activities for hire, or for amusement.
   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES. Steps, window sills, belt courses, brick and/or
wrought iron wing walls, chimneys, architraves or pediments.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. The general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding
or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or
fender straightening and repair; and painting of automobiles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Repairs other than major repair, including engine
tune-up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, undercoating shops
and tire stores.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade,
but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor
is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A
BASEMENT shall not be counted as a story. (See Appendix A).
   BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS. A use which is subordinate to the principal
use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit, and a use in which
transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment.
   BERM, OBSCURING. An earthen mound of definite height and location to serve
as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
   BLOCK. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest
such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or
live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the
continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality.
   BOARD. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established under this chapter.
   BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the established sidewalk grade
at the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof
surface of a flat roof, to the deck line for a mansard roof, and the mean
height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
Penthouses, towers, cupolas, steeples, antennas and other roof structures used
only for mechanical operation of the building shall not be included as the
height of the building. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the
height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the
building wall. (See
Appendix A.)
   BUILDING LINE. A line formed by the face of the building, and for the
purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front
setback line. (See
Appendix A.)
   BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated.
   CLUB. An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, but
not operated for profit.
   CONDOMINIUM DEFINITIONS. The following definitions are related to
condominiums.
      (1)   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101
et seq., as amended.
      (2)   CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS. The master deed, recorded pursuant to the
Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or
bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the
condominium.
      (3)   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. The drawings and information prepared
in accordance with § 66 of the Condominium Act.
      (4)   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. The portion of a condominium project designed and
intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed.
      (5)   CONSOLIDATING MASTER DEED. The final amended master deed for a
contractible or expandable condominium project, or a condominium project
containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master
deed fully describes the condominium project as completed.
      (6)   CONTRACTIBLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project from which any
portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with
this chapter and the Condominium Act.
      (7)   CONVERSION CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project containing
condominium units, some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a
notice of taking reservations under § 7 of the Condominium Act.
      (8)   EXPANDABLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project to which additional
land may be added in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act.
      (9)   MASTER DEED. The condominium document recording the condominium
project, to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference, the
bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project,
and all other information required by § 8 of the Condominium Act.
      (10)   NOTICE OF PROPOSED ACTION. The notice required by § 71 of the
Condominium Act, to be filed with the city and other agencies.
      (11)   SITE CONDOMINIUM. A development concept for a condominium
development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial or other
structures for uses permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, in
which each co-owner owns exclusive rights in a condominium unit, as described
in the master deed.
      (12)   YARDS, CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS.
         (a)   FRONT YARD SETBACK. Equal to the distance between the front yard
area line and the condominium dwelling.
         (b)   REAR YARD SETBACK. Equal to the distance between the rear yard
area line and the condominium dwelling.
         (c)   SIDE YARD SETBACK. Equal to the distance between the side yard
area line and the condominium dwelling.
   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION. A method of subdivision where land ownership of
sites is regulated by the Condominium Act, as opposed to the Subdivision
Control Act of 1967 (M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.). CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION
shall be equivalent to the term SUBDIVISION as used in this zoning chapter and
the city subdivision regulations.
   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. The site, survey and utility plans; floor
plans; and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed
structures and improvements, including the location thereof on the land.
   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. A structure with sleeping rooms, where persons
are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical
care.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A group facility for more than six children which gives
care to children away from their homes.
   DAY CARE HOME (FAMILY). A one-family dwelling which receives not more than
six children for care during the day.
   DAY CARE HOME FOR ELDERLY ADULTS. A one-family dwelling which receives not
more than six elderly or infirmed adults, for care during the day.
   DAY CARE HOME (GROUP). A one-family dwelling which receives not more than 12
children for care during the day.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new building or other structure on a
zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or
the use of open land for a new use.
   DISTRICT. A portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within
which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof
apply under the provisions of this chapter.
   DRIVE-IN. An establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are sold
to the customers in a ready-to-consume state and where the customer consumes
food, frozen desserts or beverages in an automobile parked upon the premises or
at other facilities provided for customers which are located outside the
building.
   DRIVE-THROUGH. An establishment so developed that some portion of its retail
or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and
staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons
while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, for
carrying out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the
premises.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building, or a portion thereof, designed
exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of
each other.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for and occupied
exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two
families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one
family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities.
   ERECTED. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed or moved upon. Any
physical operations on the premises which are required for construction,
excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead
gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including  poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call
boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including
buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare.
   EXCAVATION. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
   FAMILY. Either of the following:
      (1)   A domestic family, that is, one or more persons living together and
related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage or adoption, together with
servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated
person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single,
domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling;
      (2)   The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons
living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with
a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional
equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All
persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be cooking and
otherwise housekeeping as a single, nonprofit unit. This definition shall not
include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie,
organization or group where the common living arrangement and/or the basis for
the establishment of the functional equivalency of the domestic family is
likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration. There
shall be a rebuttable presumption enforceable by the Building Official in the
first instance that the number of persons who may reside as a functional
equivalent family shall be limited to six. Such presumption may be rebutted by
application to the Planning Commission for a special land use based upon the
applicable standards in this chapter.
   FARM. The carrying on of any agricultural activity and the raising of
livestock or small animals as a source of income.
   FENCE. A manmade structure constructed for the purpose of or to have the
effect of enclosing the area it is constructed upon.
   FENCE, ORNAMENTAL. A manmade structure, the surface area of which is more
than 50% open. Ornamental fences do not include chainlink fences or fences of
wire construction. (See
Appendix A).
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE. For the purposes of computing parking, that area used
for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use
to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or
intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise,
hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from this
computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the
sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured
from the interior faces of the exterior walls. (See
Appendix A).
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building
designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and
similar vehicles and such other lawn and home care equipment owned and used by
the occupant of the building to which it is accessory.
   GARAGE SALE. Any sale of personal effects, jewelry or household items,
furnishings and equipment belonging to the owner or occupant of the property
held in any district by the owner, occupant or his personal representative.
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A place for the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale
of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major
automobile repair.
   GRADE. The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the
number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the
level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade
is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by
averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building.
   GREENBELT. A planting of trees and shrubs to serve as a screening device
between abutting land uses.
   GUARANTEE. A cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of
credit or such other instrument acceptable to the city.
   HARDSHIP. Situations created by circumstances unique to an individual
property that do not generally occur to land or buildings in the neighborhood
or zoning district of the property in question and which circumstances make the
use of such property infeasible under conditions imposed by this chapter.
HARDSHIP shall not include personal or financial hardship or economic
disadvantage nor shall it constitute circumstances that are self-created.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit
as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes.
   HOSPICE. A lodging place for the ill where persons are housed and furnished
meals and attendant care.
   HOTEL. A building or part of a building, with a common entrance, in which
the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy,
and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service,
furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk service, and bellboy
service. A HOTEL may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet
halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Those features and actions associated with a project which are
considered necessary by the municipality to protect natural resources or the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and future users or
inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas,
landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage.
Improvements do not include the entire project which is subject to zoning
approval.
   JUNKYARD. An area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but
not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and
bottles. JUNKYARD includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area
of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or
other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded or bred and
raised for remuneration.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group
of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading
and unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main
building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for
the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open
spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A LOT may or may
not be specifically designated as such on public records. LOT shall mean the
same as homesite and condominium unit in site condominium developments.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. (See
Appendix A.)
   LOT, CORNER. A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the
intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a
curved street shall be considered a CORNER LOT for the  purposes of this
chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the
curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight
street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. (See
Appendix A .)
   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings,
including accessory buildings and pools, but excluding porches, patios and
decks.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined in divisions (1) through (3)
following.
      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of an interior lot, means that line
separating the lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, FRONT LOT
LINE means that line separating the lot from either street.
      (2)   REAR LOT LINE. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the
case of a lot pointed at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be an imaginary line
parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, lying farthest
from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear
lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a side street lot
line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot is an interior side lot
line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is an exterior lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds or in common use by
city or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of
such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder
thereof.
   LOT, THROUGH. Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel
streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a double frontage
lot, all yards of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage,
and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines,
measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the
side lot lines. (See
Appendix A.)
   LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land, located within a single block which, at
the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control. A ZONING LOT shall satisfy this chapter with
respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in
which the zoning lot is located. A ZONING LOT, therefore, may not coincide with
a lot of record as filed with the County Register of Deeds, but may include one
or more lots of record. (See
Appendix A.)
   MAIN BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
upon which it is situated.
   MAIN USE. The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large
volume traffic- way for both the immediate municipal area and the region
beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway
or equivalent term on the Major Thoroughfare Plan to identify those streets
comprising the basic structure of the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
   MASTER PLAN. The comprehensive community plan, including graphic and written
proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public
buildings and all physical development  of the municipality, and includes any
unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine or device which, upon the insertion
of a coin, currency, slug, token, plate or disc, operates or may be operated as
a game of contest of skill or amusement when the element of skill in such
operation predominates over chance or luck. It shall include mechanical,
electrical or electronic video games, mechanical grabbing devices, pinball
games, mechanical, electrical or electronic baseball, football, basketball,
hockey and similar sports-type games, mechanical, electrical or electronic card
games, shooting games, target games, or any other machine, device or apparatus
which may be used as a game of skill and wherein the player initiates, employs
or directs any force generated by such machine.
   MEZZANINE. An intermediate floor in any story occupying not less than one
third of the floor area of such story.
   MINI STORAGE UNITS. Storage buildings for lease to the general public for
storage of personal and household effects and for dry storage of office or
business effects, not including the warehousing of products or supplies.
   MOBILE HOME. Any building or structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include recreational
equipment.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person
upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual
nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose
regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building,
structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use
incident to the occupancy of a mobile home.
   MOTEL. A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units
containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for
overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall
cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. This definition does
not include apartments.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Charlotte, Michigan.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance,
but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to
the present requirements of the zoning district.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at
the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter in the district in which it is
located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that does not
conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE - CLASS A. A nonconforming use or structure
which has been designated to be allowed to be perpetuated and improved under
the provisions of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE - CLASS B. A nonconforming use or structure
which has been designated to be allowed to be continued within the restricted
provisions of this chapter.
   NUISANCE FACTORS. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or
practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating
invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property
line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of
an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Noise;
      (2)   Dust;
      (3)   Smoke;
      (4)   Odor;
      (5)   Glare;
      (6)   Fumes;
      (7)   Flashes;
      (8)   Vibration;
      (9)   Shock waves;
      (10)   Heat;
      (11)   Electronic or atomic radiation;
      (12)   Objectionable effluent;
      (13)   Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night;
      (14)   Passenger traffic;
      (15)   Invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic;
      (16)   A burned structure;
      (17)   A condemned structure.
   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS. A space, building or structure, or combination
thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail
sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. The
definition of NURSERY within the meaning of this chapter does not include any
space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or
Christmas trees.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. A daytime facility which has as its main objective a
development program for preschool children and whose staff meets the
educational requirements established by the state.
   NURSING HOME. A structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or
lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care.
   OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A facility providing off-street vehicular parking
spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of more than three vehicles.
   OPEN STORAGE. The storage of any materials or objects outside the confines
of a building.
   PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width; such area shall be
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be
fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Criteria developed to control nuisance factors.
   POOL OR BILLIARD HALL. A commercial establishment which provides two or more
pool and/or billiard tables for use by patrons.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board
or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or
municipal regulations to the public gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communications, telegraph, transportation or water.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Trailer coaches, travel trailers, utility trailers,
pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, and boat
trailers, snowmobiles, horse trailers, dune buggies, race cars, demolition
derby cars and other similar equipment and conveyances.
   ROOM. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a
Multiple-Family District, means a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to
at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchens,
sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage areas.
Plans presented showing one, two or three bedroom units and including a den,
library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the
purpose of computing density.
   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A structure designed, intended or used to receive
communications or other signals from geostationary, communications satellites
or other extraterrestrial sources.
   SETBACK. The distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard
open space provisions of this chapter. Setbacks for buildings shall be measured
from the foundation wall.
   SHOPPING CENTER/SHOPPING PLAZA. A privately owned commercial area having
four or more stores that share a common parking lot or common driveways.
   SIGN DEFINITIONS. The following definitions are related to signs. (See
Appendix A.)
      (1)   SIGN. Any announcement, declaration, display, billboard,
illustration and insignia, when designed and placed so as to attract general
public attention. Such shall be deemed to be a single sign whenever the
proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggest a single unit,
notwithstanding any physical separation between parts. Sign shall include any
banner, bulbs or other lighting devices, streamer, pennant, inflated or
deflated membrane device, propeller, flag (other than the official flag of any
nation or state) and any similar device of any type or kind, whether bearing
lettering or not.
      (2)   ACCESSORY SIGN. A sign which pertains to the principal use of the
premises.
      (3)   BANNER SIGN. A portable sign of fabric, plastic, or other non-rigid
material without an enclosing structural framework.
      (4)   BILLBOARD. A sign which advertises an establishment, product,
service or activity not available or not conducted on the lot on which the sign
is located.
      (5)   CHANGEABLE COPY, READER BOARD SIGN.
         (a)   Manual. A sign on which a copy is changed manually, such as
reader boards with changeable letters or pictorials.
         (b)   Automatic. An electronically controlled sign, where different
copy changes are shown on the same unexposed lamp bank or rotating portion of
the face of the sign, used as a message center reader board.
      (6)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. A business operating independent of any
other business located in a freestanding building; in a strip mall, a business
completely separated from other businesses by walls from the ground up and with
a door which may regularly be used by the public for exclusive ingress and
egress to that business; in an enclosed structure with a shared climate
controlled area, a business completely separated from other businesses by walls
from the ground up, and with a door or entrance which may regularly be used by
the public for exclusive ingress and egress to that business, and which may be
closed to the public even while the common area is open to the public; and in
an office building, a business holding itself out to the public as a single
entity, independent of other businesses or persons.
      (7)   COMMUNITY EVENT SIGN. A sign erected within the city, which is used
to call attention to special events of interest to the general public, which
may be sponsored by government agencies, schools, service clubs, civic or
religious  organizations, or other groups which are non-profit and whose
purpose is charitable, philanthropic, religious or benevolent.
      (8)   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign which identifies the owners, financiers,
contractors, architects, and engineers of a project under construction.
      (9)   CONTINUED READABILITY. Continuing to be read easily, with all
letters, images and other aspects of the sign face remaining as initially
depicted and displayed, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
      (10)   DIRECTIONAL SIGN, ON-SITE. A sign which gives directions,
instructions, or facility information for the use of the lot on which the sign
is located, such as parking or exit and entrance signs.
      (11)   ESSENTIAL SERVICES SIGN. A sign which identifies an essential
service use as defined in the City Zoning Ordinance.
      (12)   FLAG SIGN. A flag which is attached to a pole and which contains
the name, logo or other symbol of a business, company, corporation or agency of
a commercial nature.
      (13)   FLASHING SIGN. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use.
      (14)   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is not attached to a building or
wall, and is supported by one or more poles or braces, which are less than 50%
of the width of the sign, or that rests on the ground or on a foundation
resting on the ground.
      (15)   GOVERNMENT SIGN. A sign erected, or required to be erected, by the
City of Charlotte, Eaton County, state or Federal government, or any agency
thereof.
      (16)   GROUND SIGN. A freestanding sign supported by a base which rests
directly on the ground. The width of the base shall be at least 50% of the
width of the sign in order to be a ground sign.
      (17)   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign, emblem or decal informing the
public of facilities or services available on the premises, for example, a
building entrance sign, a credit card sign, or restroom sign or sign indicating
hours of business.
      (18)   MANSARD. A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally
comparable to a building wall.
      (19)    MARQUEE/CANOPY/AWNING SIGN. A sign painted on, attached to, or
consisting of an interchangeable copy reader, on a permanent overhanging
shelter which projects from the face of the building.
      (20)   MEMORIAL SIGN. A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person,
event, structure or site.
      (21)   MURAL. A design or representation painted or drawn on a wall which
does not advertise an establishment, product, service, or activity.
      (22)   NAMEPLATE. A non-illuminated, on-premise sign, giving only the
name, address and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
      (23)   NON-ACCESSORY SIGN. A sign structure advertising a service,
establishment, merchandise, or entertainment which is not sold, produced,
manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is located.
      (24)   NON-COMMERCIAL SIGN. A sign, either portable or non-portable, not
advertising commerce, trade or location, and not otherwise defined herein. A
political sign is a noncommercial sign.
      (25)   PLACARD. A sign not exceeding two square feet which provides
notices of a public nature, such as "No Trespassing," "No Hunting," or "Gas
Mains" signs.
      (26)   PORTABLE OR TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign and sign structure designed to
facilitate the movement of the sign from one zoning lot to another. The sign
may or may not have wheels, changeable lettering and/or hitches for towing.
      (27)   PROJECTING SIGN. A display sign attached directly to the building
wall, extending more than 12 inches from the face of the wall, and projecting
in such a way that its message is not parallel to the wall to which it is
attached.
      (28)   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign advertising the real estate
upon which the sign is located as being for sale, rent, or lease.
      (29)   RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign identifying or recognizing
a platted subdivision, site condominium, multi-family or other residential
development.
      (30)   ROOF LINE. The top of a roof or parapet wall, whichever is higher,
but excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projections.
      (31)   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected above the roof line of a building.
      (32)   SIDEWALK SIGN. An A-frame sign which is portable and designed to
be placed on the sidewalk in front of the use it advertises.
      (33)   SIGN AREA. The area of a sign shall be measured as the area within
a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure
which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo, or
any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or other
material or color forming an integral part of the display, or used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed,
excluding only the structure necessary to support the sign. Two or more faces
shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces, except if two such
faces are placed back-to-back and are of equal size, and are not more than two
feet apart at any point, the area of the two  back-to-back faces shall be
counted as one face. If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal size, the
larger of the two faces shall be counted as the one face.
      (34)   SIGN HEIGHT. The height of a sign shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the highest point of the sign to the grade of the
adjacent street or the average grade of the ground immediately beneath the
sign.
      (35)   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. A sign for a sale or grand opening.
      (36)   VEHICLE SIGN. A vehicle primarily located or used to serve as a
sign rather than as transportation. This includes trailers either attached or
detached from a vehicle.
      (37)   WALL SIGN. A sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to
the exterior wall of a building, extending no greater than 12 inches from the
exterior face of a wall to which it is attached, and located below the roof
line. This includes signs attached to a mansard.
      (38)   WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be
viewed from the outside.
   SPOT ZONING. Rezoning a lot or parcel of land for a use incompatible with
surrounding uses.
   STORY. That part of a building, except a mezzanine, as defined in this
section, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next
floor, or, if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement
shall not be counted as a story. (See
Appendix A.)
   STORY, HALF. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, at least 200
square feet in area, with a clear ceiling height of seven feet, six inches. For
the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at
least five feet clear height between floor and ceiling.
   STREET. A dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords
the principal means of access to abutting property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
   SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by
the proprietor thereof, or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of the sale or lease
for more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division
creates five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less in
area; or where five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less
in area, are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years.
   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING. A use or building permitted to exist during a
specified period of time.
   TRANSITION or TRANSITIONAL. A zoning district which may serve as a district
of transition, i.e., a buffer zone between various land use districts or land
use types. (See Appendix A.)
   USE. The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied.
   WALL, OBSCURING. A structure of definite height and location to serve as an
obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
   YARDS. The open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter and as defined below.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the nearest point of the main building.
      (2)   REAR YARD. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear
yard shall be the yard opposite the street address.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. An open space between a main building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the
horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest
point of the main building.
      (4)   SIDE YARD, EXTERIOR. A side yard abutting a street.
      (5)   SIDE YARD, INTERIOR. A side yard abutting a yard on another lot or
parcel. (See
Appendix A.)
(1993 Code, § 82-4) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 7-24-1995; Ord. passed
2-12-1996; Ord. passed 5-11-1998; Ord. passed 10-12-1998; Ord. passed 3-11-2002
(3); Ord. passed 7-12-2004; Ord. passed 12-8-2008; Ord. 2015-01, passed 4-13-
2015)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2;
   Definitions, see §
15-26;
   Regulations to prevent blight, see §
82-459(b)
§ 82-5 AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council may from time to time, on recommendation from the Planning
Commission or on petition, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries
or the regulations in this chapter, or subsequently established in this chapter
pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Public Act 110 of 2006,
being M.C.L.A §§ 125.3101 et seq.
(1993 Code, § 82-5) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-6 ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission is designated as the Commission specified in Public
Act 207 of 1921, § 4, being M.C.L.A. § 125.584, to shall perform the zoning
duties of such Commission as provided in the statute in connection with the
amendment of this chapter prior to adoption of Public Act 110 of 2006, pursuant
to § 301 of said act, the Zoning Commission and the Planning Commission shall
perform all duties of a Zoning Commission specified in § 301 of Public Act 110
of 2006.
(1993 Code, § 82-6) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-7 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or
interfere with any existing provision of law, or ordinance, or with any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted
or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises;
provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than
is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
(1993 Code, § 82-7) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-8 VESTED RIGHTS.
   Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to
any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use,
district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and they
are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public
health, safety and welfare.
(1993 Code, § 82-8) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-9 -- 82-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
§ 82-26 VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Municipal civil infraction. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
   (B)   Public nuisance per se. Any building or structure which is erected,
altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed
subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per
se and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Fines, imprisonment. The owner of any building, structure or premises
or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist
or shall be created, who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such
violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof
shall be liable to the fines herein provided.
   (D)   Each day a separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues.
   (E)   Rights and remedies cumulative. The rights and remedies provided in
this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by
law.
(1993 Code, § 82-26) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 2-26-1996)
§ 82-27 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Official or by such deputies of his department as the Building
Official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter exclusive of
the provisions of the Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96 of 1987, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 et seq., as amended, which are under the jurisdiction of
the state.
(1993 Code, § 82-27) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. 3-12-2007)
§ 82-28 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Building Official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance
and occupancy permits and to make inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall
be unlawful for the Building Official to approve any plans or issue any permits
or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has
inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Official, and/or such other officers or departments as
shall be designated by the City Manager, shall record in duplicate, 1 copy of
which shall be filed with the City Clerk, all nonconforming uses of structures
and land existing at the effective date of this chapter for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of §
82-453 of this chapter.
   (C)   The Building Official is under no circumstances permitted to make
changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out
his duties as Building Official.
   (D)   The Building Official shall not refuse to issue a permit when
conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant despite
violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may
occur upon the granting of the permit.
(1993 Code, § 82-28) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-29 PLOT PLAN.
   (A)   The Building Official shall require that all applications for building
permits for uses not covered in §
82-471 shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan,
in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following:
      (1)   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot;
      (2)   The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures
to be erected, altered or moved, and of any building or other structures
already on the lot;
      (3)   The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures
upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate;
      (4)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may
be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being
observed.
   (B)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Building Official, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or
disapproved. The second copy shall be retained in the office of the Building
Official.
(1993 Code, § 82-29) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-30 PERMITS.
   The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit.
      (1)   Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for
the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof,
or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall
hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a
different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for
the new or different use.
      (3)   Permits for new use of building. No building, structure, or part
thereof shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type
unless a building permit is first obtained for the new or different use.
      (4)   Permits required. No building, structure, or part thereof shall be
hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall
have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall
include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type,
class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress and egress,
or other changes affecting or regulated by the City Building Code, Housing Law
of Michigan, or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving
any of the aforesaid features.
      (5)   Deposit of guarantee. Any guarantee required by this chapter shall
be deposited with the City Clerk prior to the issuance of permits.
(1993 Code, § 82-30) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-31 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No land, building, structure, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or
for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued
for such new use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate.
      (1)   Certificates not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall
be issued for any building, structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any
land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Certificates required. No building, structure, or part thereof,
which is hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used or the same
caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued for such building, structure, or part thereof.
      (3)   Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as
required by the building code for new buildings, structures, or part thereof,
or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures,
shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter.
      (4)   Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy
shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or part thereof, or
existing uses of land, if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings,
structures, or part thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Certificates of occupancy may be issued for
buildings in B-1, B-2, B-3 and CBD zones existing at the effective date of this
chapter which change occupancy and which do not provide sufficient parking as
required under §
82-455, provided there is no decrease in the number of spaces existing at the
effective date of this chapter.
      (5)   Temporary certificates. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or
structure in the process of erection or alteration, provided that such
temporary certificate shall not be effective for a period of time in excess of
6 months, and provided further that such portion of the building, structure or
premises is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   Records of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall
be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and copies shall be
furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest
in the property involved.
      (7)   Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings accessory
to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be
included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the
plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwelling.
      (8)   Applications for certificates. Application for certificates of
occupancy shall he made in writing to the Building Official on forms furnished
by the Department, and such certificates shall be issued within 10 days after
receipt of such application if it is found that the building, structure, or
part thereof, or the use of land, is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of such refusal and cause thereof, within the 10 day
period.
(1993 Code, § 82-31) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-32 FINAL INSPECTION.
   The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection,
alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure, or part thereof shall
notify the Building Official immediately upon the completion of the work
authorized by such permit, for a final inspection.
(1993 Code, § 82-32) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-33 FEES.
   (A)   Fees for rezoning application, site plan review inspection and the
issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof, required or issued under
the provisions of this chapter, may be collected by the Building Official in
advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution
of the City Council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision
resulting from enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Land areas of ten (10) acres or more in use districts RM-1, RM-2, MH,
B-2, B-3, IRO, I-1, I-2, PDD:
      (1)   Escrow funds. Where Planning Commission approval of a site plan or
PDD plan is required, and where it is reviewed by an outside consultant, those
charges shall be borne by the applicant, in addition to the basic application
fee. Planning Commission may, after its formal review, determine that outside
consultation is required regardless of size limitations.
      (2)   A minimum of $500 in escrow funds shall be collected by the city
and placed in escrow, to be administered by the City Treasurer. Escrow will be
replenished if necessary and any excess funds remaining in the escrow account
after the application has been processed and a final decision rendered
regarding the project, will be refunded to the applicant with no interest on
the funds. If the cost of the review exceeds the amount remaining in escrow, a
statement shall be sent to the applicant for the additional costs. No permits
shall be issued until the balance is paid. If unpaid for more than 14 days, the
City Building Official may take legal action to halt work on the project and
take legal action to collect the fees.
(1993 Code, § 82-33) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-11-2002(2))
§ 82-33A NOTICE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, if the city is
required to provide notice and hearing under this chapter, the city shall
publish notice of the request in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city;
   (B)   Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners
of property for which approval is being considered and the applicant if
different than the owners. Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom
real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants
of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the
property or occupant is located in the city.
   (C)   The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the
application will be considered for approval. If the name of the occupant is not
known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this
subsection. The notice shall do the following.
      (1)   Describe the nature of the request.
      (2)   Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The
notice shall include a listing of all existing street addressed within the
property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such
addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street
addresses, other means of identification may be used.
      (3)   State when and where the request will be considered.
      (4)   Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
(Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-34 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission is designated the
Commission, as specified in Public Act 285 of 1931, § 3, being M.C.L.A. §
125.33, as amended, and in Public Act 110 of 2006, § 4, being M.C.L.A. §
125.3101, and shall perform the duties of such Commission as provided in these
acts, as amended, together with such other powers and duties as are given to
such Commission by the provisions of this chapter, including authority to act
on all matters requiring approval or recommendation of such Commission.
   (B)   Authority to approve uses. Whenever in this chapter the lawful
exercise or existence of a use requires the approval of the Planning
Commission, such Commission is hereby authorized and directed to investigate
the matter requiring such approval, to conduct a hearing thereon, to make a
determination, to either grant or refuse the approval and to do all things
reasonably necessary to the making of such investigation and determination,
subject to the provisions of subsections (B) through (G) of this section,
inclusive. With respect to the authority granted Planning Commission members in
this chapter, a members in this chapter, a member of the Planning Commission
may be removed for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office by the
City Council upon written charges after a public hearing.
   (C)   Hearing; notice.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold a minimum of 2 regular meetings
annually, giving notice of the time and place by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. Notice shall be given not less than 15 days
before the meeting. The Planning Commission is subject to the Open Meetings
Act, 1976 PA 267, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application for a special land use approval, a
conditional use approval, a planned residential development approval, a site
plan approval of a Class A nonconforming use approval or any other land use
approval which requires a decision on discretionary grounds, 1 notice that a
request has been received shall be given as provided in §
82-33(A). Notification need not be given to more than 1 occupant of a
structure, except that if a structure contains more than 1 dwelling unit or
spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses
or organizations, 1 occupant of each unit or spatial areas shall receive
notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than 4 dwelling units
or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice ma be given to the manager or
owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the
primary entrance to the structure.
   (D)   Surveys and plans. Where the Planning Commission is empowered to
approve certain uses of premises under the provisions of this chapter or in
cases where the Commission is required to make an investigation, the applicant
shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably
required by the Commission for the proper evaluation and consideration of the
matter.
   (E)   Hearings; matters to be considered. In making any recommendations or
approvals on special land uses, conditional uses, planned residential
districts, site plans or other matters authorized by law, the Planning
Commission and the City Council, where its approval is also required, shall
consider and apply the following standards.
      (1)   Whether or not the use involved is consistent with and promotes the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   Whether or not the use involved is compatible with adjacent uses of
land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and
facilities affected by the land use.
      (3)   Whether or not the use involved is consistent with the public
health, safety and welfare of the city.
   (F)   Conditions for approval.
      (1)   Reasonable conditions may be required in conjunction with the
approval of a special land use, conditional use, planned residential district
or other land uses or activities permitted by discretionary decision. The
conditions may include conditions necessary to insure that public services and
facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of
accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or
activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and
energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the
use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed
shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Be designed to protect natural resources, and the health, safety
and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will
use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as
a whole;
         (b)   Be related to the valid exercise of the policy, power and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity;
         (c)   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning
regulations; be related to the standards established in this chapter for the
land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to insure compliance
with those standards.
      (2)   The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use
or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall
remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and
the landowner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes
granted in conditions.
(1993 Code, § 82-34) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-35 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on
recommendation of the Planning Commission or on petition, after public notice,
hearing and report by the Planning Commission as provided by law, amend,
supplement or change the boundaries or regulations in this chapter or
subsequently established pursuant to the authority and procedure established in
Public Act 110 of 2006, § 4.202, being M.C.L.A.§ 125.3306, as amended. At least
1 public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission, and a report made
thereon, before the City Council shall adopt any amendment to this chapter or
the maps adopted under this chapter. If an individual property or 10 or fewer
adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the Planning Commission shall
give a notice of the proposed rezoning in the same manner as required under §
82-33A. If 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the
Planning Commission shall give a notice of the proposed rezoning in the same
manner as required under §
82-33A, except for the requirement of §
82-33A(B) and except that no individual addresses of properties are required to
be listed under §
82-33A. Not less than 15 days notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall first be given by mail to each public utility company and to each
railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the
districts or zones affected that registers its name and mailing address with
the City Clerk for the purpose of receiving such notice. An affidavit of
mailing shall be maintained. A hearing shall be granted a person interested at
the time and place specified on the notice. A summary of the comments submitted
at the public hearing shall be transmitted with the report if the Planning
Commission and the proposed zoning ordinance, including any maps, to the City
Council. The City Council may hold additional public hearings if it considers
them necessary. After receipt of the Planning Commission's report, the City
Council may adopt the proposed amendment, with or without amendments, by a
majority vote of the members or refer the proposed amendment again to the
Planning Commission for a further report. If an individual property or several
adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, notice of the proposed rezoning
and hearing shall be given as provided in this section. City Council shall
grant a hearing to a property owner who requests a hearing by certified mail
addressed to the Clerk.
      (1)   A zoning ordinance shall take effect upon the expiration of 7 days
after publication as required by this section or at such later date after
publication as may be specified by the legislative body.
      (2)   Following adoption of a zoning ordinance and any subsequent
amendments by the legislative body, the zoning ordinance or subsequent
amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk and a notice of ordinance
adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the local
unit of government within 15 days after adoption.
      (3)   A copy of the notice required under subsection (2) shall be mailed
to the airport manager of an airport entitled to notice under §
82-34.
      (4)   The notice required under this section shall include all of the
following information:
         (a)   In the case of a newly adopted zoning ordinance, the following
statement:
            "A zoning ordinance regulating the development and use of land has
been adopted by the City of Charlotte."
         (b)   In the case of an amendment to an existing zoning ordinance,
either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the
geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment.
         (c)   The effective date of the ordinance or amendment.
         (d)   The place where and time when a copy of the ordinance or
amendment may be purchased or inspected.
      (5)   The filing and publication requirements under this section
supersede any other statutory requirements relating to the filing and
publication of city ordinances.
   (B)   Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements set
forth in this subsection, an amendment to a zoning ordinance which is the
object of the petition shall be passed only by a 2/3 vote of the City Council.
The protest petition shall be presented to the City Council before final
legislative action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the
following:
      (1)   The owners of at least 20% of the area of the land included in the
proposed change;
      (2)   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included within an
area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land
included in the proposed change. Publicly owned land shall be excluded in
calculating this 20% land area requirement.
(1993 Code, § 82-35) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-36 CONDITIONAL REZONING.
   (A)   An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing, and the City
Council may approve, certain use and development of the land as a condition to
a rezoning of the land or an amendment to a zoning map.
   (B)   In approving the conditions under subsection (A), the City Council may
establish a time period during which the conditions apply to the land. Except
for an extension under subsection (D), if the conditions are not satisfied
within the time specified under this subsection, the land shall revert to its
former zoning classification.
   (C)   The City Council shall not add to or alter the conditions approved
under subsection (A) during the time period specified under subsection (B) of
this section.
   (D)   The time period specified under subsection (B) may be extended upon
the application of the landowner and approval of the City Council.
   (E)   The City Council shall not require a landowner to offer conditions as
a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer under subsection (A) shall not
otherwise affect a landowner's rights under Act of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 2006, the ordinances of the city, or any other laws of this state.
(Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§§ 82-37 -- 82-55 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 82-56 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall
perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of Public
Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3601 through 125.3607, as amended, in
such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The City Council shall act as the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the
member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or
herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes
malfeasance in office.
   (C)   The Mayor and Mayor Pro-Tem shall act as the Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson. The City Clerk shall serve as the Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   (D)   The City Council may also, if it so desires, appoint not more than two
alternate members for the same term as regular members of the Board of Appeals.
An alternate member may be called to serve in the place of a regular member for
the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has
abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been
appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The
alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the
Board of Appeals.
(1993 Code, § 82-56) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-8-1996(2); Ord.
passed 12-14-1998; Ord. passed 3-12-2007; Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 82-57 MEETINGS.
   (A)   All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such times as such Board may determine. All meetings
conducted by said Board shall be open to the public. The Board of Appeals shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Four members of the
Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business.
   (B)   The Board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books,
papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it.
(1993 Code, § 82-57) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-58 APPEAL.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person, firm or
corporation, or by an officer, department, board or bureau affected by a
decision of the Building Inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within such time
as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule, by filing with
the Building Official and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Building Official shall forthwith transmit
to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Official certifies to the Board of Appeals
after notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the Building Official and on due cause
shown.
   (C)   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof as provided in §
82-61 and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any
person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
   (D)   The City Council shall, from time to time, determine by resolution the
fee which shall be paid to the Secretary of the Board of Appeals at the time
that notice of appeals is filed, which the Secretary shall forthwith pay over
to the City Treasurer to the credit of the General Fund of the city.
(1993 Code, § 82-58) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-59 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or
change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any
change in the terms of this chapter, but does have power to act on those
matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review,
interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a
variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. These powers include
the following.
      (1)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement,
permit, decision or refusal made by the Building Official or any other
administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a nonuse variance from the
strict application of the provisions of this chapter where by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of
property at the time of enactment of this chapter or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such
property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in
peculiar or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this
chapter. In granting a variance the Board may attach thereto such conditions
regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as
it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In
granting a variance, the Board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies
the granting of a variance.
      (3)   Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, requests for exceptions, for
interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval
situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the Board to pass. Any
exception or special approval shall be subject to such conditions as the Board
may require to preserve and promote the character of the zoning district in
question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the
following:
         (a)   Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map
fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this chapter, where
street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on
the zoning map;
         (b)   Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for
public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission;
         (c)   Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or
loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification
will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements;
         (d)   Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as
may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such
shape, or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical
characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without
such modification;
         (e)   Permit temporary uses for periods not to exceed 2 years in
undeveloped sections of the city and for periods not to exceed 6 months in
developed sections;
         (f)   Permit temporary carport and storage structures. The Board shall
consider the placement of such structures with regard to size, anchoring, type
of construction, and appropriate setbacks of the zoning districts. The Zoning
Board shall determine the length of time the temporary building may be allowed
and may attach reasonable conditions of approval.
         (g)   Permit, upon proper application, the following character of
temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months
with the granting of 12-month extensions being permissible: uses which do not
require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals, in granting permits for temporary uses pursuant
to subsections (A)(3)(e) and (A)(3)(f) of this section, shall do so under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a
change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein
the temporary use is permitted;
      (2)   The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing,
stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and
arrangements for removing the use at the termination of the temporary permit;
      (3)   All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other
requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace,
morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city
shall be made at the discretion of the Board of Appeals;
      (4)   In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the Board
of Appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related
to the permitted use of the land; recreation developments, such as, but not
limited to, golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which
do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections;
      (5)   The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the
district;
      (6)   No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving
notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing
to be held as further provided for in this chapter. Further, the Board of
Appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the Planning Commission
prior to the taking of any action.
   (C)   In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this
chapter, the Board shall, before making any variations from the chapter in a
specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase
the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger
the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property
values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public
health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The
concurring vote of 4 members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Official, or to
decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this
chapter to render a decision. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
give or grant to the Board the power or authority to alter or change this
chapter or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the Mayor
and the City Council in the manner provided by law.
(1993 Code, § 82-59) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-13-2003(2); Ord.
passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-60 ORDERS.
   In exercising the powers provided in §
82-59, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that
end shall have all the powers of the Building Official from whom the appeal is
taken.
(1993 Code, § 82-60) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-61 NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon written request concerning a request for a variance, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give notice as
provided in §
82-34(C)(1).
   (B)   Upon receipt of a written request seeking an interpretation of the
zoning ordinance or an appeal of an administrative decision, a notice stating
the time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall be sent to the
person requesting the interpretation not less than 15 days before the public
hearing. In addition, if the request for an interpretation or appeal of an
administrative decision involves a specific parcel, written notice stating the
nature of the interpretation request and the time, date, and place of the
public property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in
question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary
of the property in question. If a tenant's name is not known, the term
"occupant" may be used.
(1993 Code, § 82-61) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§ 82-62 EXPIRATION OF ORDERS.
   (A)   No order of the Board permitting the erection of a building shall be
valid for a period longer than 1 year, unless a building permit for such
erection or alteration is obtained within the 1 year period and such erection
or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the
terms of the permit.
   (B)   No order of the Board permitting a use of a building or premises shall
be valid for a period longer than 1 year unless such use is established within
the 1 year period; provided, however, that where the permitted use is dependent
upon the erection or alteration of a building such order shall continue in
force and effect if a building permit for the erection or alteration is
obtained within the 1 year period and the erection or alteration is started and
proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the permit.
(1993 Code, § 82-62) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-63 -- 82-80 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL ZONE MAP
§ 82-81 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The city is hereby divided into districts or zones, as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
      (1)   The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the city under the
following words:
"This is to certify that this is the OFFICIAL ZONING MAP referred to in ARTICLE
IV, § 5.15 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Charlotte, Michigan,"
together with the date of the adoption of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map
shall be deposited in the City Clerk's vault when not in actual use.
      (2)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws
of the state, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed
on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning
Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council,
together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:
On  (date)  , by official action of the City Council, the following (change)
changes were made in the Official Zoning Map, (brief description of the nature
of the change) which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
City Clerk. No amendment to this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the
Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change and entry
has been made on such map.
      (3)   No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map
or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the provisions set forth in
this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatsoever kind by any person shall be
considered in violation of this chapter and punishable as provided in this
chapter.
      (4)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official
Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official
Zoning Map above described and deposited in the vault of the City Clerk shall
be the final authority.
      (5)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way
lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
      (6)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, or the centerlines of
right-of- way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the
zoning map. If no such distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by
the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.
      (7)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
      (8)   Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other
body of water, such boundary line shall be deemed to be located midway between
opposite shores.
      (9)   Where the boundary of a district follows a subdivision boundary
line, such boundary line shall be construed to be the district boundary line.
      (10)   Where unzoned property may exist, or where, due to the scale, lack
of detail or illegibility of the zoning map on file in the office of the City
Clerk, there is any uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended
location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning
the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written
application, or upon its own motion, by the Board of Appeals.
(1993 Code, § 82-81) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-12-2006)
§ 82-82 INTERPRETATION OF TEXT.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to uses permitted in any district, or
any condition set forth in this chapter, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   No use of land shall be permitted in any use district except those
uses specifically set forth in the district.
      (2)   Uses or structures not specifically permitted in a zoning district
shall be prohibited in such district.
      (3)   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter where uses of yard
areas are indicated as being permitted, the use of any other yard area for such
use shall be prohibited.
(1993 Code, § 82-82) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-83 ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the municipality shall
be vacated, such street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof, shall
automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to
which it attaches.
(1993 Code, § 82-83) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-84 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.
   Whenever any area is annexed to the city, 1 of the following conditions will
apply.
      (1)   Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified as
being in whichever district of this chapter that is recommended by the Planning
Commission to the City Council and that is approved by the City Council.
      (2)   Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically
classified as an R-2 District until a zoning map for such area has been adopted
by the City Council. The Planning Commission shall recommend the appropriate
zoning districts for such area within 3 months after the matter is referred to
it by the City Council.
(1993 Code, § 82-84) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-85 DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   R-1   One-Family Residential District
   R-2   One-Family Residential District
   RT   Two-Family Residential District
   RM-1   Multiple-Family Residential District
   RM-2   Multiple-Family Residential District
   MH   Mobile Home Residential District
   NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   OS-1   Office-Service District
   B-1   Local Business District
   B-2   Community Business District
   B-3   General Business District
   CBD   Central Business District
   C   Conservancy
   IRO   Industrial Research Office District
   I-1   Light Industrial District
   I-2   General Industrial District
   P-1   Vehicular Parking District
(1993 Code, § 82-85) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-86 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of
§§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations; §§
82-451 et seq., general provisions; and §§
82-491 et seq., general exceptions.
(1993 Code, § 82-86) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-87 -- 82-105 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. R-1 AND R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 82-106 INTENT.
   The R-1 and R-2 One-Family Residential Districts are designed to be composed
of low density residential home development. The regulations are intended to
stabilize, protect and encourage the residential character of the district and
prohibit activities not compatible with a residential neighborhood. Development
is limited to single-family dwellings, plus such other uses as schools, parks,
churches and certain public facilities which serve the residents.
(1993 Code, § 82-106) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-107 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In One-Family Residential Districts, no building or land shall be used and
no building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings;
      (2)   Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the
boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not
less than 5 acres, all subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the
city, and provided further that no farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for
the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the
slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises
or have been maintained on the premises for at least a period of 1 year
immediately prior thereto, and for the use and consumption by persons residing
on the premises;
      (3)   Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and
recreational facilities;
      (4)   It is the intent of this section to allow for and regulate the
establishment of home occupations that are compatible with the neighborhood in
which they are located and which will preserve the peace, quiet, and domestic
tranquility within all residential districts in the city.
         (a)   Home occupations shall be permitted subject to the following
conditions:
            1.   The use is conducted entirely within a building without being
visible or evident from the street or neighboring premises.
            2.   There is no change to the character of the building in which
it is conducted and the use does not constitute or create a nuisance, including
but not limited to noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odors, or electrical
interference.
            3.   There is no outside storage or outdoor displays of materials,
goods, or any other items.
            4.   The occupation is only carried out by the inhabitants of the
residence, plus not more than one person who is not an inhabitant.
            5.   The occupation only employs mechanical equipment similar in
power and type usual and permissible for household purposes and hobbies and
does not affect the insurance rates on premises other than where employed.
            6.   The use occupies not more than 25% of the ground floor area of
the dwelling.
            7.   Parking for customers can be accommodated on the site and/or
at curbside on the street and there shall be no significant traffic volume
increase associated with the occupation.
            8.   The occupation does not require the delivery of goods or the
visit of customers before 6:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m.
            9.   Signage is in compliance with zone district regulations and is
accessory to the home occupation.
            10.   Persons carrying out the occupation are in compliance with
all required licenses, certificates, or similar requirements.
            11.   The property is in conformance with all applicable district
regulations.
      (5)   State registered family day care homes for children.
      (6)   Day care homes for elderly adults subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   Not more than 6 persons other than the full-time occupants of
the dwelling may be cared for in any 1 dwelling;
         (b)   No overnight accommodations shall be provided;
         (c)   Such facility shall not provide nursing or medical care.
      (7)   Municipal office buildings when in character with the neighborhood.
      (8)   Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of
this chapter.
      (9)   Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering
courses in general education and not operated for profit.
      (10)   Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the
permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 code, § 82-107) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 8-11-1997; Ord.
passed 4-9-2007(3); Ord. 2022-02, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 82-108 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in One- Family Residential Districts
upon the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject
to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to
such other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting
properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   The limit upon the number of persons who may reside as a functional
equivalent of the domestic family may be increased or enlarged upon a
demonstration by the applicant of all of the following:
         (a)   There are adequate provisions on the subject property for off-
street parking for each adult proposed to reside on the premises, and adequate
storage for each person proposed to reside on the premises;
         (b)   The extent of increase or enlargement of the limit upon the
number of persons shall not be considered cumulatively with existing and
reasonably projected population concentration in the area, or place an
unreasonable burden upon public services, facilities and/or schools;
         (c)   There shall be a minimum of 125 square feet of usable floor
space per person on the premises.
      If the Planning Commission grants an application under this provision,
the determination shall include the specific maximum number of persons
authorized to reside on the property and any minimum parking or storage
requirements to be maintained.
      (2)   Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary schools
offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. Access to the
site shall be in accordance with §
82-470.
      (3)   Utility and public service buildings and uses, without storage
yards, when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building
within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
      (4)   State-licensed day care home (group), all in accord with Public Act
116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 et seq., as amended, for not more than
12 children for care during the day; provided that for each child so cared for
there is provided and maintained an outdoor play area. Such play space shall
have a total minimum area of 1,000 square feet plus 100 square feet for each
child. Such play area shall be fenced and screened with planting from any
adjoining residential land.
      (5)   Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or
community recreation centers, nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the
following conditions:
         (a)   The proposed site for any of the uses permitted in this
subsection (5) of this section which would attract persons from, or are
intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least
1 property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the Major
Thoroughfare Plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all access in
accordance with §
82-470;
         (b)   Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide and
shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be
maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures
permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls used
to obscure the use from abutting residential districts;
         (c)   Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not
less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The
Planning Commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those
instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate
from the immediately adjacent areas and will therefore be pedestrian. Prior to
the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the
organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved
for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the
proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal members, the off-
street parking requirement shall be determined by the Planning Commission on
the basis of usage.
         (d)   Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, the
pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, 6 feet in height, and
entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate.
      (6)   Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject
to the following conditions:
         (a)   The site shall be so planned as to provide all access in
accordance with §
82-470;
         (b)   The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship
between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances,
driveways and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular
traffic safety;
         (c)   Development features including the principal and accessory
buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the
possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. This shall mean
that all principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 200 feet from
any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that where
topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the
Planning Commission may modify this requirement.
      (7)   Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher
learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or
religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following
conditions.
         (a)   Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at
least 40 acres in area and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded
subdivision plat.
         (b)   All access to the site shall be in accordance with §
82-470.
         (c)   No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line.
      (8)   Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject
to the following conditions.
         (a)   The site shall be so located as to provide for ingress and
egress from the site directly onto a thoroughfare having an existing or planned
street designated as a major or secondary thoroughfare.
         (b)   The principal buildings on the site shall be set back from
abutting properties zoned for residential use not less than 15 feet.
         (c)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in §§
82-426 et seq. may be allowed, provided front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum requirements by 1 foot for each foot of building
that exceeds the maximum height allowed.
      (9)   Public buildings, such as, but not limited to, courthouses, health
facilities, jails, and the like. Access to the site shall be in accord with §
82-470.
      (10)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the
permitted uses listed in this section.
      (11)   Group homes for children and/or adults subject to the following:
         (a)   That the exterior of the principal building and accessory
buildings be constructed in a manner to appear as though it is a single-family
dwelling;
         (b)   The setback requirements of §§
82-426 and
82-427(B) and (C) shall apply, however, the minimum side yard setback shall be
not less than 25 feet;
         (c)   In the event that use of outdoor areas is planned, the outdoor
areas shall be screened by landscaping;
         (d)   That the total maximum number of residents (not including those
who provide care) shall not exceed 12;
         (e)   The group home will be hooked up to public water and sanitary
sewer facilities;
         (f)   In the judgment of the Planning Commission, the group home will
not change the essential character of the area for which it is proposed, and
that the group home will not be disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses.
         (g)   The group home shall not be used for any of the following
purposes:
            1.   As a correctional facility as defined in Public Act 415 of
1982, § 2(b), being M.C.L.A. § 791.502(b);
            2.   As a facility which houses juveniles as defined in Public Act
73 of 1988, § 2(b), being M.C.L.A. § 803.222(b);
            3.   As a facility which houses persons deemed incompetent to stand
trial under the provisions of Public Act 258 of 1974, §§ 1031 and 1032, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 330.2031 and 330.2032;
            4.   As a facility which houses persons acquitted of a criminal
charge by reason of insanity and committed according to the provisions of
Public Act 258 of 1974, § 1050, being M.C.L.A. § 330.2050.
            5.   As a facility which houses prisoners as a community correction
center or a community residential home, as those terms are defined in Public
Act 68 of 1974, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 791.265a.
         (h)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with §
82-455(14)(a)1, and shall otherwise comply with §
82-455. Parking located closer than 10 feet from any property line shall be
screened.
         (i)   The group home must be a state-licensed residential facility and
comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the same.
         (j)   The group home must be a single-family, owner-occupied dwelling.
In lieu of this requirement, an assigned resident manager or owner
representative living on the premises may be permitted by the Planning
Commission.
         (k)   The minimum lot size for a group home shall be 3 acres.
         (l)   The Planning Commission may place or require any conditions it
deems necessary to insure compliance with the provisions listed above.
         (m)   The maximum lot coverage by all buildings shall be 25%.
(1993 Code, § 82-108) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-13-1997(1); Ord.
No. 2009-01, passed 2-9-2009)
§ 82-109 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All dwelling units in one-family residential districts shall be
reviewed by the Building Official subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and
ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable
state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling.
      (2)   Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on
piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the
dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter
wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local
requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations
below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is
compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area.
      (3)   Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials
similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (4)   Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing
materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
      (5)   Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall
configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width
ratio which does not exceed 3 to 1, or is in reasonable conformity with the
configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (6)   The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located
under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate
structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the
principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10% of the square
footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less.
   (B)   The Building Official may request a review by the Planning Commission
of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(5) of
this section. The Building Official or Planning Commission shall not seek to
discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable
compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the
economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the
city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the Building
Official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and
similar documentation as he deems necessary to permit a complete review and
evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to
similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable
types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain
any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered.
(1993 Code, § 82-109) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-110 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density
permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-110) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-111 -- 82-125 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI. RT TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 82-126 INTENT.
   The RT Two-Family Residential District is designed to provide sites for two-
family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as
zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and the lower density
one-family residential districts.
(1993 Code, § 82-126) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-127 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a Two-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used and
no building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified
uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   All uses permitted and all conditional uses and as regulated in the
One-Family Residential Districts. The standards of the schedule of regulations
applicable to the R-1 One-Family Residential District shall apply as minimum
standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the
above permitted uses.
(1993 Code, § 82-127) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-128 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in a Two- Family Residential District
upon the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject
to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to
such other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting
properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   All special condition uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 One-Family
Residential Districts and subject to the regulations of that district.
      (2)   Funeral homes (mortuaries).
         (a)   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height and 20
square feet in area and such sign shall be set back one-half the depth of the
front yard.
         (b)   Signs when lighted shall be shielded from abutting residences.
         (c)   All height provisions and yard setback requirements as required
for residences in the district in which such use is located shall be complied
with.
         (d)   All yard, parking lot, service drive and exterior building
lighting shall be shielded from abutting residences.
         (e)   All parking areas and service areas for such use shall be
screened from view of abutting residential properties through the provision of
screen planting not less than 5 feet in height and/or through the provision of
a completely obscuring wall or fence not less than 5 feet in height.
      (3)   Bed and breakfast dwellings subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Such dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes
and ordinances.
         (b)   Such dwellings shall be located on state truckline routes.
         (c)   Such dwellings shall be limited to one per city block.
         (d)   Not more than 49% of the total floor space of the dwelling unit
may be used for leasable sleeping rooms.
         (e)   The leasable sleeping rooms shall have a minimum size of 100
square feet for each 2 occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each
additional occupant, not to exceed a maximum of 4 occupants per room.
         (f)   Each leasable sleeping room must have a separate operating smoke
detector alarm.
         (g)   Lavatory and bathing facilities must be available to all persons
using any leasable sleeping room.
         (h)   There will be no separate cooking facilities available to
persons using any leasable sleeping room.
         (i)   There will be at least 2 exits from each level of the dwelling
units.
         (j)   The maximum length of stay for any person using any leasable
sleeping room is 14 consecutive days.
         (k)   Every operator of such dwelling unit must keep a list of the
names and addresses of all persons staying at the dwelling unit. The guest
register must be available for inspection by city officials at any time.
         (l)   The operations of the dwelling unit will not be permitted to
endanger, offend or otherwise interfere with the safety or rights of others so
as to constitute a public nuisance.
(1993 Code, § 82-128) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-129 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All dwelling units in a Two-Family Residential District shall be
reviewed by the Building Official subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and
ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable
state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling.
      (2)   Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on
piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the
dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter
wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local
requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations
below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is
compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area.
      (3)   Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials
similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (4)   Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing
materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
      (5)   Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall
configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width
ratio which does not exceed 3 to 1, or is in reasonable conformity with the
configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (6)   The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located
under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate
structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the
principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10% of the square
footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less.
   (B)   The Building Official may request a review by the Planning Commission
of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(5) of
this section. The Building Official or Planning Commission shall not seek to
discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable
compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the
economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the
city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the Building
Official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and
similar documentation as he deems necessary to permit a complete review and
evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to
similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable
types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain
any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered.
(1993 Code, § 82-129) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-130 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
    See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and maximum density
permitted.
(1993 Code, § 82-130) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-131 -- 82-145 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII. RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 82-146 INTENT.
   The RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide sites
for low-rise multiple- family dwelling structures which are similar in terms of
use and structural character to single-family dwellings and which will
generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and
the lower density one-family residential districts. The multiple-family
districts are further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment
type of unit in an otherwise low density, single-family community. (1993 Code,
§ 82-146) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-147 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a multiple-family district, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   All principal uses permitted and all conditional uses as regulated
in the one-family and two-family residential districts with the lot area,
yards, and floor area requirements for single-family dwellings equal to at
least the requirements of the immediately abutting residential district of
least density.
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings subject to the conditions herein imposed:
         (a)   Each dwelling unit shall have 1 floor at ground level.
         (b)   No more than 4 dwelling units shall be attached in any
construction group or contained in any single structure, except that where the
roof ridge lines and building facades of any 4 consecutive units are staggered
or offset by at least 10 feet, then a maximum of 8 units may be permitted.
         (c)   The site plan shall be so planned as to provide ingress and
egress directly onto a major or secondary thoroughfare, except when the
Planning Commission finds, upon review of the site plan, that ingress and
egress directly onto an adjacent minor street will not be detrimental to the
harmonious development of adjacent property. Where feasible, the Planning
Commission may require that ingress and egress to parking facilities be
provided from adjacent alleys so as to minimize curb cuts directly onto the
major or secondary thoroughfares.
         (d)   The site plan shall be so planned as to recognize yard and
general development relationships with adjacent land uses. The Planning
Commission may recommend physical features to be provided which will insure
harmony in these relationships.
      (3)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incident to
any of the permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-147) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-148 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in an RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential
District upon the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission,
subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject
further to such other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning
Commission are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and
to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for
the treatment of persons who are mentally ill or have contagious disease, not
to exceed 4 stories, when the following conditions are met:
         (a)   All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting
of at least 5 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on a lot of record;
         (b)   The proposed site shall have at least 1 property line abutting a
major thoroughfare;
         (c)   The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from
bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 40 feet for front, rear and
side yards for all 2 story structures. For every story above 2, the minimum
yard distance shall be increased by at least 10 feet;
         (d)   Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all
residential view with an obscuring wall or fence 6 feet in height. Ingress and
egress to the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare;
         (e)   All ingress and egress to the off- street parking area, for
guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall be
directly from a major thoroughfare.
      (2)   State-licensed day care centers for children, subject to the
following conditions:
         (a)   Such facility shall have received a state license to operate
prior to seeking a special use permit under this chapter;
         (b)   Not less than 400 square feet of outdoor play area per child, as
authorized by the license issued to the applicant by the Department of Children
and Family Services allowed to occupy such home, shall be provided on the site;
         (c)   Screening and fencing of outdoor play area shall be provided as
required by the Planning Commission;
         (d)   Parking shall be provided to allow for direct drop-off and pick-
up of children without requiring children to cross public streets.
      (3)   Convalescent homes or nursing homes not to exceed a height of 2
stories, when the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building
ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the convalescent home
there shall be provided not less than 1,500 square feet of open space. The
1,500 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for landscape setting,
off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements, employee
facilities and any space required for accessory uses. The 1,500 square foot
requirement is over and above the building coverage area;
         (b)   No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line.
      (4)   Group homes for children subject to the following.
         (a)   The setback requirements of §§
82-426 and
82-427(E) and (F) shall apply; however, the minimum side yard setback be not
less than 25 feet.
         (b)   In the event that use of outdoor areas is planned, the outdoor
areas shall be screened by landscaping.
         (c)   That the total maximum number of residents shall not exceed 20,
not including those providing care.
         (d)   The group home will be hooked up to public water and sanitary
sewer facilities.
         (e)   The group home shall not be used for any of the following
purposes:
            1.   As a correctional facility as defined in Public Act 415 of
1982, § 2(b), being M.C.L.A. § 791.502(b);
            2.   As a facility which houses juveniles as defined in Public Act
73 of 1988, § 2(b), being M.C.L.A. § 803.222(b);
            3.   As a facility which houses persons deemed incompetent to stand
trial under the provisions of Public Act 258 of 1974, §§ 1031 and 1032, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 330.2031 and 330.2032;
            4.   As a facility which houses persons acquitted of a criminal
charge by reason of insanity and committed according to the provisions of
Public Act 258 of 1974, § 1050, being M.C.L.A. § 330.2050.
         (f)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with §
82-455(14)(a)1 and shall otherwise comply with §
82-455. Parking located closer than 10 feet from any property line shall be
screened.
         (g)   The maximum lot area coverage by all buildings not to exceed
25%.
         (h)   That all group homes shall be located on an improved (paved)
street.
         (i)   The Planning Commission may place or require any conditions it
deems necessary to insure compliance with the provisions listed above.
         (j)   The group home must be a state licensed residential facility and
comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the same.
         (k)   The site for which a group home is proposed shall be at least 1
acre in size.
(1993 Code, § 82-148) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-13-1997(2))
§ 82-149 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All dwelling units in an RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District
shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and
ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable
state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling.
      (2)   Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on
piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the
dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter
wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local
requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations
below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is
compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area.
      (3)   Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials
similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (4)   Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing
materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
      (5)   Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall
configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width
ratio which does not exceed 3 to 1, or is in reasonable conformity with the
configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (6)   The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located
under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate
structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the
principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10% of the square
footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less.
   (B)   The Building Official may request a review by the Planning Commission
of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (A)(2), (A)(3) and (A)(4) of
this section. The Building Official or Planning Commission shall not seek to
discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable
compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the
economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the
city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the Building
Official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and
similar documentation as he deems necessary to permit a complete review and
evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to
similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable
types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain
any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered.
(1993 Code, § 82-149) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-150 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use and the maximum
density permitted.
(1993 Code, § 82-150) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-151 -- 82-165 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII. RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 82-166 INTENT.
   The RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide sites
for higher density multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which
will be located in the proximity of the central downtown business district of
the city. The RM-2 districts are further provided to serve the limited needs of
the apartment type of unit in an otherwise low density, single-family
community.
(1993 Code, § 82-166) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-167 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   All principal uses permitted and all conditional uses as regulated
in the one-family and two-family residential districts, with lot area, yards
and floor area requirements for single-family dwellings equal to at least the
requirements of the immediately abutting residential district of least density.
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-167) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-168 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in an RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential
District upon the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission:
all conditional uses permitted and as regulated in the RM-1 Multiple-Family
Residential District.
(1993 Code, § 82-168) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-169 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All dwelling units in an RM-2 Multiple- Family Residential District
shall be reviewed by the Building Official subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and
ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable
state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling.
      (2)   Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on
piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the
dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter
wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local
requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations
below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is
compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area.
      (3)   Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials
similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (4)   Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing
materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
      (5)   Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall
configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width
ratio which does not exceed 3 to 1, or is in reasonable conformity with the
configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (6)   The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located
under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate
structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the
principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10% of the square
footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less.
   (B)   The Building Official may request a review by the Planning Commission
of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (A)(3), (a)(4) and (a)(5) of
this section. The Building Official or Planning Commission shall not seek to
discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable
compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the
economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the
city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the Building
Official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and
similar documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review and
evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to
similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable
types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain
any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered.
(1993 Code, § 82-169) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-170 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum
density permitted.
(1993 Code, § 82-170) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-171 -- 82-185 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX. MH MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 82-186 INTENT.
   The purpose of the MH Mobile Home Residential District is to encourage a
suitable environment for persons and families that by preference choose to live
in a mobile home rather than a conventional single- family structure. In
keeping with the occupancy characteristics of contemporary mobile homes, this
article establishes moderately low density standards and permitted uses that
reflect the needs of residents in the district. Development is limited to
mobile homes when located in a subdivision designed for that purpose or a
mobile home park and recreation facilities, churches, schools and necessary
public utility buildings.
(1993 Code, § 82-186) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-187 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Principal permitted uses in an MH Mobile Home Residential District are as
follows.
      (1)   Mobile homes.
      (2)   Mobile home parks.
      (3)   Mobile home subdivisions.
      (4)   State-registered family day care homes for children.
      (5)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playfields, playgrounds and
other recreational facilities.
      (6)   Public, parochial or other private elementary, intermediate, and/or
high schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit.
      (7)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted principal uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-187) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-188 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in an MH Mobile Home Residential
District upon the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission,
subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject
further to such other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning
Commission are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and
to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Churches and other facilities incidental thereto subject to the
following:
         (a)   The site shall be adjacent to a city major thoroughfare and all
ingress and egress shall be limited to and directly upon the thoroughfare;
         (b)   Buildings exceeding 25 feet in height shall be permitted,
providing the front, side and rear yard setbacks are increased 1 foot for each
foot the building exceeds 25 feet;
         (c)   A continuous, uninterrupted obscuring screening of suitable
material of at least 4 feet in height but not more than 6 feet in height shall
be provided along sides of the off-street parking area when adjacent properties
are zoned residential;
         (d)   A minimum of 3 acres shall be provided;
         (e)   The front setback area shall remain as open space unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except for landscaping, plant materials or
vehicle access drives.
      (2)   Public utility buildings and uses, but not including service and
storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate locating within the
district to serve the immediate vicinity.
      (3)   Nursery schools, state-licensed group day care homes and day care
centers (not including dormitories); provided that for each child so cared for,
there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor
play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than
5,000 square feet and shall be screened from any adjoining lot in any
residential district.
      (4)   Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work for a
period not to exceed 1 year.
      (5)   Golf courses, public or private. If a golf course is a course open
to persons other than those who reside in the mobile home park, it cannot be
used as part of the overall permitted density.
(1993 Code, § 82-188) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-189 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The requirements for mobile home parks in the MH Mobile Home
Residential District are:
      (1)   The park shall be a minimum of 10 acres in area;
      (2)   All buildings within the park shall be less than 2 stories or 25
feet;
      (3)   Mobile home parks shall be landscaped as follows:
         (a)   If the mobile home park abuts an existing residential
development, the park shall be required to provide screening along the park
boundary abutting the residential development;
         (b)   If the park abuts a nonresidential development, the park need
not provide screening;
         (c)   In all cases, however, a park shall provide screening along the
park boundary abutting a public right-of-way.
      The landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs, a minimum of
3 feet in height, which are spaced to provide a continuous screen at maturity.
Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they conceal the mobile home
park as effectively as the required landscaping described above.
      (4)   Open space requirements are as follows:
         (a)   A mobile home park that contains 50 or more mobile home sites
shall have at least 1 easily accessible open space area containing not less
than 25,000 square feet;
         (b)   The total of the land dedicated for open space shall not be less
than 2% of the park's gross acreage that is approved for construction pursuant
to a permit to construct, but not less than 25,000 square feet.
   (B)   Site size requirements are as follows.
      (1)   The mobile park shall be developed with sites averaging 5,500
square feet per mobile home unit. This 5,500 square feet for any 1 site may be
reduced by 20%, provided that the individual site shall be equal to at least
4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land gained through the reduction of
a site below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal amount of land shall be
dedicated as open space, but in no case shall the open space and distance
requirements be less than that required under R 125.1946, Rule 946 and R
125.1941 and R 125.1944, Rules 941 and 944 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
      (2)   Mobile homes shall be placed at least 10 feet from the pavement of
the internal road serving the mobile home unit.
      (3)   Mobile homes shall be at least 20 feet from the front, side or rear
of the nearest mobile home. In those instances when the mobile home is adjacent
to a structure which is not used for living purposes such distance shall be not
less than 10 feet.
   (C)   The following provisions relate to accessory buildings and uses.
      (1)   The provisions of §
82-454 relating to accessory building location and spacing shall not apply to
mobile home parks. Accessory buildings in mobile home parks shall be subject to
Mobile Home Rule 941.
      (2)   The provision of §
82-454(9) shall not apply to mobile home parks. The following shall apply.
         (a)   Storage areas. No personal property shall be stored outside or
under any mobile home. Storage sheds may be used to store property but need not
be supplied by the owner of the mobile home development.
         (b)   Storage/parking. If boats, boat trailers and utility trailers
are permitted to be parked within the mobile home park, adequate parking spaces
for such vehicles in a central or collective parking area shall be provided.
This area shall be in addition to the automobile parking requirements of this
chapter and shall be adequately locked, fenced and permanently buffered.
   (D)   The requirements for mobile home subdivisions, in addition to the
requirements contained in the Michigan Subdivision Control Act of 1967 and
Chapter 62 of this Code, relating to subdivisions, are:
      (1)   Minimum lot size: single area, 5,000 sq. ft.; single width, 45
feet; double-wide area, 7,200 square feet; double-wide width, 60 feet;
      (2)   Maximum building height: 25 feet;
      (3)   Minimum yard setback: front, 25 feet; side, 10 feet; rear, 25 feet;
      (4)   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 30%;
      (5)   In a mobile home subdivision, a corner lot which abuts upon a
street on the same side of which other residential lots front in the same
block, any building shall have a minimum side setback equal to the front
setback of the district in which it is located.
(1993 Code, § 82-189) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-190 -- 82-205 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X. OS-1 OFFICE-SERVICE DISTRICT
§ 82-206 INTENT.
   The OS-1 Office-Service Districts are designed to accommodate uses such as
offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas
between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition
between major thoroughfares and residential districts.
(1993 Code, § 82-206) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-207 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an Office-Service District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive,
administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic,
drafting and sales subject to the limitations contained in §
82-209, relating to required conditions.
      (2)   Medical office, including clinics.
      (3)   Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, rest and
convalescent homes.
      (4)   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar
uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only.
      (5)   Personal service establishments, including barber shops, beauty
shops and health salons.
      (6)   Off-street parking lots.
      (7)   Churches.
      (8)   Business schools or private schools operated for profit.
      (9)   Day care centers and nursery schools.
      (10)   Municipal buildings.
      (11)   Other uses similar to the uses listed in this section.
      (12)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the
permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-207) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-208 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in an OS-1 Office-Service District upon
the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject to the
conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to such
other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are necessary
to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties
and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Funeral homes. The site plan shall provide for adequate off-street
assembly area for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further
that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-
street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the
building of mortuary establishments.
      (2)   Public utility and service buildings. Public utility and service
buildings and uses, including telephone exchange buildings (without storage
yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building
within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
      (3)   Bed and breakfast dwellings. Bed and breakfast dwellings subject to
the following conditions.
         (a)   Such dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes
and ordinances.
         (b)   Such dwellings shall be located on state truckline routes.
         (c)   Such dwellings shall be limited to 1 per city block.
         (d)   Not more than 49% of the total floor space of the dwelling unit
may be used for leasable sleeping rooms.
         (e)   The leasable sleeping rooms shall have a minimum size of 100
square feet for each 2 occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each
additional occupant, not to exceed a maximum of 4 occupants per room.
         (f)   Each leasable sleeping room must have a separate operating smoke
detector alarm.
         (g)   Lavatory and bathing facilities must be available to all persons
using any leasable sleeping room.
         (h)   There will be no separate cooking facilities available to
persons using any leasable sleeping room.
         (i)   There will be at least 2 exits from each level of the dwelling
units.
         (j)   The maximum length of stay for any person using any leasable
sleeping room is 14 consecutive days.
         (k)   Every operator of such dwelling unit must keep a list of the
names and addresses of all persons staying at the dwelling unit. The guest
register must be available for inspection by city officials at any time.
         (l)   The operations of the dwelling unit will not be permitted to
endanger, offend or otherwise interfere with the safety or rights of others so
as to constitute a public nuisance.
(1993 Code, § 82-208) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-209 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Required conditions in the OS-1 Office-Service District are as follows.
      (1)   No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the
building.
      (2)   The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that
normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited.
(1993 Code, § 82-209) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-210 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and provided minimum
yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-210) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-211 -- 82-225 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI. B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 82-226 INTENT.
   The B-1 Local Business Districts, as established in this article, are
designed to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of
persons residing in adjacent residential areas.
(1993 Code, § 82-226) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-227 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a Local Business District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   All uses permitted and all conditional uses permitted in the OS-
1 Office-Service Districts.
      (2)   Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on
the premises, such as but not limited to groceries, meats, dairy products,
baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware.
      (3)   Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises, such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radio, television,
shoe, and the like), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops, photographic
studios, and self-service laundries and drycleaners.
      (4)   Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing directly
with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than 1 retail
outlet shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Post office and similar governmental office buildings, serving only
persons living in the adjacent residential area.
      (6)   Off-street parking lots.
      (7)   Other uses similar to the above uses.
      (8)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted
uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-227) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-228 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Required conditions in a Local Business District are as follows.
      (1)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
      (2)   All business, servicing, processing and storage of goods, except
for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
(1993 Code, § 82-228) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-229 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in a Local Business District upon the
granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject to the
conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to such
other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are necessary
to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties
and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Automobile service station for sale of gasoline and oil, and not
including repair other than incidental service and subject to the following:
         (a)   The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall
not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in
the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25
feet from a street intersection, measured from the roadway, or from adjacent
residential property and subject to other ordinances of the city;
         (b)   The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet, and so
arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to
wait;
         (c)   There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to
a residential district, a 4 foot, 6 inch, completely obscuring wall or fence.
The height of the wall or fence shall be measured from the surface of the
ground.
         (d)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential
districts and from abutting streets.
         (e)   All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjoining residential
property.
      (2)   Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone
exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, regular
service stations with service yards but without storage yards, and water and
sewage pumping stations.
      (3)   Restaurants, including drive-through restaurants, subject to the
following:
         (a)   Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent
business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare;
         (b)   Access to the site shall not be by way of a residential street;
         (c)   Trash receptacles shall be screened from public view and shall
be covered to prevent debris from being a nuisance to abutting properties;
         (d)   Outdoor lighting of buildings or parking areas shall be shielded
from abutting residential areas;
         (e)   All loading and unloading and parking shall be provided off-
street;
         (f)   A 6 foot-high, completely obscuring wall shall be provided when
abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, RT, RM, MH or OS-1 Districts.
The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Such
wall shall further meet the requirements of §§
82-451 et seq., general provisions.
      (4)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the uses
listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-229) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-230 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum
yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-230) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-231 -- 82-245 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII. B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 82-246 INTENT.
   The B-2 Community Business Districts are designed to cater to the needs of a
larger consumer population than is served by the Local Business Districts, and
are generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of
establishments served by a common parking area and generating large volumes of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(1993 Code, § 82-246) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-247 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a Community Business District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   All uses permitted and all conditional uses permitted in the B-
1 Districts except gasoline service stations, subject to the regulations
applicable in this article.
      (2)   All retail business, service establishments or processing uses as
follows:
         (a)   Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of
merchandise in an enclosed building;
         (b)   Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop
nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter,
upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair,
photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a
retail adjunct;
         (c)   Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls;
         (d)   Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, except
those having the character of a drive-in;
         (e)   Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of
assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings;
         (f)   Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for
profit;
         (g)   Other uses similar to the above uses;
         (h)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the
permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-247) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-248 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Required conditions in a Community Business District are as follows.
      (1)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
      (2)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street
parking, loading and those open air uses indicated as being subject to special
conditions in §
82-249 shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
(1993 Code, § 82-248) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-249 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in a Community Business District upon
the granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject to the
conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to such
other reasonable conditions which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are
necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting
properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Open air business uses when developed in planned relationship with
the B-2 District as follows.
         (a)   Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site, and sales
of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies, provided further
that such uses shall be located at the exterior end of the building mass
located in a B-2 District.
         (b)   Recreational space providing children's amusement park and other
similar recreation when part of a planned development, provided further that
such use be located at the exterior end of the building mass located in a B-
2 District, but not at the intersection of 2 major thoroughfares. Such
recreation space shall be fenced on all sides with a 4 foot chainlink type
fence.
      (2)   Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis
courts, indoor skating rinks or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation
when located at least 100 feet from any front, rear, or side yard of any
residential lot in an adjacent residential district.
(1993 Code, § 82-249) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-250 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum
yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-250) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-251 -- 82-255 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIIA. MARGINAL SERVICE ROADS
§ 82-256 RESERVED.
(1993 Code, § 82-256)
Editor's note:
   Ord. of May 14, 2001 renumbered §§ 82-256 and 82-257 as §§ 82-408 and 82-409
respectively. At the discretion of the editor, said sections have been renamed
to better fit the format of the Code.
§ 82-257 RESERVED.
(1993 Code, § 82-257)
Editor's note:
   Ord. of May 14, 2001 renumbered §§ 82-256 and 82-257 as §§ 82-408 and 82-409
respectively. At the discretion of the editor, said sections have been renamed
to better fit the format of the Code.
§§ 82-258 -- 82-265 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIII. B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 82-266 INTENT.
   The B-3 General Business Districts are designed to provide for more
diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the
pedestrian movement in the Local Business District or the Community Business
District.
(1993 Code, § 82-266) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-267 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a General Business District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   All uses permitted and all conditional uses permitted in B-1 and B-
2 Districts.
      (2)   Bus passenger stations.
      (3)   New and used car salesroom, showroom, office or associated service
facilities.
      (4)   Other uses similar to the above uses.
      (5)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted
uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-267) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-268 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Required conditions in a General Business District are as follows.
      (1)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
      (2)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street
parking, loading and those open air uses indicated as being subject to special
conditions in §
82-269 shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
(1993 Code, § 82-268) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-269 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in a General Business District upon the
granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject to the
conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to such
other conditions which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are necessary
to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties
and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of new or secondhand
automobiles, house trailers, or rental trailers and/or automobiles, all subject
to the following.
         (a)   The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and
dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface
water accumulated within the area.
         (b)   Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from
the intersection of any 2 streets.
         (c)   No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot.
         (d)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential
districts.
      (2)   Hotel and motel, subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent
business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare.
         (b)   Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor
area.
         (c)   No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more
than 30 days within any calendar year.
      (3)   Business in the character of a drive-in or open front store,
subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any
existing or proposed street must be maintained.
         (b)   Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the
intersection of any 2 streets.
         (c)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential
districts.
         (d)   A 6-foot-high, completely obscuring wall shall be provided when
abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 or FS
Districts. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the
ground. Such wall shall further meet the requirements of §§
82-451 et seq., general provisions.
      (4)   Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities are
conducted within a totally enclosed main building, and provided further that
all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from abutting residential
districts on the same side of the street.
      (5)   Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not
grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden
supplies, subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products
shall meet all setback requirements of a structure.
         (b)   All loading and parking shall be provided off-street.
         (c)   The storage of any soil, fertilizer or other loose, unpackaged
materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses.
      (6)   Automobile car wash subject to the following.
         (a)   All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than
50 feet.
         (b)   All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed
building.
         (c)   Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building,
but shall not be in the required front yard, and shall not be closer than 25
feet from any residential district.
         (d)   All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be
provided space off the street right-of-way, and parking shall be provided in
accordance with §§
82-455 and
82-456.
         (e)   Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from
the intersection of any 2 streets.
         (f)   All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be paved with
Portland cement or asphaltic concrete.
         (g)   All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent
residential districts.
         (h)   A completely obscuring wall, 4 feet, 6 inches in height, shall
be provided where abutting to a residential district.
      (7)   Amusement arcades which provide space for patrons to engage in
playing of mechanical amusement devices or similar activities, subject to the
following.
         (a)   Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major
business streets and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking
area for such establishment on the business street. Access from a side or
residential street shall be prohibited.
         (b)   Locations for any such facility shall be no closer than 500 feet
to the property line of any elementary, intermediate or high school.
         (c)   No such business shall be located within 500 feet of the
property line of a similar business.
         (d)   No such business building shall be located within 500 feet of
any front, rear or side yard line of any residential lot in a residential
district.
         (e)   Off-street parking areas shall be developed in accord with all
of the standards of §§
82-455 and
82-456.
      (8)   Minor automotive repair businesses, such as muffler shops, shock
absorber replacement shops, tire stores, undercoating shops and minor engine
repair shops, subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector
street or shall be to a minor street which has direct access to an abutting
major or collector street.
         (b)   Access to and from such use shall not be cause for traffic to
utilize residential streets.
         (c)   Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited unless
such storage is within a fenced and obscured area which meets all setback
requirements.
         (d)   Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building
for more than 24 hours.
         (e)   Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not
be utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair.
         (f)   All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs such as,
but not limited to, tire changing and headlight changing, shall be conducted
within a building.
         (g)   Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the
disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view.
         (h)   A 6-foot-high obscuring wall shall be provided and maintained on
those property lines adjacent to or abutting a residential district.
      (9)   Small engine repair and equipment repair such as lawn mower repair
and servicing, subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector
street or shall be to a minor street which has direct access to an abutting
major or collector street.
         (b)   Access to and from such use shall not be cause for traffic to
utilize residential streets.
         (c)   Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited unless
such storage is within an obscured area which meets all setback requirements.
         (d)   Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not
be utilized for the storage of equipment awaiting repair.
         (e)   All vehicle servicing or repair shall be conducted within a
building.
         (f)   Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the
disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view.
      (10)   An adult entertainment business may be permitted in the B-3
(General Business) Zoning District as a conditional use under the following
procedures and conditions.
         (a)   No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within a 400-
foot radius of any residential zone. Measurement of the 400-foot radius shall
be made from the outermost boundary of the lot or parcel upon which the
proposed adult use will be situated to the outermost residential district
boundary.
         (b)   No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within a 400-
foot radius of a school, library, park, playground, or church. Measurement of
the 400-foot radius shall be made from the outermost boundary of the lot or
parcel upon which the proposed adult use will be situated to the school,
library, park, playground, or church.
         (c)   The site shall include a diagram that shows all land use zoning
districts and any school, library, park, playground, or church located within
500 feet of the proposed adult use. The diagram shall be drawn to a scale of
not greater than 1 inch equals 20 feet.
         (d)   No adult entertainment business shall be located within a 400-
foot radius of any other adult entertainment business.
         (e)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with §
82-455 and screened on all sides. The screening of the off-street parking areas
shall be a solid fence, wall or evergreen planting that is at least 6 feet
high.
         (f)   If employees or patrons of an adult entertainment business
violate any of the provisions of Article II of
Chapter 15 of the City Code, the conditional use permit may be suspended or
revoked. No criminal charge need be brought for suspension or revocation of the
conditional use permit to occur. The acts described in this subsection may be
shown to have occurred by a preponderance of the evidence.
      (11)   Stand-alone drive-up automated teller machine kiosks, subject to
the following conditions:
         (a)   A nonsealed site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission
approval;
         (b)   The kiosk shall comply with the provisions of §
82-454 of this chapter;
         (c)   When the kiosk is to be located within 150 feet of a residential
district, an obscuring wall or similar structure 6 feet in height shall be
provided to protect residences from noise and glare;
         (d)   Drives shall be constructed or marked so as to provide a by-pass
lane and a minimum of 3 stacking spaces. Stacking spaces may not be located
within any required yard;
         (e)   Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the
intersection of any 2 streets;
         (f)   Signage shall be limited to that installed on the kiosk and
directional sings not exceeding 3 square feet in display area or 5 feet in
height.
(1993 Code, § 82-269) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 5-11-1998; Ord.
passed 12-8-2008; Ord. 2012-03, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 82-270 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum
yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-270) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-271 -- 82-285 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIV. CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 82-286 INTENT.
   The CBD Central Business District is intended to permit those uses which
provide for a variety of retail stores and related activities, and for office
buildings and service establishments which occupy the prime frontages in the
Central Business District and which serve the consumer population beyond the
corporate boundaries of the city. The district regulations are designed to
promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability of retail development
by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automotive
related services and nonretail uses which tend to break up such continuity.
(1993 Code, § 82-286) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-287 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a CBD Central Business District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities
on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited
to, food, drugs, liquor, furniture, clothing, dry goods, notions or hardware.
      (2)   Any personal service establishment which performs services on the
premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to,
repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, and the like), tailor shops,
beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers and dry
cleaners.
      (3)   Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are served while seated
within a building occupied by such establishment, and wherein the establishment
does not extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a
drive-in or open front store.
      (4)   Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative or
professional nature.
      (5)   Banks, with drive-in facilities permitted, when such drive-in
facilities are incidental to the principal function.
      (6)   Public and quasi-public buildings such as, but not restricted to:
         (a)   Churches;
         (b)   Municipal offices;
         (c)   Municipal off-street parking lots;
         (d)   Libraries;
         (e)   Museums;
         (f)   Fraternal organizations.
      (7)   Commercial recreation facilities such as bowling alleys, theaters
and similar uses.
      (8)   Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorators or
similar trades, of which not more than 25% of the floor area of the building or
part of the building occupied by the establishment is used for making,
assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, furnishing or refinishing its
products or merchandise, and provided that the ground floor premises facing
upon and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances,
offices or display. All storage of materials on any land shall be within the
confines of the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment.
      (9)   Business schools or private schools operated for profit; examples
of private schools permitted include, but are not limited to, the following:
dance schools, music and voice schools and art studios.
      (10)   Newspaper offices and printing plants.
      (11)   Storage facilities when incident to and physically connected with
any principal use permitted, provided that such facility be within the confines
of the building or part thereof occupied by the establishment.
      (12)   Hotels and motels.
      (13)   Bus passenger stations.
      (14)   Other uses which are similar to the above and subject to the
following restrictions.
         (a)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail from the premises where produced.
         (b)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street
parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
         (c)   Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited.
      (15)   Sidewalk or outdoor cafes. One-year permits must be obtained from
the City Manager. Rules governing sidewalk or outdoor café permits shall be
adopted by Council resolution.
      (16)   Accessory structures customarily incident to the permitted uses
listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-287) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 6-13-2005)
§ 82-288 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the CBD Central Business District
subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use.
      (1)   Dwelling units within an existing commercial building subject to
the following conditions.
         (a)   It is the intent of subsection (1) to provide for the conversion
of the upper floors of existing commercial buildings and to extend their
economic life by permitting the construction of one-, two- and multiple family
residential dwelling units.
         (b)   Dwelling units shall not be located below the second floor.
         (c)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of not less
than one and one-half parking spaces per dwelling unit.
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings shall be in structures designed and
built for this use on a site of not less than one and three-quarters acres in
size.
         (b)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of not less
than one and one-half parking spaces per dwelling unit.
         (c)   A greenbelt conforming to the requirements of § 82-460 shall be
required where a parking lot abuts a public thoroughfare and/or where the site
abuts a residential district.
         (d)   Multiple-family dwellings are permitted upon the granting of a
permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject to such other conditions
which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are necessary to provide
adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject
further to a public hearing held pursuant to § 82-34(C).
(1993 Code, § 82-288) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 10-12-1998; Ord.
passed 6-13-2005; Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-13-2017; Ord. 2018-05, passed 9-10-
2018)
§ 82-289 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density
permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-289) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-290 -- 82-305 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XV. C CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
§ 82-306 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of the Conservancy District to protect the natural
resources of the city by application of special regulations for the use of land
which may be subject to periodic inundation at predictable intervals, which may
be subject to soil erosion, or which may be particularly suited to provide for
the impoundment of waters for the purpose of stormwater control or groundwater
recharge. Regulations, while permitting reasonable economic use of such land,
will help to protect the public health, public safety and general welfare, and
will reduce the financial burdens imposed upon the community which may result
from the improper use of land. All lands included in the district shall be
subject to the terms imposed in this article addition to the terms imposed by
any other district in which such lands may be located.
   (B)   Areas having excessively high water table or valuable impoundment
potential shall be determined by the City Council upon the advice of an
engineer or any other professional retained by the city who is competent in the
field of water resources or hydrology.
(1993 Code, § 82-306) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-307 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CUT. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or
will be removed by excavation; CUT also means the depth below original ground
surface to excavated surface.
   DEBRIS BASIN. A barrier or dam built across a waterway or other suitable
locations to retain rock, sand, gravel or silt or other materials.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   DIVERSION. A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower side
constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
   EMBANKMENT. A manmade deposit of soil, rock or other materials.
   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water
or gravity.
   FLOODPLAIN. For the purpose of this chapter, means all the land which was or
would be inundated during the intermediate regional flood as designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with maps under community panel numbers
260065-0001 and -0002, or by the State Water Resources Commission.
   GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling, or stockpiling, or any combination
thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
   GRADING PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize grading under the City Building
Code.
   GRASSED WATERWAY. A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water
from a field, diversion or other site features.
   MULCHING. The application of plant or other suitable materials on the soil
surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in establishing plant
cover.
   NATURAL GROUND SURFACE. The ground surface in its original state before any
grading, excavation or filling.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discourage the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water
or gravity as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENT POOL. The reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of submerged
sediment during the life of the debris basin.
   SLOPE. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degree.
   SOIL. All unconsolidated material and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
   SOIL ENGINEER. A professional engineer who is qualified by education and
experience to practice applied soil mechanics and foundation engineering.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
   STRUCTURAL ROCK FILLS. Fills constructed predominantly of rock materials for
the purpose of supporting structures.
   TEMPORARY PROTECTION. Stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas.
   VEGETATIVE PROTECTION. Stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas
by covering the soil with:
      (1)   Permanent seeding, producing long- term vegetative cover;
      (2)   Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover; or
      (3)   Sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of perennial sod-
forming grass.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash
in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or
intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and includes
any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or
floodwater.
(1993 Code, § 82-307) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
Cross reference:
   Definitions generally, see § 1.2;
   Zoning definitions, see §
82-4
§ 82-308 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS OR GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
AREAS.
   The following uses are permitted by right in floodplain or groundwater
recharge areas.
      (1)   Recreation uses. Parks, playgrounds, playfields, bridle paths,
nature trails, natural wildlife preserves, and similar uses. Land owned by the
developer of multiple housing or of a planned unit development in the
conservancy district may be used to provide the necessary open space required
under the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Golf courses. In accordance with the requirements of §
82-108(6) of this chapter.
      (3)   Agricultural operations. In accordance with the requirements of §
82-107(2) of this chapter.
      (4)   Utilities, roads, railroads, dams, structures for recreation uses.
When designed so as not to increase the possibility of flood or be otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.
(1993 Code, § 82-308) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-309 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT.
   In all areas, except floodplain or groundwater recharge areas, uses
permitted shall be regulated by the requirements of the particular zoning
district affecting the property. Any other requirements of the Conservancy
District, including those regarding soil erosion, shall apply.
(1993 Code, § 82-309) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-310 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT IN FLOODPLAIN OR GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE AREAS.
   Provided such uses shall not in the opinion of the Planning Commission be
adverse to the purpose of this section or damaging to the public health, safety
or welfare, or impose a financial burden upon the community, the following uses
may be permitted by issuance of a special use permit in accordance with §§
82-56 et seq., and any other requirements stipulated in this chapter. In no
case, however, shall encroachments in the floodway be allowed which would cause
any increase in base flood elevations.
      (1)   Dumping or backfilling with any material in any manner. In the case
where a floodplain area has no groundwater recharge or impoundment, potential
filling may occur through compensating excavation and shaping of the floodplain
in such a way so as to maintain or improve the flow or natural impoundment
capacity of the floodplain. In no case shall the flow or impoundment capacity
of the floodplain be reduced.
      (2)   Uses permitted in the zoning district in which the property is
located, except cemeteries, provided that any building constructed in the
floodplain shall have a minimum ground floor elevation including basement of
not less than 1 foot above the elevation of the floodplain and provided that
construction shall not impede the flow in the watercourse.
(1993 Code, § 82-310) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-311 REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR USES IN FLOODPLAIN OR
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS.
   In addition to the requirements of §§
82-56 et seq., the applicant for a special use permit in the C Conservancy
District shall submit the following.
      (1)   A letter of approval from the State Water Resources Commission if
the floodplain is affected.
      (2)   A location map, including existing topographic data at 2-foot
interval contours.
      (3)   A map showing proposed grading and drainage plans, including the
location of all public drainage easements, the limits and extent of the
proposed fill, excavation and occupation.
      (4)   A statement from the County Drain Commissioner indicating that he
has reviewed and approved the plans.
      (5)   A statement from the County Health Department indicating that it
has reviewed and approved the plans.
      (6)   A statement from an engineer of the city's choice concerning
feasibility of the plans and his approval.
      (7)   Any other information requested by the Planning Commission.
(1993 Code, § 82-311) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-312 SETBACKS FROM WATERCOURSES.
   In no case shall any permanent structure be erected closer than 50 feet to
the bank of Battle Creek or Butternut Creek River or to the center of any
county or township drain. The bank of the Battle Creek or Butternut Creek River
shall be determined by legal survey. The center of public drainage ways shall
be determined from legal descriptions which are of public record.
(1993 Code, § 82-312) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-313 PLANS FOR CONTROL OF SOIL EROSION.
   Any development in the city shall comply with the standards and
specifications for soil erosion and sediment control as adopted by the
Thornapple Grand Soil Conservation District on April 15, 1974.
      (1)   Compliance. No site plan, except for single-family residential
structures which must meet standards approved for the plat, shall be approved
unless it includes soil erosion and sediment control measures in accordance
with the technical standards of the Thornapple Grand Soil Conservation
District. No certificate of occupancy of any building may be granted unless and
until all needed erosion control measures have been completed or substantially
provided for in accordance with this chapter and the standards and
specifications of the Thornapple Grand Soil Conservation District. The
developer shall bear the full responsibility for the installation and
construction of all required erosion control measures according to the
provisions of this chapter and to the standards and specifications of the
Thornapple Grand Soil Conservation District.
      (2)   Data required. The developer must submit the following for the
entire tract of land, whether or not the tract will be developed in stages:
         (a)   A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be
performed;
         (b)   Description of the features, existing and proposed, surrounding
the site of importance to the proposed development;
         (c)   General soil conditions on the site available from the City
Building Department or the Thornapple Grand Soil Conservation District;
         (d)   Location and description of existing and future manmade features
of importance to the proposed development;
         (e)   Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures in accordance with standards and specifications of the
Thornapple Grand Soil Conservation District;
         (f)   A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each
area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control
measures.
      (3)   Grading permit. A grading permit valid for no more than 6 months
unless extended by new application as provided for in the City Building Code
shall be required for each development. This permit may not be issued without
the approval of both the Public Works Director and the Building Official.
      (4)   General design principles. Practical combinations of the following
general principles will provide effective erosion and sediment control when
properly planned and applied.
         (a)   The development plan shall be fitted to the topography and soils
so as to create the least erosion potential.
         (b)   Permanent vegetation and improvements such as streets, storm
sewers or other features of the development, capable of carrying storm runoff
in a safe manner, shall be scheduled for installation to the greatest extent
possible before removing the vegetative cover from an area.
         (c)   Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
         (d)   Where inadequate vegetation exists, temporary or permanent
vegetation shall be established.
         (e)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any 1
time during development.
         (f)   When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be
kept to the shortest practical period of time.
         (g)   Critical areas exposed during construction shall be protected
with temporary vegetation and/or mulching.
         (h)   Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps)
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from
land undergoing development.
         (i)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. The permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed
as soon as practical in the development.
      (5)   Development standards. All development plans, specifications and
timing schedules, including extensions of previously approved plans, shall
include provisions for erosion and sediment control in accordance with the
standards and specifications established by the Thornapple Grand Soil
Conservation District. Technical standards for the design and installation of
erosion and sediment control measures are on file at the Thornapple Grand Soil
Conservation District office in the city and with the City Building Department.
      (6)   Maintenance. Individuals or developers carrying out soil erosion
and sediment control measures under this chapter, and all subsequent owners of
property on which such measures have been installed, shall adequately maintain
all permanent erosion control measures, devices and plantings in effective
working condition.
(1993 Code, § 82-313) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-314 FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.
   The flood insurance study prepared under the guidance of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated January 2, 1981, and the floodway
boundary and floodway map of the city, Community Panel Number 260065-0001 and
260065-0002, and the map index and profiles are hereby adopted by reference and
hereby made a part of this chapter. In the event any portion of this chapter is
inconsistent with the provisions of the flood insurance study, floodway
boundaries, floodway maps and profiles as described, such sections of this
chapter shall be subject to the flood insurance study, maps and profiles and no
amendment to this chapter shall be required to make this section effective.
(1993 Code, § 82-314) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-315 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Within flood prone areas:
      (1)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and
      (2)   Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flood as certified by a registered
professional engineer.
(1993 Code, § 82-315) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-316 ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING RECORDS.
   For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk
premium rates within zone A on a community's FHBM, the city shall:
   (A)   Obtain the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
habitable floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement;
   (B)   Obtain, if the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation, in
relation to mean sea level, to which the structure was floodproofed; and
   (C)   Maintain a record of all such information with the official designated
by the community under 44 C.F.R. 59.22(a)(9)(iii).
(1993 Code, § 82-316) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-317 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures within zones A1-30 on the city's FIRM shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(1993 Code, § 82-317) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-318 FLOODPROOFING.
   Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure in accordance
with 44 C.F.R. 59, § 60.3 (c)(3) and (c)(8) or § 60.6(b)(3) either:
   (A)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base
flood, and a record of such certificates indicating the specific elevation, in
relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained with the official designated by the city under 44 C.F.R. 59.22(a)(9)
(iii); or
   (B)   A certified copy of a local regulation containing detailed
floodproofing specifications which satisfy the watertight performance standards
of 44 C.F.R. 60.3(c)(3) or of 44 C.F.R. 60.6(b)(3) shall be submitted to the
Federal Insurance Administrator for approval.
(1993 Code, § 82-318) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-319 -- 82-335 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVI. IRO INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH OFFICE DISTRICT
§ 82-336 INTENT.
   The IRO Industrial Research Office Districts are designed to provide for
uses which are office or research type or industrial uses which have limited
impact outside of the industrial building. The District is intended to
encourage uses which have a high value per acre of land that will supplement
the city's tax base. Certain businesses are permitted within office buildings
as secondary uses.
(1993 Code, § 82-336) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-337 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an IRO Industrial Research Office District, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following
specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (A)   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design
and pilot or experimental product development.
   (B)   Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive,
administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic,
drafting and sales.
   (C)   Data processing and computer centers, including service and
maintenance of electronic data processing equipment.
   (D)   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations.
   (E)   Hospitals, clinics and medical offices; medical laboratories.
   (F)   Motels or hotels.
   (G)   Assembly halls, display halls, convention centers or similar places of
assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings.
   (H)   Other uses similar to the above uses.
   (I)   Municipal buildings and uses.
   (J)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted
uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-337) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-338 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in an IRO Industrial Research Office
District upon the granting of a permit for such by the Planning Commission
subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject
further to other conditions which, in the opinion of the Commission, are
necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting
properties and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Any of the following industrial uses when conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building:
         (a)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment
of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals,
toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine
shops;
         (b)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet
metal (excluding large stamping such as automobile fenders or bodies), shell,
textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing mills) and yarns;
         (c)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar
ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas;
         (d)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or
rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products;
         (e)   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs;
         (f)   Laboratories: experimental, film or testing.
      (2)   Retail and service uses shall be permitted in buildings which
exceed 1 story in height as secondary uses to the principal permitted office
uses included in §
82-337(1)-(5):
         (a)   Retail businesses or service establishments;
         (b)   Personal service establishments, such as but not limited to
repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, and the like), tailor shops,
beauty parlors or barber shops, laundries or dry cleaners, printing or
photographic reproduction, photographic, art or interior decorating studios;
         (c)   Theaters, bowling alleys, billiard halls, health salons or
similar forms of indoor recreation;
         (d)   Restaurants or other places serving food and beverage, but not
including drive-in, fast food, carry-out or drive through restaurants and
subject further to the following conditions.
            1.   Such uses shall be located within an office structure or motel
building or shall be located in a freestanding building within the IRO District
so as to be adjacent to a use designated as being allowed in §
82-337(2)-(7).
            2.   Such use shall be planned as a part of an overall plan for
development of not less than 30 acres and shall be part of a service
establishment complex for such development.
            3.   Such uses shall comprise not more than 20% of the land area of
an overall development.
            4.   The location of such uses shall be established at the time of
site plan review and approval for the total development complex.
(1993 Code, § 82-338) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-339 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Required conditions in an IRO Industrial Research Office District.
   (A)   The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Any use established in the IRO District shall be operated so as to
comply with the performance standards set forth in §
82-472.
   (C)   All uses shall receive site plan review and approval by the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of any building permit.
   (D)   Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the following
schedule.
      (1)   For office buildings of less than 100,000 square feet in gross
floor area, at least 1 loading space, separate from off-street parking, shall
be provided in the rear or side yard only.
      (2)   For office buildings of 100,000 square feet or more in gross floor
area, at least 1 loading space with a dimension of at least 10 by 50 feet or
500 square feet in area, with clearance of at least 14 feet in height, in the
rear or side yard only.
      (3)   For principal uses permitted subject to special conditions, 1
separate space, in addition to spaces required for offices, shall be provided
for each service entrance to the secondary uses in the rear or side yard only.
      (4)   For industrial buildings, off-street loading shall be provided in
accordance with §
82-457.
      (5)   All loading and unloading shall be provided off-street in the rear
yard or in the interior side yard, and in no instance shall be permitted in a
front yard. All loading and unloading areas shall be screened from public view.
   (E)   All buildings shall be provided with finished materials on all sides.
Pole barn types of structures shall not be permitted.
(1993 Code, § 82-339) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-340 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum
yard setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-340) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-341 -- 82-355 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVII. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 82-356 INTENT.
   (A)   The I-1 Light Industrial Districts are designed so as to primarily
accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose
external physical effects are restricted to the area of the District and in no
manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-
1 District is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the
manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment
of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material. It is
further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form,
to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted.
   (B)   The general goals of this use District include, among others, the
following specific purposes:
      (1)   To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the
needs of the municipality's expected future economy for all types of
manufacturing and related uses;
      (2)   To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from
manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas
for new residential development;
      (3)   To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of
fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and
from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable
influences;
      (4)   To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well
considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent
development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and
other objectionable influences.
(1993 Code, § 82-356) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-357 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a Light Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
      (1)   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research,
design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a
completely enclosed building;
      (2)   Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or
processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That
portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment
used in the manufacturing, compounding, or processing shall be totally obscured
by a wall on those sides abutting R-1 through R-2, R-T, RM-1, RM-2, MH, OS-1,
B-1, B-2, B-3, and CBD Districts and on any front yard abutting a public
thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in §
82-467. In I-1 Districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the
Planning Commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than 4
feet 6 inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be 8
feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of §§
82-451 et seq., general provisions. A chainlink fence, with intense evergreen
shrub planting, shall be considered an obscuring wall. The height shall be
determined in the same manner as the wall height as set forth in this
subsection.
         (a)   Warehousing, mini storage facilities and wholesale
establishments, and trucking facilities.
         (b)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or
treatment of such products as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy,
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery;
tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
         (c)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of
articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or
stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns.
         (d)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar
ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
         (e)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal
or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products.
         (f)   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs.
         (g)   Laboratories: experimental, film or testing.
         (h)   Manufacture and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet
metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves
and the like.
         (i)   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such
plants shall not deal directly with consumers at retail.
         (j)   All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures,
storage yards and other related uses.
      (3)   Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service
buildings and yards; public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations;
water supply and sewage disposal plants; water and gas tank holders; railroad
transfer and storage tracks; railroad rights-of-way; freight terminals;
      (4)   Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone,
lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is
enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides
abutting all residential or business districts, and on any yard abutting a
public thoroughfare. In any I-1 District the extent of such fence or wall may
be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or
wall shall not be less than 5 feet in height, and may, depending on land usage,
be required to be 8 feet in height. A chainlink type fence, with dense
evergreen shrubbery inside of the fence, shall be considered to be an obscuring
fence.
      (5)   Commercial kennels.
      (6)   Greenhouses.
      (7)   Trade or industrial schools.
      (8)   Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character than
the uses listed in this section.
      (9)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-357) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-13-2003(2))
§ 82-358 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in a Light Industrial District upon the
granting of a permit for such use by the Planning Commission subject to the
conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to such
other conditions which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are
necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting
properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with §
82-34(C).
      (1)   Auto engine and body repair shops when completely enclosed in a
building and provided any outdoor storage is completely obscured from public
view.
      (2)   Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located
in the interior of the District so that no property line shall form the
exterior boundary of the I-1 District.
      (3)   Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate
measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or
nuisances.
      (4)   Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either
their outdoor storage requirements or activities, such as, but not limited to,
lumber yard, building materials outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor
sales of boats, house trailers, automobile garages, or agricultural implements,
or serve convenience needs of the Industrial District, such as, but not limited
to, eating and drinking establishments, bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, automobile service station, motel or bowling alley, trade or
industrial school or industrial clinic.
      (5)   Other uses of a similar character to the uses listed in this
section.
(1993 Code, § 82-358) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-359 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and the minimum yard
setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-359) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-360 -- 82-375 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVIII. I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 82-376 INTENT.
   General Industrial Districts are designed primarily for manufacturing,
assembling and fabrication activities, including large scale or specialized
industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some
degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 District is so structured as to permit
the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semifinished or finished
products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material.
(1993 Code, § 82-376) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-377 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a General Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for 1 or more of the following specified uses
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   Any use first permitted and as regulated in an I-1 District.
      (2)   Heating and electric power generating plants.
      (3)   Any of the following production or manufacturing uses, not
including storage of finished products, provided that they are located not less
than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet
distant from any other district:
         (a)   Junk yards, provided such are entirely enclosed within a
building or within an eight- foot obscuring wall;
         (b)   Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an
approved and enclosed incinerator plant;
         (c)   Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill;
         (d)   Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or
plaster of Paris;
         (e)   Petroleum or other inflammable liquids; production, refining or
storage;
         (f)   Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore.
      (4)   Any other use which shall be determined by the city, after
recommendation from the Planning Commission, to be of the same general
character as the above permitted uses in §
82-377. The city may impose any required setback and/or performance standards
so as to insure public health, safety and general welfare.
      (5)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
permitted uses listed in this section.
(1993 Code, § 82-377 ) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-378 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   See §§
82-426 et seq., schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and the minimum yard
setback requirements.
(1993 Code, § 82-378) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-379 -- 82-395 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIX. P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT
§ 82-396 INTENT.
   The P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are intended to permit the establishment
of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles
as a use incidental to a principal use. This District will generally be
provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed
without adequate off-street parking facilities.
(1993 Code, § 82-396) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-397 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Premises in Vehicular Parking Districts shall be used only for an off-street
vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such
regulations as are provided in this article.
(1993 Code, § 82-397) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-398 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Required conditions in Vehicular Parking Districts are:
      (1)   The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection
with 1 or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining
business or industrial districts, or in connection with 1 or more existing
professional or institutional office buildings or institutions;
      (2)   Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RT, RM-1, RM-2 or
nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to such
districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is
perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private
driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 District and above
listed districts;
      (3)   Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than 1 day and shall not be used as an off-street
loading area;
      (4)   No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or
display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area;
      (5)   No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits
and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area;
      (6)   No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be
erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height;
      (7)   Applications for P-1 District rezoning shall be made by submitting
a dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans
in accordance with §
82-400.
(1993 Code, § 82-398) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-399 MINIMUM DISTANCES AND SETBACKS.
   Minimum distances and setbacks in a P-1 Vehicular Parking District are as
follows.
      (1)   Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to the
side and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district,
the required wall shall be located along the lot line.
      (2)   Front yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a
residentially zoned district which has a common frontage in the same block with
residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet
erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for
the residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is the greater.
The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under
unusual circumstances, the Planning Commission finds that no good purpose would
be served. The land between the setback and street right-of-way line shall be
kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees, or
lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly
in appearance.
(1993 Code, § 82-399) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-400 PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Off-street parking lots in a P-1 Vehicular Parking District shall be laid
out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and
regulations. (See
Appendix B for figure.)
      (1)   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in
accord with the following minimum requirements.
 
                                                    Total Width  Total Width of
Parking     Maneuvering                             of 1 Tier of Two Tiers of
Pattern     Land Width  Parking Space Parking Space Parking      Spaces Plus
(degrees)   (feet)      Width (feet)  Length (feet) Spaces Plus  Maneuvering
                                                    Maneuvering  Lane (feet)
                                                    Lane (feet)
0 (parallel 12          8             20            20           28
parking)
45          12          8-1/2         20            32           55
60          15          8-1/2         20            36-1/2       58
90          20          9             20            40           60
 
      (2)   All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement,
with the exception of the 90-degree pattern and parallel parking where two-way
movement may be permitted.
      (3)   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of
maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly
limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles.
      (5)   Each entrance and exit to and from such parking lot shall be at
least 20 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential
district except in the instance of parallel parking where 8 feet may be
allowed.
      (6)   Ingress and egress to a parking lot or any other part of a property
in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be
across land zoned for single-family residential use.
(1993 Code, § 82-400) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 12-12-1994)
§ 82-401 SIDE YARDS.
   Where the P-1 District is contiguous to side lot lines of premises within a
residentially zoned district, a screening wall shall be located on the property
line as provided in §
82-467.
(1993 Code, § 82-401) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-402 FRONT YARDS.
   Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which
has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein
no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal
to the required residential setback for the residential district. The required
wall as provided in §
82-467 shall be located on this minimum setback line.
(1993 Code, § 82-402) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-403 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING.
   Screening and landscaping requirements in a P-1 Vehicular Parking District
are as follows.
      (1)   The parking area shall be provided with a continuous and completely
obscuring wood or masonry wall or fence 4 feet 6 inches in height measured from
the surface of the parking area. This wall or fence shall be provided on all
sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district
except in the instance where such residential district is across a street such
wall or fence may be provided as a landscaped screening planting area. Whenever
such wall is required, all land between the wall and boundaries of the P-
1 District shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped
with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. Ornamental
trees shall be planted at 30-foot intervals, 6 feet from the wall. The ground
area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall
be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance.
      (2)   All planting plans shall be in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (1) of this section and in accordance with §
82-460.
(1993 Code, § 82-403) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-404 SURFACE OF PARKING AREA.
   The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes,
required under this section, shall have portland cement or asphaltic concrete
surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the Director of Public
Works or his designee. Such facilities shall be drained so as to dispose of all
surface water accumulated in the parking area. The parking area shall be
surfaced within 1 year of the date of rezoning for P-1 vehicular parking use if
the parking area is to serve an existing use.
(1993 Code, § 82-404) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-405 LIGHTING.
   All lighting used to illuminate any P-1 District off-street parking area
shall be so installed as to be directed on the parking area only.
(1993 Code, § 82-405) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-406 APPROVAL AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission, upon application by the property owner of the
parking area, may modify the yard and wall requirements where, in unusual
circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the
requirements of this article.
   (B)   In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of
ingress and egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall
not more than 10 feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of
access to the parking area.
   (C)   In addition to the requirements in this article, such parking area
shall comply with such further requirements or conditions as may be prescribed
by the Planning Commission for the protection of the residential district
abutting such parcel in which the parking area is to be located.
(1993 Code, § 82-406) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-407 ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   The intent of this section is to establish roadway access standards
inclusive of driveways, shared drives, frontage and rear access and road
related roadway geometric improvements and access control features.
      (2)   The compliance standards of this section are intended to minimize
potentially hazardous traffic movements and related traffic conflicts, provide
effective spacing standards between driveways and between driveways and
intersections and to ensure reasonable access to properties within desired
public safety standards. The provisions of this section shall apply during the
site plan review process before Planning Commission approval.
   (B)   Driveway spacing.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, a COMMERCIAL
DRIVEWAY is defined as any vehicular access, except those serving single family
or two family residences or serving an essential public service structure.
      (2)   Minimum spacing (commercial). Minimum spacing between 2 commercial
driveways on the same side of the roadway shall be determined based upon the
posted speed limit along the parcel frontage. The minimum spacings indicated
below are measured from centerline to centerline.
 
Posted Speed Limit (MPH) Minimum Driveway Spacing (Feet)
25                       130
30                       185
35                       245
40                       300
45                       350
50                       455
 
      (3)   Left-turn conflicts. To reduce left turn conflicts, new commercial
driveways shall be aligned with existing driveways across the roadway where
possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of
150 feet from existing driveways, measured centerline to centerline, on the
opposite side of the roadway.
      (4)   Minimum spacing. Minimum spacing between proposed driveways and
street intersections shall be subject to the following requirements. The
following measurements are from the nearest edge of the driveway throat to the
nearest edge of the intersection.
 
                                                     Minimum Spacing for a
Location of Driveway        Minimum Spacing for Full Channelized Right-Turn-In,
                            Movement Driveway (Feet) Right-Turn-Out Driveway
                                                     (Feet)
On a major thoroughfare,
intersecting street is a    250                      125
major thoroughfare
On a major thoroughfare,
intersecting street is not  200                      125
a major thoroughfare
On a secondary thoroughfare 125                      75
On a collector street       75                       75
 
      (5)   Number of commercial driveways.
         (a)   The number of commercial driveways serving a property shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access and access for
emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic operations and safety along the
public roadway.
         (b)   Access shall be provided for each separately owned parcel. This
access may be an individual driveway, shared driveway, or via a service drive.
Additional driveways may be permitted for the property only as follows: 1
additional driveway may be allowed for properties with continuous frontage over
300 feet, and 1 additional driveway for each additional 300 feet of frontage,
if the Planning Commission determines additional access is justified without
compromising traffic operations along the public street. The applicant shall
submit a traffic impact study if additional access is sought. All driveways
shall comply with the spacing requirements set forth in this section.
         (c)   In making its determination on whether additional access is
justified, the Planning Commission may refer to the following list of
developments, that generate enough traffic to warrant consideration of
additional access. Where possible, additional access points should be located
on a side street, shared with adjacent uses, or designed for right-turn-in,
right-turn-out only movements.
            1.   Multiple family developments with over 500 units.
            2.   Grocery store of over 30,000 square feet (GFA).
            3.   Shopping center with over 40,000 square feet (GFA).
            4.   Hotel or motel with over 400 rooms.
            5.   Industrial developments with over 300,000 square feet (GFA) or
350 employees, although a secondary entrance for trucks should be allowed.
            6.   Warehouses of over 750,000 square feet (GFA) or 350 employees.
            7.   Mobile home park with over 600 units.
            8.   General office building of 150,000 square feet (GFA) or 500
employees.
            9.   Medical office building of 60,000 square feet (GFA) or 200
employees.
            10.   Fast food restaurant of over 6,000 square feet (GFA).
            11.   Sit down restaurant of over 20,000 square feet (GFA).
      (6)   Shared driveways and service roads.
         (a)   Where the Planning Commission determines that reducing the
number of access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and
safety while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, a
shared driveway or service drive connecting 2 or more properties or uses may be
required. In particular, service drives may be required where recommended in
the Master Plan or corridor plan, near existing traffic signals or near
locations having traffic volumes and along segments of roadway with a
relatively high number of accidents or limited sight distance.
         (b)   Shared driveways and service drives shall be within a recorded
access easement.
         (c)   The Planning Commission may allow temporary access where the
service road is not completed if a performance bond or other financial
guarantee is provided which assures the elimination of the temporary access
upon completion of the service road. Occupancy permits shall not be issued
until such financial guarantee has been submitted to the city.
      (7)   Driveway Width. The following standards shall apply unless
engineering judgement determines that another dimension is more suitable for a
particular site.
         (a)   The standard two-way commercial driveway design shall include 1
ingress lane and 1 egress lane with a combined width of 30 feet, measured from
face of curb to face of curb.
         (b)   Where exit volumes are expected to exceed 1,000 vehicles per
day, 100 during peak hours, or in areas where it is determined that undesirable
motorist delays will occur, 2 egress lanes may be required. Such driveways
shall include 1 15-foot wide ingress lane and 2 11.5-foot wide egress lanes (1
marked exclusively for left turns). In areas where significant pedestrian/
bicycle travel is expected, the egress and ingress lanes shall be separated by
a 6 to 10 foot wide median with a pedestrian refuge area.
         (c)   Where driveways are to be located on a road segment having a
high accident rate or significant traffic congestion/delays, or where left run
access is available through alternative means of access, the Planning
Commission may require driveway design and signing which prohibits certain
turning movements.
         (d)   For access arrangements which include 2 one-way driveways, such
as a right-turn-in and right-turn-out only arrangements, each driveway shall be
16 feet wide, measured perpendicular to the curb, and angled to minimize the
disruption of traffic flow.
      (8)   Engineering judgement. Engineering judgement shall be utilized to
determine the necessary throat length, but in no case shall it be less than 25
feet.
      (9)   Angle of commercial driveways. Commercial driveways shall be on a
90 degree angle with roadway unless physical modification and/or directional
signs are used to enforce intended one-way operations or restricted movements.
      (10)   Deceleration and acceleration lanes and tapers. Deceleration and
acceleration lanes and tapers where warranted by either through traffic
conditions or expected high driveway volumes shall be used to avoid the
disruption in the flow of traffic.
(1993 Code, § 82-407) (Ord. passed 2-12-2001; Ord. passed 9-10-2001(3))
Editor's note:
   Ord. of Feb. 12, 2001, § 82-474, set out provisions intended for use as §
82-471. At the City Clerk's request, these provisions have been included as §
82-407.
§ 82-408 MARGINAL SERVICE ROADS; INTENT.
   Marginal service roads may be required by the Planning Commission, after
consultation with the traffic engineer, when it is determined by the Commission
that an excessive number of ingress and egress roads may occur with relation to
a major or secondary thoroughfare and that reducing the number of points of
access to the thoroughfare is in the best interest of the city. Unless the
property owner demonstrates that an alternative design would be in the public
interest, as determined by the Planning Commission, marginal service roads may
be required.
(1993 Code, § 82-408) (Ord. passed 2-25-1991; Ord. passed 5-14-2001; Ord.
passed 3-11-2002(1))
§ 82-409 MARGINAL SERVICE ROADS; REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Uses permitted in this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   In those instances where the Planning Commission finds that an
excessive number of ingress or egress points may occur with relation to major
or secondary thoroughfares, the Commission may require marginal service roads
and, to assure adequate traffic circulation on the site, may require the
development of parking so that contiguous lots on abutting properties will
allow traffic circulation from 1 property to another without re-entering the
public thoroughfare.
      (2)   The pavement of the marginal service road shall be located 10 feet
from the future right-of- way line of the thoroughfare and shall be at least 24
feet wide except in the situation where existing adjacent parking lots are to
be connected by way of a common maneuvering lane and a greater width cannot be
provided, the such service road shall be at least 22 feet in width. Said
service road shall be an easement which will permit the use of the service road
for traffic circulation from 1 property to another. Said easement shall be in a
written form acceptable to the City Council prior to the issuance of a building
permit and shall run with the land and benefit/burden the heirs, assigns and
transferees of the properties to be served by the drives. No permanent
structures shall be permitted within the easements. Each property owner shall
be responsible for maintenance of the easement so that it remains usable as a
means of getting from 1 property to another. The Street Administrator will
cause the service road to be maintained if the property owner fails in his
responsibility, and all costs will be charged to the property and added to the
taxes if not paid. The easement shall be recorded with the County Register of
Deeds.
      (3)   Building permits for the property to be served by the marginal
service roads shall not be issued unless and until such drives have been
completed, or a performance guarantee has been posted with the city for such
purposes.
      (4)   When marginal service roads are required, the Planning Commission
shall require that the entire 24 foot area be paved up to the abutting
properties. Backing from parking spaces onto the marginal service shall not be
permitted. The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the marginal
access service road at the property line and the Street Administrator shall
maintain a record of all marginal service road elevations so that their grades
can be coordinated. Marginal service road elevations shall conform to
elevations established by the Council or, if not so established, be not more
than 1 foot above the elevation of the adjoining property. Marginal service
roads shall meet construction specifications set by the Street Administrator
based on current engineering practices and principals for the construction of
base, pavement and draining facilities, and the like.
      (5)   The 10 foot setback area between the future road right-of-way and
the service road shall be kept in grass and landscaped in accordance with plans
approved by the Planning Commission.
      (6)   Temporary entrances and exits may be approved for individual sites
provided money is placed in escrow to assure elimination of temporary entrances
and exits. Building permits shall not be issued until monies have been
deposited with the city.
      (7)   In determining which entrances and exits will be permanent and
which will be temporary, the Planning Commission shall generally be guided by
the requirements of §
82-407, access management standards.
(1993 Code, § 82-409) (Ord. passed 2-25-1991; Ord. passed 5-14-2001; Ord.
passed 3-11-2002(l))
§§ 82-410 – 82-425 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XX. SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
§ 82-426 SCHEDULE LIMITING HEIGHT, BULK, DENSITY AND AREA BY ZONING DISTRICT.
   This schedule gives limits for height, bulk, density and area by zoning
district. Letters in parentheses refer to notes in §
82-427.
         Minimum Zoning   Maximum Height  Minimum Yard Setback (per
         Lot Size per     of Structures   lot in feet)              Maximum %
         Dwelling Unit                                              Lot Area
Zoning                                                              Covered by
District Area in Width in in                                        All
         sq. ft. feet     stories in feet front each side rear      Buildings
            Minimum Zoning  Maximum Height  Minimum Yard Setback
            Lot Size per    of Structures   (per lot in feet)       Maximum %
            Dwelling Unit                                           Lot Area
Zoning                                                              Covered
District    Area in Width   in                    each              by All
            sq. ft. in feet stories in feet front side     rear     Buildings


R-1 One     8,400                                 8 & 12
Family      (a)     70(a)   2       25      25(b) (b, c)   35(b)    30
Residential
R-2 One     12,000                                10 & 12
Family      (a)     85(a)   2       25      30(b) (b, c)   35(b)    30
Residential
RT Two                                            8 & 12
Family      4,000   40      2       25      25(b) (b, c)   35(b)    30
Residential
RM-
1
Restricted  (d)     (d)     2       25      25(e, 15 & 15  35(e)    50
Multiple                                    f)    (e)
Family
Residential
RM-
2 Multiple  (d)     (d)     3       30      30(e) 30 & 30  30(e)    25
Family                                            (e)
Residential
MH Mobile   See §§
Home        82-186 et seq. for development standards
Residential
OS-1 Office
Service     —     —     —     30      20(g) 15(h)    20(h, i) —
District
B-1 Local   —     —     —     30      25(g) (h, k)   20(h, i) —
Business
B-                                          40(g,          (h, i,
2 Community —     —     —     30      i, j) (i, j)   j)       —
Business
B-3 General —     —     —     30      30(g) (h)      20(h)    —
Business
CBD Central —     —     No maximum      None  (h)      —      —
Business
IRO
Industrial  —     —     —     40      40(l, 20(j)    40       —
Research                                    k)
Office
I-1 Light   —     —     —     40      40(l, 20(j)    40(m, n) —
Industrial                                  k)
I-2 General —     —     —     60      60(i, 30(i, j) (i, m.,  —
Industrial                                  l, k)          n, l)
 
(Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 11-12-2002(2))
§ 82-427 NOTES TO SCHEDULE.
   (A)   See §
82-428, averaged lot size, and §
82-429, subdivision open space plan, regarding flexibility allowances.
   (B)   For all uses permitted other than single family residential, the
setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in
§
82-108 or §
82-426, whichever is greater. For all lots of record having less than 70 feet
of lot width, the minimum required side yards shall be 5 feet and 10 feet.
   (C)   In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard setback
abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the
district in which located and all regulations applicable to a front yard shall
apply.
   (D)   In an RM-2 Multiple Family District, the total number of rooms, not
including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities, shall not be more than the
area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 1,200. All units shall have at
least 1 living room and 1 bedroom, except that not more than 10% of the units
may be of an efficiency apartment type. For the purpose of computing the
permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments
shall control:
      Efficiency      =   1 room
      One bedroom      =   2 rooms
      Two bedroom      =   3 rooms
      Three bedroom   =   4 rooms
      Four bedroom      =   5 rooms
Plans presented showing 1, 2 or 3 bedroom units and including a den, library or
other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of
computing density. The area used for computing density shall be the total site
area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or
bounding roads. For the RM-1 District a minimum of 4,000 square feet of lot or
site area shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
   (E)   In all RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple Family Residential Districts, the
minimum distance between any 2 buildings shall be regulated according to the
length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be
less than 30 feet. Parking may be permitted within a required side or rear yard
but shall not cover more than 30% of the area of any required yard or any
minimum distance between buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum
distance between 2 buildings in all RM Districts is as follows:
         LA + LB + 2(HA + HB)
   S   =                                        
             6
Where:
   S   =   Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A
and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either.
   LA   =   Total length of building A. The total length of building A is the
length of that portion of a wall of building A from which, when viewed directly
from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of
building B.
   LB   =   Total length of building B. The total length of building B is the
length of that portion of a wall of building B from which, when viewed directly
from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall
of building A.
   HA   =   Height of building A. The height of building A at any given level
is the height above natural grade level of any portion of a wall along the
length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground
immediately adjoining the portion of the wall along the total length of the
building.
   HB   =   Height of building B. The height of building B at any given level
is the height above natural grade level of any portion of a wall along the
length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground
immediately adjoining the portion of the wall along the total length of the
building.
   (F)   The distance from the front lot line to the nearest point of a
principal building shall not be less than 25 feet, except that where an entire
block frontage is developed at one time, under single ownership or control,
then the minimum setback may be reduced to 20 feet, provided that the average
setback for all structures shall not be less than 25 feet.
   (G)   Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the
required front yard, provided that there shall be maintained a minimum
unobstructed and landscaped setback of 10 feet between the nearest point of the
off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest right-
of-way line as indicated on the Thoroughfare Plan of the Master Plan of Future
Land Use.
   (H)   No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the
district, except as otherwise specified in the Building Code, provided that if
walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or
other openings, side yards of not less than 10 feet shall be provided. On a
corner lot which has a common rear lot line with a residential district, there
shall be provided a setback of not less than 10 feet on the side bordering the
residential district or street.
   (I)   Off-street loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the
ratio of at least 1 space for each establishment and shall be provided in
addition to any required off-street parking area. Off-street loading space
shall further meet the requirements of §
82-457. This provision shall not apply in the CBD District. In those instances
where properties abut an alley, such alley may be substituted for off-street
loading requirements in business districts. In office districts off-street
loading may take place in undesignated places in parking lots, provided such
loading is of a short-term nature.
   (J)   No building shall be closer than 75 feet to any adjacent residential
district or to any major thoroughfare.
   (K)   Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback.
   (L)   Off-street parking may be permitted within the required front yard,
provided that such off-street parking is not located within 20 feet of the
front lot line.
   (M)   No building shall be located closer than 50 feet or the height of the
building, whichever is the greater, to the outer perimeter (property line) of
such district when the property line abuts any residential district.
   (N)   All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened
with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than 6 feet high, or with a chainlink
type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent
residential, office, or business district or from a public street.
(1993 Code, § 82-427) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
Cross reference:
   Distance spacing for multiple dwellings; side yards abutting a street, see
Appendix C
§ 82-428 AVERAGED LOT SIZE.
   The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary
lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as
required in the schedule of regulations in this article for each one-family
residential district. If this option is selected, the following conditions
shall be met.
      (1)   In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be
so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than 10%
below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations and shall not
create an attendant increase in the number of lots.
      (2)   Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall
average the minimum required for the district in which it is located.
      (3)   All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through
this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat.
(1993 Code, § 82-428) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-429 SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE PLAN.
   (A)   The intent of the subdivision open space plan is to promote the
following objectives:
      (1)   Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the
natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar
natural assets;
      (2)   Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of residential areas;
      (3)   Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open
area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and allowing the
developer to by-pass natural obstacles on the site;
      (4)   Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to
all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development
of recreational facilities.
   (B)   Modifications to the standards as outlined in the schedule of
regulations in this article may be made in the one-family residential districts
when the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The lot area in all one-family residential districts, which are
served by a public sanitary sewer system, may be reduced up to 20%. In the R-
1 District, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths
up to 5 feet. In the R-2 Districts, this reduction may be accomplished in part
by reducing lot widths up to 10 feet. These lot area reductions shall be
permitted provided that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if
the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot
areas as required for each one-family district under the schedule of
regulations in this article. All calculations shall be predicated upon the one-
family districts having the following gross densities (including roads):
   R-1   =   3.8 dwelling units per acre.
   R-2   =   2.7 dwelling units per acre.
      (2)   Rear yards may be reduced to 30 feet when such lots border on land
dedicated for park, recreation and/or open space purposes, provided that the
width of the dedicated land shall not be less than 100 feet measured at the
point at which it abuts the rear yard of the adjacent lot.
      (3)   Under the provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section, for each
square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the
reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in the
schedule of regulations, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to
the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision in a manner approved by the
municipality.
      (4)   The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall
in no instance be less than 4 acres and shall be in a location and shape
approved by the Planning Commission.
      (5)   The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this
section shall not include bodies of water, swamps or land with excessive grades
making it unsuitable for recreation. All land dedicated shall be so graded and
developed as to have natural drainage. The entire area may, however, be located
in a floodplain.
      (6)   This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted only if it is
mutually agreeable to the City Council and the subdivider or developer.
      (7)   This plan, for reduced sizes, shall be started within 6 months
after having received approval of the final plat and must be completed in a
reasonable time. Failure to start within this period shall void all previous
approval.
      (8)   Under this planned unit approach, the developer or subdivider shall
dedicate the total park area (see subsection (B)(1) of this section) at the
time of filing of the final plat or any portion of the plat.
(1993 Code, § 82-429) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-430 SINGLE-FAMILY CLUSTERING OPTION.
   The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-family
residential patterns which, through design innovation, will introduce
flexibility so as to provide for the sound physical handling of site plans in
situations where the normal subdivision approach would otherwise be
unnecessarily restrictive. To accomplish this, the following modifications to
the single-family residential standards shall be permitted subject to the
conditions herein imposed.
      (1)   Under this section, the attaching of single family homes will be
permitted when the homes are attached through a common party wall which does
not have over 60% of its area in common with an abutting dwelling wall; by
means of an architectural wall detail which does not form interior room space;
or through a common party wall in only the garage portion of adjacent
structures, there being no common party wall relationship permitted through any
other portion of the residential unit.
      (2)   The number of units attached in the above manner shall not exceed
4.
      (3)   Yard requirements may be modified as follows.
         (a)   Yards abutting a street may be reduced to not less than 25 feet.
         (b)   Spacing between groups of attached units or individual units
shall be at least 20 feet in the R-1 District and 15 feet in the R-2 District.
         (c)   That side of a cluster adjacent to a service drive or private
land shall not be nearer to said drive or land than 10 feet.
      (4)   In all single-family residential districts on parcels of land
meeting certain criteria, densities in a cluster development may be increased
to the following maximum (including street right-of-way):
   R-1 District   =   4.5 dwelling units/acre.
   R-2 District   =   3.7 dwelling units/acre.
      (5)   The Planning Commission may approve the clustering or attaching of
buildings on parcels of land, under single ownership and control, which, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, have characteristics which would make sound
physical development under the normal subdivision approach impractical because
of parcel size, shape or dimension or because of steep topography, soil
problems or similar natural conditions. In approving an area for cluster
development at the densities permitted in subsection (4) of this section, the
Planning Commission shall find at least 1 of the following conditions to exist.
         (a)   The parcel to be developed is generally parallel to, and
generally does not exceed 400 feet in depth, on those unsubdivided parcels of
land abutting a major thoroughfare or freeway of at least 120 feet of right-of-
way width so as to provide transition between the major thoroughfare and
adjacent single-family detached housing.
         (b)   The parcel contains major topographic problems which, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, would make sound physical development under
the normal subdivision approach impractical. In approving these areas for
single-family cluster development, the Planning Commission shall find that:
            1.   Slopes within the site in excess of 10% appear as a typical
feature of the site rather than an exceptional or infrequent feature of the
site;
            2.   The achieving of the road grades of less than 10% is
impossible unless the site was mass graded. The providing of one-family
clusters will, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, allow a greater
preservation of the natural setting.
         (c)   A small parcel which is shaped in such a way that it contains
acute angles which would make a normal subdivision difficult to achieve and has
frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare.
         (d)   A substantial part of the parcel's perimeter is bordered by a
major thoroughfare which would result in a substantial proportion of the lots
of the development abutting the major thoroughfare.
         (e)   The parcel contains a floodplain or poor soil conditions which
result in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being
unbuildable. Soil test borings, floodplain maps or other documented evidence
must be submitted to the Planning Commission in order to substantiate the
parcel's qualification for cluster development.
         (f)   The parcel contains natural assets which could be preserved
through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include natural stands
of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife, unusual
topographic features, or other natural assets which, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, should be preserved. Requests for qualification under
these conditions must be supported by documented evidence which indicates that
the natural assets would qualify the parcel under this option.
      (6)   The area in open space accomplished through the use of one-family
clusters shall represent at least 15% of the horizontal development area of a
one-family cluster development.
      (7)   In order to provide an orderly transition where the project
proposed for use as a cluster development abuts a one-family residential
district, the Planning Commission shall determine that the abutting one family
district is effectively buffered by means of 1 of the following within the
cluster development: single-family lots subject to the standards of the
schedule of regulations, open or recreation space, changes in topography which
provides an effective buffer, a major or secondary thoroughfare, some other
similar means of providing a transition.
      (8)   Any area to be dedicated for park, recreation or open space
purposes as a result of the application of this section shall be subject to
review and approval of the Planning Commission for minimum size, shape,
location, access, the character of any improvement and assurance of the
permanence of the open space and its continued maintenance.
      (9)   In submitting a proposed layout under this section, the sponsor of
the development shall include, along with the site plan, the proposed building
elevations and typical floor plans, an indication of existing and proposed
public easements, soil information or data sufficient to determine the
buildability of the site, topography drawn at a 2 foot contour interval, all
computation relative to acreage and density, and any other details which will
assist in reviewing the proposed plan.
      (10)   Approval of a site plan under this section shall be effective for
a period of 1 year. Development not started in this period shall be considered
as abandoned and authorization shall expire requiring that any proposed
development thereafter shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission. Any proposed change in site plan or building plans, after approval
has been received, shall require review and approval by the Planning Commission
prior to effecting the change.
      (11)   Application of this option shall only be permitted when the site
plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
(1993 Code, § 82-430) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
Cross reference:
   Cluster example, see
Appendix D
§ 82-431 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-
family detached dwellings by site planning the layout of individual dwellings,
streets and open space. To accomplish development under this option, the
following conditions shall apply. In the one-family residential districts, the
site planning of individual single-family dwellings may be permitted after
review of a site plan by the Planning Commission in accordance with the public
hearing requirements set forth and regulated in §
82-34(C).
   (B)   The Planning Commission in making its review shall find that the
following minimum standards are fully met.
      (1)   The maximum number of individual single family dwellings per acre,
throughout the entire site, shall not exceed the dwelling unit density level of
the one-family district in which the site is located. These densities,
including roads, are as follows:
         (a)   R-1 One-Family Residential Districts   =   3.8 dwellings/acre.
         (b)   R-2 One-Family Residential Districts   =   2.7 dwellings/acre.
      (2)   An area equal to the minimum land area requirement of the district
shall be provided for each dwelling unit, including the building envelope.
      (3)   Setbacks shall be provided for each building envelope equal to the
minimum setback requirements of the district as set forth below.
         (a)   Front setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way, or
from the similar line of a private street easement, to the front of the
building envelope.
         (b)   Side setback shall be measured from building envelope to
building envelope and shall be at least equal to the total minimum side yard
setback requirement of the district between 2 single family detached dwellings.
         (c)   Rear setback shall be measured from the rear line of the
building envelope to the rear property line or to the nearest common space
area.
      (4)   All streets shall be built to public street standards and may be
dedicated to the city as public streets or remain as private streets. All
public streets shall be located within an appropriate right-of-way as set forth
in the city's Master Plan. Private streets shall be located within an easement
equal in width to the appropriate street right-of-way.
      (5)   All streets, utilities and improvements required for subdivision
shall be installed to applicable city standards.
      (6)   The condominium subdivision plan shall include all necessary
easements granted to the city for the purposes of constructing, operating,
inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing and/or removing
pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for
the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage,
water and stormwater run-off across, through and under the property subject to
the easement, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for
the location of the structures.
      (7)   The maximum number of stories and building height restrictions of
the district shall be met as shall the minimum floor area requirements of the
district. Any detached accessory uses shall comply with the applicable
standards of this chapter for such uses. Setbacks required for such uses shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the land area boundaries as required in
this section for each individual single-family detached dwelling.
(1993 Code, § 82-431) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
Cross reference:
   Condominium subdivision terminology, see
Appendix E
§§ 82-432 – 82-450 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XXI. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 82-451 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the
provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter
shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more
stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the
provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. This provision shall not
apply to mobile home parks which are regulated in accord with Public Act 96 of
1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 et seq., as amended.
(1993 Code, § 82-451) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-452 SCOPE.
   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed or
altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of
any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1993 Code, § 82-452) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-453 NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES OF LAND, STRUCTURES, AND USES OF STRUCTURES
AND PREMISES.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that
may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but
which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this
chapter or future amendment.
      (2)   It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
      (3)   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or
a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of
additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition
of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district
involved.
      (4)   It is further recognized that certain nonconforming uses and
structures do not significantly depress the value of nearby properties and are
not contrary to the public health, safety and welfare and that such use or
structure was lawful at the time of its inception and that no useful purpose
would be served by the strict applications of requirements for nonconformities
under this chapter and, therefore, 2 classes of nonconforming use and structure
are designated, being class A and class B.
      (5)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is defined to
include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and
fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved
and provided further that all work shall be done pursuant to a valid permit.
   (B)   Class A nonconforming uses or structures. Those nonconforming uses or
structures which have been designated by the Planning Commission, after
hearing, as class A, providing findings that the following conditions exist
with respect to the use or structure.
      (1)   The use or structure was lawful at its inception.
      (2)   Continuance of the use or structure does not significantly depress
property values of nearby properties.
      (3)   Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to the
public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of this chapter.
      (4)   An improvement to an existing nonconforming condition will result.
      (5)   No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the
provisions of this chapter with which the use or structure does not conform.
   (C)   Class A conditions. The decision to grant a class A designation shall
be made in writing, setting forth the findings and reasons on which it is
based. Conditions may be attached, including time limits where deemed necessary
to assure the use or structure does not become contrary to the public health,
safety or welfare or the spirit and purpose of this chapter and further to
assure that at least the following standards are met.
      (1)   Screening and landscaping should be provided in keeping with
community standards to provide compatibility with adjacent uses.
      (2)   Effects which may have a negative impact such as lighting, noise or
visual impact should be minimized.
      (3)   Where such use is in close proximity to homes, parking should not
be permitted to utilize curb side parking to an extent greater than the
immediate property frontage of the nonconforming use.
      (4)   New signage should meet zoning district requirements. Existing
nonconforming signs may be required to be eliminated or reduced in size and
number as the Commission may, in its judgment, determine.
      (5)   The exterior building materials utilized in any alteration to the
building shall be harmonious with materials on abutting properties whenever
practical.
      (6)   Enlargement of a building may be allowed provided such enlargement
does not create a more nonconforming yard setback condition which would impact
on conforming properties in the immediate vicinity.
      (7)   The Commission may require such other safeguards and improvements
as it may deem necessary to protect conforming uses in the surrounding area.
   No class A nonconforming use or structure shall be resumed if it has been
discontinued for 6 consecutive months or 18 months in any 3-year period. No
class A nonconforming use or structure shall be used, altered or enlarged in
violation of any condition imposed in its designation.
   (D)   Revocation of class A designation. Any class A designation shall be
revoked, following the same procedure required for designation, upon a finding
that as a result of any change of conditions or circumstances the use or
structure no longer qualifies for class A designation.
   (E)   Class B nonconforming uses or structures. All nonconforming uses or
structures, not designated class A, shall be class B nonconforming uses or
structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structures shall comply with all the
provisions of this chapter relative to nonconforming uses and structures. To
avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has
been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include
the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such demolition
or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall
be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
   (F)   Reactivation of discontinued nonconforming use or structure. A
nonconforming use of land or structure which is discontinued or ceases to exist
as specified in subsections (H)(3) and (J)(5) of this section may be reinstated
as a class A nonconforming use or structure by the Planning Commission after
hearing and after finding that the following conditions exist or will be met
with respect to the use or structure.
      (1)   The proposed use will be the same type of use as the previous use
which occupied the property or a new use which is no more intensive than the
previous use. Example: In a residential zone a business use allowed in a B-
1 Local Business District exists, such use may be replaced by another B-1 use
or a higher use such as an OS-1 or RM use but shall not be replaced by a more
intense use such as those allowed in a B-2, B-3, CBD or Industrial District.
      (2)   That conditions specified in subsections (B)(2) through (4) of this
section will be complied with.
      (3)   A determination shall be made by the Planning Commission that the
use or structure will be a blighting influence on the neighborhood if not
allowed to be occupied.
   (G)   Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to
the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard
requirements may be obtained through the Board of Appeals.
   (H)   Non conforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer
permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may
be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
      (1)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
      (2)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
      (3)   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.
   (I)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built
under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot
coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its
location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity. Such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which does not increase its nonconformity.
      (2)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not
be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
      (4)   Should such structure be a pre-existing porch or deck, and provided
that the structure's footprint remains the same or is made smaller, it may be
replaced due to age or structural issues.
   (J)   Nonconforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a
structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be allowed in the
district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued as
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
      (2)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
      (3)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification, provided the
use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the
existing nonconforming use. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or
structure and land in combination is changed to a more conforming use, it shall
not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
      (4)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      (5)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises
in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for 6 consecutive months or
for 18 months during any 3 year period, the structure, or structure and land in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the
regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by
seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision.
      (6)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   (K)   Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part
to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive
months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50% of the assessed
value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it
existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be
increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
      (1)   Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for
which a general exception or conditional use approval is required as provided
in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without
further action be deemed a conforming use in such district.
   (M)   Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy,
ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures
or structures and land in combination.
   (N)   Applications for temporary use permits. Businesses located in OS-1, B-
l, B-2, B-3 and CBD Districts and churches, wherever located, within the
corporate limits of the city, may make applications for temporary use permits
where they desire to promote business sales which would normally be prohibited
in their zoning district. Such application may only be made where the sales
promotion bears a reasonable relationship to the business normally permitted in
that district. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the lawful
business bears a reasonable relationship to the prohibited business for which a
special use permit is sought. Where the Planning Commission decides that such a
reasonable relationship exists, it may grant a temporary use permit, provided:
      (1)   The principal use has previously been granted site plan approval;
      (2)   The principal use is in compliance with all current city zoning
regulations;
      (3)   The temporary use does not create a public safety problem as
determined by the Police Department;
      (4)   The temporary use does not exceed 30 days;
      (5)   Commitment is made to restore any lawn areas where temporary use
may have taken place;
      (6)   Adequate parking would remain available for the building for the
principal use;
      (7)   A zoning officer finds the application would not impair the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public.
   In conjunction with a temporary use permit, 1 sign not to exceed 20 square
feet will be allowed and may be placed on the front or side yard setback,
provided that it does not interfere with public safety as determined by the
Police Department. Upon approval of the Planning Commission and the applicant
meeting all of the conditions of approval, the Building Official is authorized
to execute a temporary use permit.
(1993 Code, § 82-453) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-11-1999(1); Ord.
passed 4-9-2007(1))
§ 82-454 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
   Accessory buildings, structures and uses, except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all yard regulations of
this chapter applicable to main buildings.
   (B)   Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any minimum side or front
yard setback.
   (C)   A building accessory to a residential building may occupy not more
than 25% of required rear yard, provided that in no instance shall the
accessory building exceed 100% of the ground floor area of the main building.
On a corner lot all of the land to the rear of the house may be utilized in the
computation of percent of lot coverage for accessory buildings.
   (D)   A detached building accessory to a residential building shall not be
located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located
closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where
the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory
building shall be no closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance
shall an accessory structure be located within a dedicated easement right-of-
way.
   (E)   No detached accessory structures in the R-1, R-2, RT, RM-1, RM-2, MH,
OS-l, B-1 and P-1 Districts shall exceed 18 feet in height; provided, however,
when the detached accessory building is located in a rear yard with a ground
elevation lower than that of surrounding the primary residential structure, the
height of the accessory building may be measured from a plane parallel to the
first floor of the primary residential structure. Accessory structures in all
other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of
structures in such districts.
   (F)   In no case shall a residential accessory structure have a flat, level
roof. All accessory structure roofs must be sloped to allow water drainage.
   (G)   Temporary carport and storage structures, whether manufactured or
home-built, shall adhere to all requirements of §
82-545 for detached accessory structures. Permits for temporary carports and
storage structures are limited to a period of two years, and said temporary
carport or storage structure shall be removed upon expiration. Temporary
carport and storage structures shall be securely fastened to ground in a manner
sufficient to prevent its detachment due to wind or weather.
   (H)   When a building accessory to a residential building is located on a
corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the
front lot line of the lot to its rear, such building shall not project beyond
the front yard line required on the lot in the rear of such corner lot. When an
accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the side lot line of the lot to its rear, such
building shall not project beyond the side yard line of the lot in the rear of
such corner lot. In no instance shall a building accessory to a residential
building be located nearer than ten feet to a street right-of-way line.
   (I)   Accessory buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed
to be compatible with the design and construction of the principal building on
the site. Design elements that should be considered in determining
compatibility include: exterior building material (which need not be identical
to the principal building but compatible in appearance), roof style and pitch,
architectural style, and color.
   (J)   The provisions concerning the size and height in this section shall
not apply to accessory buildings on a farm (such as barns and silos).
   (K)   Wireless transmission antennas and towers are subject to the following
the requirements of §
82-459.
      (1)   A maximum height limit of 60 feet for towers and antennas is
permitted in residential districts.
      (2)   No maximum height limit is required in nonresidential districts.
      (3)   In all districts a tower or antenna shall be located on the parcel
or lot in such manner that the base of the tower or antenna is set back from
all property lines not less than the height of the tower or antenna.
   (L)   Recreational equipment owned by residents of the city may be stored on
their individual lots in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   All recreational equipment parked or stored shall not be connected
to sanitary facilities; and shall not be occupied, except as provided in
subsection (a) of this section.
         (a)   In any residential district it shall be lawful for only
nonpaying guests at a residence to occupy a single recreational vehicle for a
period not exceeding 72 hours. The total number of days during which
recreational vehicles may be occupied under this subsection shall not exceed 10
in any calendar year on the premises of a dwelling unit.
      (2)   Recreational equipment shall be maintained in a clean, well-kept
state so as not to detract from the appearance of the surrounding area. A
suitable, securely fastened weatherproof cover shall be placed on all boats
whenever stored outside. In lieu of a cover, canoes and rowboats may be stored
such that they do not collect and retain rainwater. Snowmobiles, ATV’s,
personal watercraft and similar vehicles shall be stored under a suitable,
securely fastened weatherproof cover, or stored within an enclosed trailer.
      (3)   Recreational equipment shall be operable and shall have a current
license or registration when applicable.
      (4)   Recreational equipment stored on residential lots may be parked in
the following manner:
         (a)   Inside any enclosed structure.
         (b)   Outside in the rear yard on an improved surface (gravel, asphalt
or concrete), no closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line, and no
closer than ten feet to the primary residential structure.
         (c)   Outside in the side yard on an improved surface (gravel, asphalt
or concrete), no closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line, and no
closer than ten feet to the primary residential structure, and provided such
parking shall be behind the front face of the primary residential structure.
         (d)   Outside on the front driveway or improved surface directly
adjacent to the front driveway, provided that the vehicle is no closer than 15
feet to the front lot line. The provisions of §
82-454(L)(4)(c) do not apply to recreational equipment stored under the
provisions of this section.
         (e)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a recreational
vehicle may be parked anywhere on the premises, or within a public right-of-way
area where street parking is permitted, during active loading or unloading.
         (f)   The combined area covered by the dwelling, accessory structures,
and the area covered by the outside storage of such units shall not exceed 40%
of the net lot area.
      (5)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to recreational
equipment officially designated for barrier-free use in accordance with state
law, and used as the regular means of transportation by or for a handicapped
person.
   (M)   A resident of a dwelling unit may have not more than one motorized
vehicle for sale on the site of such dwelling unit at any time and in no
instance shall vacant residential lots or parcels be utilized for the sale of
vehicles. A resident may conduct minor automobile repairs of vehicles of the
resident such as oil changes and tune ups between the hours from sunrise to
sunset on the property of the resident’s dwelling unit; however, in no instance
shall a resident repair the vehicle of other than a resident of the dwelling
unit on such property. The sale of vehicles from a residential property shall
not exceed two vehicles in any one year for a period not to exceed two weeks in
any one year.
   (N)   Freestanding solar panels shall be considered an accessory building
and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all other
applicable building codes and ordinances.
   (O)   Wind generators may be permitted in rear yards when the following
conditions are met.
      (1)   The highest point of any portion of the generator shall not exceed
35 feet above the average grade of the lot.
      (2)   The generator device shall be placed no closer to any side or rear
lot line than the total distance between the grade of the lot at the base of
the tower and the highest point of any portion of the generator.
      (3)   The maximum diameter formed by a circle encompassing the outermost
portions of the blades or other wind activated surfaces shall not exceed 30% of
the distance between the ground and the highest point of any portion of the
wind generator. The generator shall be so located that no portion of the
structure would penetrate the vertical plane of any adjacent property line if
it were to topple over in its normally assembled configuration.
      (4)   The construction of the tower, blades, base structure, accessory
building and wiring shall meet all applicable local building codes and
ordinances.
   (P)   In all office, service and business districts, rooftop equipment and
apparatus shall be screened from ground level by being housed in a penthouse or
structure constructed of the same type of building materials used in the
principal structure or by building design.
(1993 Code, § 82-454) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 3-13-2000; Ord.
passed 11-12-2002(2); Ord. passed 1-13-2003(2); Ord. 2014-04, passed 9-8-2014;
Ord. 2018-01, passed 10-8-2018)
§ 82-455 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   There shall be provided in all districts, at the time of erection or
enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking
space, with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off- street parking
spaces in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as prescribed in this section.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to mobile home
parks. Mobile Home Commission Rules 920, 925 and 926 shall apply to all mobile
home courts.
      (2)   Off-street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or
within a side yard which is in excess of the minimum side yard setback unless
otherwise provided in this chapter. Off-street parking shall not be permitted
within a front yard nor within a minimum side yard setback unless otherwise
provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either
on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve,
measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the
off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels
intended for use as parking by the applicant.
      (4)   Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of parking
strip, driveway, garage, or a combination thereof and shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve. In R-1, R-2 and R-T residential zones,
parking is not permitted in a front yard except on an improved driveway with a
concrete, asphalt, gravel or stone surface. Such driveway shall not utilize
more than 35% of the front yard.
      (5)   In all districts except the CBD Central Business District, any area
once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any
other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere.
      (6)   In all districts except the CBD Central Business District, off-
street parking existing at the effective date of this chapter in connection
with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an
amount less than required in this section for a similar new building or use.
      (7)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required
off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall
not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses
computed separately.
      (8)   In the instance of dual function of off- street parking spaces
where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Board of Appeals may
grant an exception.
      (9)   The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the
repair of vehicles is prohibited except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (10)   For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for
off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which is similar in
type.
      (11)   When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up
to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half
shall require 1 parking space.
      (12)   The requirements of subsection (13) of this section shall not be
applicable to those uses located in the CBD Central Business District. Parking
for CBD uses is provided in common parking lots intended to serve all
activities of the Central Business District.
      (13)   For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces
required, useable floor area as defined in §
82-4 shall govern unless otherwise specified.
      (14)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the number of spaces
required in this section. Parking shall not exceed nor be less than the
required space per unit of measure for new uses. In accordance with this
section, the Planning Commission may approve additional or fewer spaces,
provided the applicant demonstrates that adequate parking will be provided,
excessive parking will be avoided and snow storage is accommodated.
      The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be
determined in accordance with the following schedule.
Use Number of Minimum Parking Spaces per Unit of Measure
Use                            Number of Minimum Parking Spaces per Unit of
                               Measure
Residential
                               1 for each 3 units and 1 for each employee;
Housing for the elderly        should units revert to general occupancy, then 2
                               spaces per unit shall be provided
Residential, one family        2 for each dwelling unit
Residential, two family and    2 for each dwelling unit
multiple family
Mobile home                    2 for each mobile home plus 1 for each employee
                               of a mobile home park
Bed and breakfast              1 for the owner/operator and 1 for each guest
establishments                 room
Institutional
Churches and temples           1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of pews in the main
                               unit of worship
Hospitals/health care centers  2 for each 1 bed
Convalescent homes and nursing 1 for each 4 persons in residence and 1 space
homes                          for each 2 employees in the largest work shift
Elementary and junior high     1 for each 1 teacher, employee or administrator,
schools                        plus the requirements for the auditorium or
                               stadium
                               1 for each 1 teachers, employee or administrator
High schools                   and 1 for each 10 students, plus the
                               requirements for the auditorium or stadium
                               1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum
Private clubs or lodges        occupancy load as established by local, county
                               or state fire, building or health codes
Private golf clubs, swim       1 for each 2 member families or individuals,
clubs, tennis clubs or other   plus spaces required for restaurant or bar which
similar uses                   is open to the public
Golf courses open to the       4 for each 1 golf hold and 1 for each employee,
general public except          plus spaces required for each accessory use such
miniature courses              as a restaurant or bar
Stadium and sports arena or
similar place of outdoor       1 for each 4 seats or 8 feet of benches
assembly
Theaters and auditoriums       1 space for each 3 seats, plus 1 for each 2
                               employees
Library, museum or post office 1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor space
Nursery schools, group day     1 for each care giver or teacher, plus off-
care homes and day care        street loading space for children entering and
centers                        leaving the facility
Commercial
                               1 for each 1 employee; in addition, reservoir
                               parking spaces equal in number to 5 times the
                               maximum capacity of the auto wash; maximum
Auto wash (automatic)          capacity of the auto wash shall mean the
                               greatest number of automobiles possible under
                               ground some phase of washing at the same time,
                               which shall be determined by dividing the length
                               of feet of each wash line by 20
Auto wash (self-washing        3 for each stall in addition to the stall itself
service or coin operated)
Beauty parlor or barber shop   2 spaces for each of the first 2 chairs, and
                               1-1/2 spaces for each additional chair
Bowling alleys                 5 for each bowling lane plus parking for
                               accessory uses
Dance halls, roller rinks,     1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum
exhibition halls, and assembly occupancy load as established by the Fire
halls without fixed seats      Marshal
Drive-in restaurant            1 for each employee and 1 for each 25 square
                               feet of usable floor area
Drive-through                  1 for each employee and 5 stack-up spaces for
                               each drive-through window or station
Carry-out (with no eating on   1 for each employee and 1 for each 60 square
premises)                      feet of usable floor area with a minimum of 4
                               spaces
Establishments for sale and    1 for each 100 square feet of useable floor area
consumption, on the premises,  or 1 for each 2 persons allowed within the
of beverages, food or          maximum occupancy load as established by local,
refreshments                   county or state fire, building, or health codes,
                               whichever is greater
Furniture and appliance,
household equipment, repair    1 for each 800 square feet of useable floor area
shops, showroom of a plumber,  (for that floor area used in processing, 1
decorator, electrician, or     additional space shall be provided for each 2
similar trade, shoe repair and persons employed therein)
other similar uses
                               2 for each lubrication stall, rack or pit; and 1
                               for each gasoline pump island; and 1 for each
Gasoline service stations      vehicle used as part of the equipment of the
(full service)                 gasoline service station; no spaces are required
                               for self-service pumps; additional parking shall
                               be provided for any accessory retail use as
                               required for such use
                               1 space plus 1 space for each employee on the
Gasoline filling stations      largest working shift; but not less than 3
(self service)                 spaces in any instance; additional parking shall
                               be provided for any accessory retail use as
                               required for such use
                               1 for each seat or 6 feet of benches, or 1 for
Ice skating or roller rink     each 150 square feet of skating area, whichever
                               is the greater
Laundromats and coin operated  1 for each 2 machines
dry cleaners
Miniature golf courses         2 spaces per hold plus 3 spaces for employees
Golf driving range             1 space for each driving tee plus 3 spaces for
                               employees
Mini storage rental units      1 space for each employee and 1 space for each
                               additional 50 storage rental units
Mortuary establishments        1 for each 50 square feet of assembly rooms,
                               parlors, and slumber rooms useable floor space
Motel                          1 for each rental unit, plus 2 additional spaces
                               for management and/or service personnel
Motor vehicle sales and        1 for each 200 square feet of useable floor area
service establishments         of sales room and 1 for each 1 auto service
                               stall in the service room
                               1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum
Pool hall or club              occupancy load as established by the Fire
                               Marshal
Retail stores except as        1 for each 150 square feet of useable floor area
otherwise specified herein
Planned commercial or shopping Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand, but
center                         not less than 1 space per 300 square feet of
                               gross floor area
Amusement arcade               1 for each 1 game table and 1 for each amusement
                               device
                               1 parking space for each 3 persons allowed
                               within the maximum occupancy load as established
Athletic clubs, exercise       by local, county or state fire, building or
establishments, health         health clubs plus 1 space per employee; in those
studios, sauna baths, judo     instances where memberships are provided for,
clubs and other similar uses   not less than 1 space per each 5 memberships
                               shall be provided plus 1 space per employee or 1
                               space for each 2 clothing lockers, plus 1 space
                               per employee, whichever is the larger
                               1 for each 100 square feet of useable floor area
Establishments for adult       or 1 for each 2 persons allowed within the
entertainment                  maximum occupancy load as established by local,
                               county or state fire, building, or health codes,
                               whichever is greater
Offices
Banks                          1 for each 100 square feet of useable floor area
                               1 for each employee; in addition, reservoir
                               waiting spaces at each service window or station
Banks (drive-in)               shall be provided at the rate of 5 for each
                               service window or station; each waiting space
                               shall measure not less than 20 feet in length
Business offices or
professional offices except as 1 for each 300 square feet of useable floor area
indicated in the following
item
Professional offices of        1 for each 75 square feet of useable floor area
doctors, dentists or similar   in waiting rooms, and 1 space for each examining
professions                    room, dental chair or similar use area
Industrial
                               1 space on site for every 2 employees in the
                               largest working shift or 1 for each 450 square
Industrial or research         feet of useable floor area in those instances
establishments                 where shift size is unknown; space on the site
                               shall also be provided for all construction
                               workers during periods of plant construction
                               1 for every 1 employee in the largest work
Wholesale establishments       shift, or 1 for every 1,700 square feet of
                               useable floor space, whichever is greater
Warehouses                     1 for every employee in the largest work shift
Parking for Handicapped (All Districts)
Shall comply with the provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA).
The number and layout of spaces required shall comply with ADA accessibility
guidelines, including the following.
Accessible Parking Spaces*
(required minimum)             Accessible Spaces Guideline for Layout of Spaces
Total Parking Spaces in Lot
1 - 25                         1                 PU Diagram
26 - 50                        2
51 - 75                        3
76 - 100                       4
101 - 150                      5
151 - 200                      6
201 - 300                      7
301 - 400                      8
401 - 500                      9
501 - 1,000                    2**
1,001 and over                 20**
 
*   Accessible spaces are required to be 8'0" wide, with an adjacent access
aisle 5'0" wide. One in every 8 accessible spaces shall have an access aisle
8'8" wide (rather than 5') and shall be signed "van accessible."
**   Percent of total.
***   Plus 1 space for each 100 over 1,000.
(1993 Code, § 82-455) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 9-14-1998(2); Ord.
2012-01, passed 6-11-2012)
§ 82-456 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.
   Whenever the off-street parking requirements in §
82-455 require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-
1 vehicular parking districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall
be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
standards and regulations.
   (A)   No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor
is issued by the building official. Applications for a permit shall be
submitted to the city in such form as may be determined to the city in such
form as may be determined by the building official and shall be accompanied
with two sets of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot
showing the provisions of this section will be fully complied with.
   (B)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot shall be provided and
approved by the city engineer who shall have full power to regulate and
determine the places of ingress and egress so that traffic on the streets and
highways of the city shall be controlled, regulated and coordinated and to
require the installation and maintenance of suitable barriers to insure the
safety of pedestrians passing any such parking lot, in order to provide for the
greatest possible public safety and welfare. Such necessary directional signs
and controls as are required by the city shall be established and maintained by
the owner or lessee of the parking lot. All drives and parking shall be
surfaced in a manner equivalent to that which is provided for the parking areas
under §
82-404.
   (C)   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering
lanes.
   (D)   All drives shall be surfaced in a manner equivalent to that which is
provided for the parking areas under §
82-404. Screening and landscaping and lighting shall be provided in keeping
with the requirements of §§
82-403 and
82-405. Plans for the layout of a parking lot shall show a total dimension
across two tiers of spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane) of at least the
standards as required in §
82-400.
   (E)   Off-street parking areas shall be provided with a continuous and
completely obscuring wall or fence in accordance with the specifications of §
82-403, on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a
residential district.
   (F)   The parking area shall be so designed as to provide a landscape plan
in accord with §
82-403 and §
82-460.
(Ord. passed 10-10-1992)
§ 82-457 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof,
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of
dedicated streets or alleys. Such space shall be provided as follows:
   (A)   All spaces in OS-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts shall be provided in
the ratio required in §§
82-426 et seq., under minimum rear yard.
   (B)   All spaces shall be laid out in the dimensions of at least ten by 50
feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in
height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an
asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent durable and
dustless surface. All spaces in I and IRO districts shall be provided in the
following ration of spaces to usable floor area.
 
Gross floor area  (in Square feet) Loading and unloading spaces required in
                                   terms of square feet of usable floor  area
0—20,000                         One space
20,000—100,000                   One space plus one space for each 20,000
                                   square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet
100,000—500,000                  Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000
                                   square feet in excess of 100,001 square feet
 
(Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-458 USES NOT OTHERWISE INCLUDED WITHIN A SPECIFIC USE DISTRICT.
   Because the uses referred to in this section possess unique characteristics
making it impractical to include them in a specific use district
classification, they may be permitted by the city council after review by the
planning commission under the conditions specified, and after public hearing.
In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to in this section shall be
specifically prohibited from all residential districts. These uses require
special residential districts. These uses require special consideration since
they service an area larger than the city and require sizable land areas,
creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts.
Reference to those uses failing specifically within the intent of this section
is as follows:
   (A)   Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique
characteristic of being used only after darkness and since they develop a
concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their
parking area, they may be permitted in I-1 districts. Outdoor theaters shall
further be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the
building official and the city engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting
and other technical aspects.
      (2)   Points of ingress and egress shall be available to the outdoor
theater from abutting major thoroughfares (86-foot right-of-way or greater),
and shall not be available from any residential street.
      (3)   All vehicles waiting or standing to enter the facility shall be
provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or
stand within a dedicated right-of-way.
      (4)   The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from
being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All
lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined
within, and directed onto the premises of the outdoor theater site.
   (B)   Commercial television and radio towers, public utility microwaves,
cellular transmissions towers and public utility TV transmitting towers. Radio
and television towers, public utility microwave and public utility TV
transmitting towers, and their attendant facilities, shall be permitted in I-
1 districts provided such use shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel
of not less than one times the height of the tower to all points on each
property line. The site shall in no instance be used for the storage of
vehicles or any material not required for the principal use. Outdoor storage of
any kind shall be expressly prohibited.
   (C)   Airports and landing fields. Airports and landing fields, including
structures accessory to such facilities and for the operation of an airport,
may be permitted in an area zoned for industrial purposes, provided access
directly to the site is from an abutting major thoroughfare, provided that land
under runway approaches shall not be put to any use which might later serve as
a basis for an effective argument that the space above should not be used by
aircraft, and provided by the Civil Aeronautics Administration be submitted
with the request for use.
(Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-459 RESERVED.
(1993 Code, § 82-459)
Editor's note:
   Ord. passed 9-14-1998(3) repealed § 82-459 in its entirety. Former § 82-459
pertained to regulations to prevent blight and derived from Ord. passed 10-12-
1992, § 5.183, and from Ord. passed 3-23-1998.
§ 82-460 PLANT MATERIALS AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Greenbelt requirements. Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or
planting is required, it shall be planted to completion within 180 days of
occupancy of the building or structure unless a longer period is permitted in
writing by the Zoning Official. Planting shall thereafter be reasonably
maintained, including permanence and health of plant materials to provide a
screen to abutting properties and including the absence of weeds and refuse.
Withered and/or dead plant materials shall be replaced within a reasonable
period of time, but no longer than one growing season.
   (B)   Minimum standards. The landscape standards of this article are
considered the minimum necessary. In several instances, the standards are
intentionally flexible to encourage flexibility and creative design. Applicants
are encouraged to provide additional landscaping to improve the function,
appearance and value of their property.
   (C)   Landscaping commission review. For existing and proposed uses that
require site plan approval to either expand or be built, landscaping should be
installed insofar as practical. The planning commission in its review of the
site plan has the authority to increase, decrease or otherwise modify the
landscaping and screening requirements of this article. In doing so, the
commission shall consider the following criteria:
      (1)   The amount of space on the site available for landscaping.
      (2)   Existing landscaping on the site and on adjacent property.
      (3)   The type of use on the site and size of the development.
      (4)   Existing and proposed adjacent land uses.
      (5)   The effect the required landscaping would have on the operation of
the existing or proposed land use.
   (D)   Plant material size.
      (1)   Plant material shall not be located within 4 feet of the property
line.
      (2)   Where plant materials are placed in 2 or more rows, plantings shall
be staggered in rows.
      (3)   Evergreen trees shall not be less than 7 feet in height.
      (4)   Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than 5 feet in height when
used as screening.
      (5)   Large shrubs shall be a minimum of a #5 container (18" to 24").
      (6)   Small shrubs shall be a minimum of a #3 container (15" to 18").
      (7)   Larger deciduous trees shall not be less than 2-2 1/2 inches in
caliper measured one foot above ground level.
      (8)   Ornamental trees shall not be less than 1 3/4" – 2 1/2" in caliper
measured 1 foot above ground level.
SUGGESTED PLANT MATERIALS LIST
 
LARGER TREES
Norway Maple - Acer   Red Maple - Acer rubra     Sugar Maple - Acer
platanoides                                      saccharum
Beech - Fagus         Honeylocust - Gleditisia - Dawn Redwood - Metasequoia
                      thornless                  glyptostroboides
Bloodgood London
Planetree- Platanus x Oak - Quercus              Linden - Tilia
acerifoili
 
 
ORNAMENTAL TREES
Serviceberry - Aelanchier Crabapple - Disease Canada Red Chokecherry -
                          Resistant - Malus   Prunus
Ornamental Pearl - Pyrus
calleryana
 
 
EVERGREEN TREES
Fir Pine Spruce
 
 
NARROW EVERGREENS
Arborvitae Upright Junipers Upright Yews
 
 
LARGE DECIDUOUS
Barberry     Buckthorn Border Privet
Burning Bush Forsythia Lilac
Viburnums
 
 
SMALLER DECIDUOUS
Cottoneaster Dwarf Lilac Potentilla
Spirea       Viburnum    Weigela
 
LARGE SHRUBS
Deciduous
Honeysuckle                    Lilac                     Forsythia
Border privet                  Buckthorn                 Sumac
Pyracantha                     Barberry                  Flowering quince
Sargent crabapple              Dogwood (Red Osier, Grey)
Cotoneaster (Pekin, Spreading)
Evergreen
Irish yew                      Hicks yew                 Mugo pine
Pfitzer juniper                Savin juniper
 
SMALL SHRUBS
Deciduous
Regal privet                    Fragrant sumac          Japanese quince
Potentilla                      Compact burning bus     Cotoneaster (Cranberry,
                                                        Rockspray)
   Evergreen
Dwarf mugo pine                 Big leaf winter creeper Arborvitae
Low spreading junipers (Andora,
Hughes, Tamarak, and the like)
Spreading yews (Dense, Brown's,
Ward, and the like)
 
 
TREES NOT SUGGESTED
Silver Maple - Acer    Boxelder - Acer nugundo   Honeylocust - Gleditisia -
saccharium                                       thorned
Mulberry - fruiting -  Poplar - Populus speciers Black Locust - Robinia
Morus                                            species
Willow - Salix species
 
      (2)   Mixture required. A mixture of plant materials (evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs) is required in all landscape plants as a protective
measure against disease and insect infestation.
      (3)   Parking lot landscaping and screening.
         (a)   Parking lots of greater than 5,000 square feet in area shall
meet the following landscaping requirements for the interior of the parking
lot:
            1.   One canopy tree for every 20 parking spaces, with a minimum of
two trees, shall be planted in end islands within the parking area;
            2.   Each interior landscaped area shall have at least 150 square
feet;
            3.   Required parking lot land- scaping areas shall be covered with
turf, shredded bark, stone, or living ground cover plants;
            4.   Each interior landscaped area shall be protected by a raised
standard or rolled curb and gutter unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Greenbelts. Greenbelts shall be required where a developed parcel
or parking lot abuts a public thoroughfare in the RM-1, RM-2, MH, OS-1, B-1, B-
2, B-3, PD, IRO, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts. Greenbelts shall meet the
following standards.
         (a)   Greenbelts are to be constructed only on private property and
are not a part of the public rights-of-way.
         (b)   The minimum width of a required greenbelt shall be at least 10
feet.
         (c)   Greenbelts shall contain 1 tree for each 75 lineal feet of
frontage, or fraction thereof, on a public thoroughfare. At least one-half of
the required trees shall be canopy trees.
         (d)   Greenbelts shall contain 4 shrubs for each 20 lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Said shrubs shall be planted in beds of mulch, bark, or
stone.
         (e)   If a landscape screen is required along a pubic thoroughfare,
the greenbelt tree planting requirements shall still apply.
         (f)   In no case shall greenbelts be considered as a part of the off-
street parking area landscape requirements.
         (g)   The Zoning Administrator may recommend approval of alternate
spacing arrangements and alternative numbers of plant materials if the intent
of reducing negative effects between incompatible land uses is achieved.
      (5)   Landscape screening between land uses.
         (a)   Multiple family residential land uses adjacent to a public park
facility or land principally used or zoned for single family residential shall
have the following between it and all areas of such park or residential land:
            1.   Wall or fence shall be provided with a minimum height of six
feet; or a hedge, berm, or combination thereof forming a continuous screen at
least four feet high, if approved by the Planning Commission;
            2.   Multiple family projects shall also provide a minimum of 1
deciduous or evergreen tree for every 1,000 square feet of open space on the
development site. Trees in any required screen may be counted toward this
requirement.
         (b)   The following screening features shall be provided by any
commercial or office development which is adjacent to a public park or land
principally used or zoned for single family residences:
            1.   A landscaping area having a minimum width of 15 feet. This
area shall consist of natural landscape materials such as lawn, ground cover,
shrubs, and trees, and shall not contain impervious materials;
            2.   A wall or fence shall be provided with a minimum height of 6
feet; or a hedge, berm, or combination thereof forming a continuous screen at
least 4 feet high if approved by the Planning Commission;
            3.   Required tree plantings: 1 deciduous tree or evergreen tree
shall be provided for every 75 feet of lot line shared with a residential or
park use or zoned property.
         (c)   The following screening features shall be provided by any
industrial property which abuts a residential or park use:
            1.   A landscape screen at least 15 feet in width. Screen areas
shall consist of natural landscape materials such as lawn, ground cover,
shrubs, and trees, and shall not contain impervious materials;
            2.   A wall or fence shall be provided with a minimum height of 8
feet; or a hedge, berm, or combination thereof forming a continuous screen at
least 4 feet high if approved by the Planning Commission;
            3.   Required tree plantings: 1 deciduous or evergreen tree for
every 75 feet of lot line shared with a residential or park use or zoned
property.
         (d)   In cases where an industrial project abuts a commercial or
office use a 15 foot wide screening area shall be provided. Screening shall
include a wall or fence of 6 feet in height and 1 deciduous tree or evergreen
tree per 75 feet of linear distance of shared lot line.
      (6)   Building fronts and interior grounds. Interior landscaping areas,
constituting at least 5% of the total building main floor area, shall be
provided in every nonresidential development or residential development with
attached dwelling units, except in the CBD District. Interior landscaping
should be grouped near building entrances, along building foundations, along
pedestrian walkways and along service areas in accordance with the following
standards:
         (a)   One deciduous or 1 evergreen tree shall be required for every
1,000 square feet of required interior landscaping area.
         (b)   One shrub shall be required for every 250 square feet of
required interior landscaping area.
         (c)   The interior landscaping area shall contain grass, ground cover,
or 4 inch deep shredded bark.
      (7)   Solid waste dumpsters. Solid waste dumpsters and recycling storage
containers may be located on a commercial, industrial, or multiple family
properties, provided that they are screened on all sides by a continuous opaque
fence at least 6 feet high.
Access to the dumpster shall be via a latching opaque gate that shall remain
closed when the dumpster is not being serviced. Acceptable gate enclosure
materials include wood and chain link fencing with privacy slats. Acceptable
screening materials include wood, brick, and masonry.
(1993 Code, § 82-460) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 10-11-1999(1); Ord.
passed 3-13-2000; Ord. passed 1-10-2005)
Cross reference:
   Landscape standards for parking areas, see
Appendix F
§ 82-461 SIGNS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of these regulations is to
foster public safety along public and private streets within the community by
assuring that all signs are in safe and appropriate locations. Additionally, to
promote the creation of an attractive visual environment that promotes a
healthy economy by permitting businesses to inform, identify and communicate
effectively; and directing the general public through the use of signs while
maintaining
attractive and harmonious application of signs on the buildings and sites.
   Further, to protect and enhance the physical appearance of the community in
a lawful manner that recognizes the rights of property owners by encouraging
the appropriate design, scale and placement of signs.
   Finally, to have administrative review procedures that are the minimum
necessary to balance the community's objectives and regulatory requirements.
The intent is to ensure consistent enforcement of the sign code; minimize the
time required to review a sign application; and provide flexibility as to the
number and placement of signs so the regulations are more responsive to
business needs while maintaining the community's standards.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this section
shall have the following meaning.
      ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that no longer advertises or identifies a business
establishment, product, use, or activity for a period of at least 180
consecutive days.
      ALTERATION. Any change in copy, color, size or shape which changes the
appearance of a sign, or a change in the position, location, construction, or
supporting structure of a sign.
      ANIMATED SIGN. A sign which has any visible moving part, flashing or
osculating lights, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other
apparent visible movement achieved by any means that alter the sign's
appearance in a manner that is not permitted by these regulations.
      AREA OF SIGN. Refer to measurement standards in division (J), Measurement
Standards.
      AWNING. A shelter extending from the exterior wall of a building and
composed of nonrigid materials except for the supporting framework.
      AWNING SIGN. Any sign painted on or attached to or supported by an
awning.
      BALLOON SIGN. A sign on a balloon's surface or attached in any manner to
the balloon.
      BANNER SIGN. A temporary, lightweight sign not exceeding 50 square feet
that contains a message which is attached or imprinted on a flexible surface
that deforms under light pressure and that is typically constructed of non-
durable materials, including, but not limited to, cardboard, cloth, and/or
plastic.
      BILLBOARD OR POSTER PANEL SIGN. An off-premises sign.
      BUSINESS UNIT. The space within a building occupied by an individual
business. The business unit is equivalent to the tenant space in multi-tenant
buildings.
      BUSINESS. A company, enterprise, or similar organization designed to
provide goods or services to consumers. A business may provide goods or
services to the public or clientele on-site, such as with retail sales, or be
involved in the administration, production, distribution or storage of goods to
be provided at another location, such as with manufacturing. A business may
include any commercial, office, institutional or industrial use.
      CANOPY. A freestanding permanent roof-like shelter not attached to or
requiring support from an adjacent structure.
      CANOPY SIGN. Any permanent sign attached to or constructed underneath a
canopy. The signs are below a projecting structure that extends over the
pedestrian walkway which effectively prevents the wall signs from being visible
to the pedestrian walking under the canopy. See also PROJECTING SIGN.
      CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or
symbols change  manually through placement of letters or symbols on a panel
mounted in or on a track system.
      COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN (CSP). A coordinated plan of all signs, including
exempt and temporary signs for a business, or businesses, located on a
development site. The sign plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
locations, dimensions, colors, letter styles, and sign types of all signs to be
installed on a site.
      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A nonpermanent sign identifying the persons, firms or
business directly connected with a construction project.
      DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A permanent instructional sign located on private
property at or near the public right-of-way, directing or guiding vehicular
traffic onto the property and/or toward parking or other identified locations
on the property.
      DECORATIVE DISPLAYS. Signs or displays including lighting which are a
nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays or
holiday seasons, including religious holidays.
      DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A permanent freestanding sign located on
private property at or near the entrance to the site where a group of stores in
a shopping center or plaza has a common parking lot to serve all stores.
      ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS. A portion of a freestanding or ground sign on
which the copy or symbols change electronically, either through an automatic
programming or other electronic means.
      FOOTCANDLE. A measure of illumination on a surface that is one foot from
a uniform source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the
ground, supported by one or more structural members, with 12  inches or more of
clearance between the bottom of the sign face and finished grade.
      FRONTAGE, PRIMARY. The frontage of any business unit shall include the
elevation(s) facing a public street, facing a primary parking area for the
building or tenants, or containing the primary public entrance(s) to the
building or business units.
      FRONTAGE, SECONDARY. The secondary frontage shall include those frontages
containing secondary public entrances to the building or business units, and
all building walls facing a public street or primary parking area that are not
designated as the primary building frontage.
      GOVERNMENTAL SIGN. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental functions, or required by law, ordinance or other
governmental regulation.
      GRADE. The level of the site at the property line located at the closest
distance to the sign.
      GROUND SIGN. Any sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the ground,
supported by one or more structural elements with less than 12 inches of
clearance between the bottom of the sign face and finished grade.
      HISTORICAL SIGN. Signs or displays which have historical value to the
community as designated by the Planning Commission.
      ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign for which an artificial source of light is
used in order to make the sign's message readable, including internally and
externally lit signs, and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs.
      INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS. A ground sign located on a property being used for
an institutional purpose, such as a church, school, or governmental office.
      LOGO, LOGOGRAM, OR LOGOTYPE. An emblem, letter, character, pictograph,
trademark, or  symbol used to represent any firm, organization, entity, or
product.
      MURAL. A picture which is painted or otherwise applied directly onto an
exterior surface of a structure. A mural is a sign only if it is related by
language, logo, or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or
service or the identification of any business.
      NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign which was validly installed under laws or
ordinances in effect at the time of its installation, but which is in conflict
with the current provisions of this Code.
      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign normally used for promoting an interest other
than that of a business, individual, products, or service available on the
premises where the sign is located.
      ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign used for promoting a business, individual,
product or service available on the premises where the sign is located.
      POLITICAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS. A temporary sign designed for the
purpose of supporting or opposing a candidate, proposition or other measure at
an election or for any other noncommercial expression not related to the
advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business.
      PORTABLE SIGN. Any movable sign not permanently attached to the ground or
a building which is easily moved or removed using ordinary hand tools.
      PRIVATE STREET. Primary access ways that are intended to provide
vehicular access to multiple commercial businesses and/or ownerships and are
not dedicated as a public thoroughfare.
      PROJECTING SIGN. A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall or
parapet of a building more than 12 inches, with the display surface of the sign
in a plane perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the wall. See
also CANOPY SIGN.
      REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any temporary sign pertaining to the sale, exchange,
lease, rental, or availability of land, buildings, condominium and similar
units, or apartments.
      RESTAURANT MENU SIGN. Any reader board sign for outside display at a
restaurant drive-thru or similar.
      REVOLVING OR ROTATING SIGN. See ANIMATED SIGN.
      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected upon a roof, parapet, or roof-mounted
equipment structure and extending above a roof, parapet, or roof-mounted
equipment structure of a building or structure.
      SIDEWALK SIGN. A temporary sign intended to display messages of a
transitory or temporary nature that is placed on the pedestrian walkway.
      SIGN. Any device, structure, fixture, figure, banner, pennant, flag,
balloon, poster, handbill, flier, painting, streamer, placard, or similar
object consisting of written copy, symbols, logos and/or graphics, designed for
the purpose of identifying or bringing attention to an establishment, product,
goods, services, or other message to the general public. This definition of
sign shall not include any architectural or landscape features that may also
attract attention.
      SIGN FACE. An exterior display surface of a sign including non-structural
trim exclusive of the supporting structure.
      SITE. All the contiguous ground area legally assembled into one
development location which is a zoning lot. A zoning lot is defined as a
permanent parcel (lot of record), multiple lots of record, or a portion of a
lot of record.
      SUBDIVISION SIGN. A ground sign located at the entrance of a residential
subdivision and is affiliated with all the properties or residence within the
development.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that due to the materials, sign structure,
construction, and similar is intended for temporary use and display. Any sign
or sign structure that is not permanently embedded in the ground or not
permanently affixed to a building is considered a temporary sign.
      UNLAWFUL SIGN. Any sign placed without proper approval or permits as
required by this Code at the time of sign placement, or any sign placed
contrary to the terms or time limits of any permit and any applicable
provisions of this Code.
      VEHICLE SIGN. Any sign permanently or temporarily attached to or placed
on a vehicle or trailer.
      WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to the wall of a building or structure in a
plane parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of said wall and does not
project more than 12 inches from the wall. A sign that is painted or applied
directly onto the wall of a structure is considered a wall sign.
      WINDOW, AREA OF. The area of a single window includes all the window
panes in an area that is separated by mullions, muntins, or other dividers
which are less than three inches wide.
      WINDOW SIGN. Any sign viewable through and/or affixed in any manner to a
window or exterior glass door such that it is intended to be viewable from the
exterior beyond the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the window.
   (C)   General standards. The following standards shall apply to all signs in
any zone district.
      (1)   Requirement for permit. Except as expressly provided herein, it is
unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter or relocate any sign without
obtaining zoning approval from the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission
when applicable, issuance of a sign permit as required by the Building
Official, and payment of any applicable fees.
      (2)   Changeable copy by non-electronic means may be utilized on any
permitted sign.
      (3)   Location requirements.
         (a)   No sign shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public
right-of-way or dedicated public easement without permission from the
governmental unit controlling the right-of-way or easement except for a
permitted projecting sign or canopy sign.
         (b)   No sign shall be placed in a location that obstructs the view of
traffic or pedestrians on streets or sidewalks, or the view of persons entering
or exiting the premises. Signs shall not be permitted where they obstruct a
motorist's view of regulatory signs, traffic control devices, or street signs.
         (c)   In order to ensure adequate sight distance, a minimum clear
vision area shall be maintained in accordance with §
82-463. Greater clear vision areas may be required by the Michigan Department
of Transportation or the Eaton County Road Commission in areas subject to their
jurisdiction.
      (4)   Specific dimensional standards. The dimensional standards and
regulations for sign types allowable by zone districts are as follows:
 
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: R-1, R-2, R-T (Single and Two-Family
Residential)
Sign Type     Number   Area          Height       Duration      Illumination
                                     minimum
              1 per                  clearance of
Wall Sign     dwelling maximum 3 sq  8 ft above   permanent     not permitted
              unit     ft            grade where
                                     abutting
                                     sidewalk
                       maximum 18 sq
                       ft. Increase                             permitted in
Institutional 1 per    to 32 sq ft                              accordance
Sign          frontage if located    5 ft         permanent     with
                       along state                              provisions of
                       trunk line or                            division (F)
                       major street
                                                                permitted in
Subdivision   1 per    maximum 32 sq                            accordance
Sign          entrance ft            5 ft         permanent     with
                                                                provisions of
                                                                division (F)
                                                  maximum of
Temporary     1 per    maximum 6 sq               120 days, no
Sign          frontage ft            5 ft         more than 4   not permitted
                                                  displays per
                                                  calendar year
                                                  permitted to
                                                  be installed
                                                  7 days prior
                                                  to
Construction  1 per                               construction
Sign          project  4.5 sq ft     36 inches    and must be   not permitted
                                                  removed 7
                                                  days after
                                                  completion or
                                                  occupancy
                                                  permit issued
 
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: RM-1, RM-2, and MH (Multi-Family
Residential and Mobile Home)
Sign Type Number Sign Area Height Duration Illumination
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: RM-1, RM-2, and MH (Multi-Family Residential
and Mobile Home)
Sign Type     Number       Sign Area    Height       Duration     Illumination
              1 per                     minimum
              building and              clearance of
Wall Sign     1 per        maximum 6 sq 8 ft above   permanent    not permitted
              management   ft per sign  grade where
              office                    abutting
                                        sidewalk
                           maximum 18
                           sq ft.                                 permitted in
                           Increase to                            accordance
Institutional 1 per        32 sq ft if                            with
Sign          frontage     located      5 ft         permanent    provisions
                           along state                            of division
                           trunk line                             (F)
                           or major
                           street
                           Maximum 32
                           sq ft,
                           reduced to
                           maximum 10                             permitted in
              1 per        sq ft when                             accordance
Subdivision   entrance     abutting     5 ft         permanent    with
                           single                                 provisions of
                           family use                             division (F)
                           or Zone
                           District R-
                           1, R-2, R-T
                                                     limited to a
                                                     maximum of
Temporary                  maximum 6 sq              120 days, no
Sign          1 per site   ft           5 ft         more than 4  not permitted
                                                     displays per
                                                     calendar
                                                     year
                                                     permitted to
                                                     be installed
                                                     7 days prior
                                                     to
                                                     construction
Construction  1 per        4.5 sq ft    36 inches    and must be  not permitted
Sign          project                                removed 7
                                                     days after
                                                     completion
                                                     or occupancy
                                                     permit
                                                     issued
Comprehensive Sign Plan allowable as permitted by the Planning Commission
 
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: CBD (Central Business District)
Type Number Area Height Duration Illumination
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: CBD (Central Business District)
Type          Number       Area         Height       Duration     Illumination
                           Primary
                           Frontage:
                           maximum 80%
                           of length of
              subject to   tenant space                           permitted in
              limitations  or building  minimum                   accordance
Wall Sign     of division  frontage     clearance of permanent    with
              (E) Sign     Secondary    8 ft above                provisions of
              Type         Frontage:    grade                     section
              Standards    maximum 80%
                           of length of
                           tenant space
                           or building
                           frontage
                                        minimum
                                        clearance of
              unlimited,                8 ft above
              provided                  grade;                    permitted in
              adjacent                  maximum                   accordance
Projecting    projecting   maximum area height of 12 permanent    with
Sign          signs shall  of 8 sq ft   ft above                  provisions of
              not be                    sidewalk or               section
              closer than               grade,
              15 ft                     maximum
                                        projection 6
                                        ft from wall
              unlimited,
              provided                                            permitted in
              adjacent                  minimum                   accordance
Awning or     awning or    maximum area clearance of permanent    with
Canopy Signs  canopy signs of 2 sq ft   8 ft above                provisions of
              shall not be              the sidewalk              section
              closer than
              10 ft
Freestanding  1 per                     ground 5 ft;              permitted in
or Ground     frontage                  freestanding              accordance
Sign,         upon         32 sq ft     - 20 ft;     permanent    with
including     approval by               minimum                   provisions of
Institutional the Planning              clearance 8               section
Signs         Commission                ft; all must
                           one up to 32              maximum 14
                           sq ft per                 days, limit
Temporary     1 to 4       parcel; 4                 of 6
Sign                       per business              displays per
                           up to 8 sq                calendar
                           ft                        year
Window Sign   subject to limitations of division (E) Sign Type Standards
Comprehensive Sign Plan allowable as permitted by the Planning Commission
 
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: B-1, OS-1, and MX-1 (Neighborhood
Business, Office, and Mixed Use)
Type Number Area Height Location Duration Illumination
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: B-1, OS-1, and MX-1 (Neighborhood Business,
Office, and Mixed Use)
Type          Number    Area      Height    Location    Duration   Illumination
                                  minimum
                                  clearance
                                  8 ft
                        maximum   above
              1 per     100 sq ft grade
              each      or 10% of where                            permitted in
              business  the front abutting                         accordance
Wall Sign     unit      wall      sidewalk; n/a         permanent  with
              occupying area,     cannot                           division (F)
              the       whichever project
              building  is less   beyond
                                  highest
                                  point of
                                  roof or
                                  parapet
                                            minimum 20             permitted in
Institutional 1 per     maximum             ft from                accordance
Sign          frontage  32 sq ft  5 ft      adjacent    permanent  with
                                            residential            division (F)
                                            district
                                            20 ft from             permitted in
Ground Sign   1 per     maximum   5 ft      adjacent    permanent  accordance
              frontage  32 sq ft            residential            with
                                            district               division (F)
                                  20 ft
                                  height;   minimum 100            permitted in
Freestanding  1 per     maximum   minimum   ft from                accordance
Sign          frontage  64 sq ft  clearance adjacent    permanent  with
                                  8 ft      residential            division (F)
                                  above     district
                                  grade
                        1 up to             cannot be   maximum 14
                        32 sq ft            located on  consecu-
                        per                 utility     tive days,
Temporary     1 to 4    parcel; 4           poles,      limit of 6 not
Sign                    per                 street      displays   permitted
                        business            signs,      per
                        up to 8             trees, etc. calendar
                        sq ft                           year
                                                                   permitted in
Restaurant    2 per     100 sq ft 96 inches n/a         permanent  accordance
Menu Sign     drive                                                with
                                                                   division (F)
Window Sign   subject to limitations of division (E) Sign Type Standards
Comprehensive Sign Plan allowable as permitted by the Planning Commission
 
 
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: B-2 and B-3 (Business/Commercial)
Type Number Area Height Location Duration Illumination
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: B-2 and B-3 (Business/Commercial)
Type          Number    Area      Height    Location    Duration   Illumination
                                  minimum
                                  clearance
                                  8 ft
                        maximum   above
              1 per     100 sq ft grade
Wall Sign,    each      or 10% of where                            permitted in
Canopy Sign,  business  the front abutting                         accordance
or Awning     unit      wall      sidewalk; n/a         permanent  with
Sign          occupying area,     cannot                           division (F)
              the       whichever project
              building  is less   beyond
                                  highest
                                  point of
                                  roof or
                                  parapet
                                            minimum 20             permitted in
Institutional 1 per     maximum             ft from                accordance
Sign          frontage  32 sq ft  5 ft      adjacent    permanent  with
                                            residential            division (F)
                                            district
                                            minimum 100            permitted in
              1 per     maximum             ft from                accordance
Ground Sign   frontage  32 sq ft  5 ft      adjacent    permanent  with
                                            residential            division (F)
                                            district
                                  20 ft
                                  height;   minimum 100            permitted in
Freestanding  1 per     maximum   minimum   ft from                accordance
Sign          frontage  100 sq ft clearance adjacent    permanent  with
                                  8 ft      residential            division (F)
                                  above     district
                                  grade
                                  20 ft
              1 per               height;   minimum 100            permitted in
Developmen t  shopping            minimum   ft from                accordance
Identificatio center/   150 sq ft clearance adjacent    permanent  with
n Sign        plaza               8 ft      residential            division (F)
                                  above     district
                                  grade
                        1 up to             cannot be   maximum 14
                        32 sq ft            located on  consecu-
                        per                 utility     tive days,
Temporary     1 to 4    parcel; 4           poles,      limit of 6 not
Sign                    per                 street      displays   permitted
                        business            signs,      per
                        up to 8             trees, etc. calendar
                        sq ft                           year
                                                                   permitted in
Restaurant    2 per     100 sq ft 96 inches n/a         permanent  accordance
Menu Sign     drive                                                with
                                                                   division (F)
Window Sign   subject to limitations of division (E) Sign Type Standards
Comprehensive Sign Plan allowable as permitted by the Planning Commission
 
 
Allowable Signs in Zone Districts: IRO, I-1, I-2 (Industrial)
Type          Number     Area          Height      Duration      Illumination
              1 per each maximum 100   minimum
              business   sq ft or 10%  clearance 8               permitted in
Wall Sign     unit       of the front  ft where    permanent     accordance
              occupying  wall area,    abutting                  with division
              building   whichever is  sidewalk                  (F)
                         less
                                                                 permitted in
Ground Sign   1 per      80 sq ft      8 ft        permanent     accordance
              frontage                                           with division
                                                                 (F)
                         1 up to 32 sq             maximum 14
                         ft per                    consecutive
Temporary     1 to 4     parcel; 4 per n/a         days, limit   not permitted
Sign                     business up               of 6 displays
                         to 8 sq ft                per calendar
                                                   year
Comprehensive Signs permitted as granted by the Planning Commission in the
Sign Plan     required Comprehensive Sign Plan
Required
 
   (E)   Sign type standards. The following standards for specific sign types
shall apply in addition to the other applicable standards of this section.
      (1)   Wall signs.
         (a)   Any wall sign or combined length of signs shall not be greater
than 80% of the length of the tenant space or the length of the building
frontage for single tenant buildings.
         (b)   The area of any wall sign may be increased by 25% when the
building is setback at least 200 feet from the public right-of-way and may be
further increased an additional 25% for each additional 200 feet of setback, up
to a maximum increase of 100%.
         (c)   Additional wall sign area is permitted for a secondary frontage
(see division (B) - Definitions) which shall be equal to 100% of the primary
sign area allowance.
         (d)   Additional wall signs for multiple story buildings. An
additional building sign is permitted on each of the building's primary and
secondary frontages according to the following:
            1.   For a building with two floors the additional permitted sign
area is 100% of area for each eligible wall.
            2.   This additional permitted sign area may be increased by 50% in
area for each additional building floor.
            3.   The sign must be placed at the height for which the bonus has
been granted.
      (2)   Freestanding or ground signs.
         (a)   One additional freestanding or ground sign shall be permitted
for every 100 feet of site frontage in excess of 200 feet of lot frontage.
         (b)   The permitted sign area may be aggregated into fewer and larger
signs, at the election of the property owner/business, provided that the size
of any single sign does not exceed the area permitted by more than 100%.
         (c)   Electronic message centers are permitted on a freestanding or
ground sign provided they meet the following requirements:
            1.   Only one electronic message center (EMC) is permitted per each
street frontage.
            2.   EMC copy cannot change more often than once every eight
seconds and EMC cannot exceed 50% of the total sign area permitted on the site.
            3.   All EMCs are required to have automatic dimming capability
that adjusts the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and
night.
            4.   No single electronic message is permitted to be repeated by
flashing more than once every 16 seconds.
      (3)   Temporary signs.
         (a)   Except as described in divisions (E)(3)(a)1. and 2. of this
section, signs that meet the standards of this division shall comply with
standards listed in division (C)(4) of this section, General Standards,
Specific Dimensional Standards including, but not limited to, sign area,
setback and height for the applicable zone district.
            1.   Sidewalk signs shall not exceed 2.5 feet by 3 feet in size and
may only be permitted in the Central Business District provided they are
located so as not to interfere with pedestrian passage or create a public
safety hazard and must be removed at the close of the business day.
            2.   Temporary signs in shopping centers, plazas or similar multi
tenant sites shall be limited to spaces controlled by the tenant and may not be
located in any common areas. Temporary signs in such sites are prohibited from
being placed in the required front-yard setback.
         (b)   Where an existing permanent sign exists, no single temporary
sign on a site shall exceed 10% of the smaller of either the wall sign area or
freestanding sign area. The total area of all temporary signs on a site shall
not exceed 25% of the smaller of either the wall sign area or freestanding sign
area already installed on the site.
         (c)   Temporary signs affixed to the inside of a building's windows
are exempt from the provisions of this division.
         (d)   A banner sign shall not exceed 50 square feet, and is permitted
to be displayed not more than 15 consecutive days and not more than six times
per calendar year.
         (e)   Temporary signs are exempt from obtaining a permit prior to
installation but shall be required to be kept in good condition and shall be
removed when required per ordinance.
   (F)   Illumination standards. Sign illumination shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary shielded
light sources directed solely at the sign, or internal to it.
      (2)   Use of glaring undiffused lights or bulbs shall be prohibited.
Lights shall be shaded so as not to project onto adjoining properties or
thoroughfares.
      (3)   Sign illumination that could distract motorists or otherwise create
a traffic hazard shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Illumination by bare bulbs or flames is prohibited.
      (5)   Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not
attached to a building.
      (6)   Electronic message centers may be permitted subject to division
(E), Sign Type Standards.
   (G)   Sign review procedures.
      (1)   Time limits. All sign applications shall be reviewed for compliance
with these regulations within ten business days from the time a completed
application has been accepted by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   All appeals and variances regarding the sign ordinance will be
heard by the Planning Commission (see division (H) of this section).
      (3)   A Comprehensive Sign Plan (CSP) may be submitted that permits
consideration of unique conditions, flexibility and creativity. Such CSP is
subject to approval by the Planning Commission who may permit additional signs
and/or sign area based on the applicant's demonstration of unique
characteristics of the design, building, and/or site and appropriate
landscaping associated with the freestanding signs. The approval of a CSP
cannot impose more restrictive requirements than permitted by the basic
standards. Once a CSP has been approved subsequent applications for specific
signs on the site shall be approved administratively when the proposed sign is
in compliance with the approved CSP.
   (H)   Construction and safety standards. The construction, erection, safety
and maintenance of all signs shall comply with the adopted State Building Code
and all of the following:
      (1)   Construction and maintenance. Every sign shall be constructed and
maintained in a manner consistent with the building, electrical, or other
construction code provisions and maintained in good structural condition at all
times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved
including all metal parts and supports.
      (2)   Sign safety. All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered
or moved shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so
that they shall be able to withstand wind pressure of at least 20 pounds per
square foot. All signs, including any cables, guy wires or supports shall have
a minimum clearance of four feet from any electric fixture, street light or
other public utility pole or standard.
   (I)   Maintenance standards. All signs shall be maintained in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   The property owner shall maintain signs in good repair and
structurally sound, in compliance with applicable city standards or ordinances,
and in compliance with any building code or property maintenance code
requirements.
      (2)   If the sign is deemed by the Zoning Administrator or designee to be
in an unsafe condition, the owner of the business shall be immediately notified
in writing, and shall respond to the city with a plan to correct the unsafe
condition, remove the unsafe sign, or cause it to be removed within 30 days. If
after 35 calendar days, the conditions have not been corrected through repair
or removal, the sign shall be declared a public nuisance and the Zoning
Administrator may cause the repair or removal of such sign, at the expense of
the property owner or lessee. If the total costs are not paid in full within 60
days of the repairs or removal the amount owed shall be certified as an
assessment against the property owner, and lien upon that property as
prescribed for unpaid real estate taxes.
      (3)   In cases of imminent emergency, the Zoning Administrator may cause
the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice.
      (4)   Repair, re-lettering, or repainting may be done without a permit or
without any payment of fees provided that all of the following conditions are
met:
         (a)   There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or the
mounting of the sign itself;
         (b)   There is no enlargement or increase in any of the dimensions of
the sign or its structure; and
         (c)   The sign is accessory to a legally permitted, conditional, or
nonconforming use.
   (J)   Measurement standards. For all sign types, the following standards are
used to determine the size, area, height, and other dimensional standards.
      (1)   Sign area and dimensions.
         (a)   For a wall sign which is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise
prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area and
dimensions shall include the entire portion within such background or frame.
         (b)   For a wall sign comprised of individual letters, figures or
elements on a wall or similar surface of the building or structure, the area
and dimensions of the sign shall encompass a regular geometric shape
(rectangle, circle, trapezoid, triangle, etc.), or a combination of regular
geometric shapes, which form, or approximate, the perimeter of all elements in
the display, the frame, and any applied background that is not part of the
architecture of the building. When separate elements are organized to form a
sign, but are separated by open space, the sign area and dimensions shall be
calculated by determining the geometric form, or combination of forms, which
comprises all of the display areas, including the space between different
elements. Minor appendages to a particular regular shape, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, shall not be included in the total area of a sign.
         (c)   For a freestanding or ground sign, the sign area shall include
the frame, if any, but shall not include:
            1.   A pole or other structural support unless such pole or
structural support is internally illuminated or otherwise so designed to
constitute a display device, or a part of a display device.
            2.   Architectural features that are either part of the building or
part of a freestanding structure, and not an integral part of the sign, and
which may consist of landscaping, building or structural forms complementing
the site in general.
         (d)   When two identical sign faces are placed back-to-back so that
both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of
the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of
one of the two faces. When the sign has more than two display surfaces, the
area of the sign shall be the area of largest display surfaces that are visible
from any single direction.
      (2)   Sign height.
         (a)   The height of a ground sign or freestanding sign shall be
measured from the base of the sign or supportive structure at its point of
attachment to the ground, to the highest point of the sign. A freestanding or
ground sign on a man-made base, including a graded earth mound, shall be
measured from the grade of the nearest pavement or top of any pavement curb.
         (b)   Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be
measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the
lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.
      (3)   Length of building frontage.
         (a)   The length of any primary or secondary building frontage shall
be the sum of all wall lengths parallel, or nearly parallel to such frontage.
         (b)   For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the wall
and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each such building
frontage.
         (c)   The building frontage for a business unit shall be measured from
the centerline of the walls defining the business unit.
   (K)   Exempt signs. The following signs shall be exempt from regulation
under this section:
      (1)   Any public purpose or public safety sign and any other notice or
warning required by federal, state, or local law, regulation, or resolution,
including directional signs.
      (2)   Works of art that do not include a commercial message, including
murals.
      (3)   Decorative displays provided that the display does not exceed 75
days.
      (4)   Flags of any country, state, municipality, university, college or
school.
      (5)   Building markers, such as historical designations or construction
dates; house or building numbers or names.
      (6)   Historical signs shall not be considered an abandoned sign after
review and designation by the Planning Commission following a public hearing as
required per §
82-33A, Notice.
      (7)   Signs designed and installed so as to be visible only to patrons of
an establishment when they are on the premises of the establishment.
      (8)   Instructional or "way-finding" signs installed by a federal, state,
or local unit of government.
      (9)   Time and temperature signs.
   (L)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited:
      (1)   Abandoned signs, as defined in division (B) of this section.
      (2)   Animated, flashing, rotating signs and festoons as defined in
division (B) of this section, portable changeable copy signs, inflatable signs,
tethered balloons, pennants, flutter flags, searchlights, streamers, exposed
light bulbs, strings of lights, and any clearly similar features, except those
specifically exempt from regulation as decorative displays.
      (3)   Roof signs, as defined in division (B) of this section.
      (4)   Signs located on vacant or unused property except permitted
billboards, including signs on vehicles when the vehicle is parked at a vacant
or unused property.
      (5)   Any sign containing any words, colors, lighting, or symbols that
would cause confusion to pedestrian or vehicular traffic because of their
resemblance to public safety traffic control or direction signals.
      (6)   Signs located on trees, utility poles, public benches or any other
form of public property or within any public right-of-way unless explicitly
permitted by these regulations.
      (7)   Other signs or similar structures that raise concerns for public
safety or welfare substantially similar to those listed above.
   (F)   Non-conforming signs.
      (1)   Non-conforming signs shall be maintained in good condition pursuant
to regulations of division (H), Construction and Safety Standards, and of
division (I), Maintenance Standards, of this section.
      (2)   A non-conforming sign shall not be altered, modified or
reconstructed except:
         (a)   When such alteration, modification or reconstruction would bring
such sign into conformity with these regulations;
         (b)   Any alteration, modification or reconstruction shall be limited
to the replacement of a sign panel, replacing individual letters and logos
within the same area, or repainting a sign face. No changes to the structure,
framing, erection or relocation of the sign are permitted unless such changes
conform to division (F)(2)(a) of this section.
      (3)   Restoration of damage. If a sign or sign structure which is
nonconforming is damaged by any means or in any manner to the extent that the
cost of reconstruction or restoration exceeds one-half (50%) the value of
replacement of the sign or sign structure prior to the damaging occurrence,
such structure may be reconstructed or restored only if its use conforms with
the provisions of this section.
      (4)   Repairs to nonconforming sign. Repair work may be done to
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the structure is
not enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered.
      (5)   Safety repairs. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any structure or part
thereof upon order by an official charged with protecting the public safety.
   (G)   Appeals and variances. The Planning Commission shall hear all appeals
from an administrative decision or variance requests with regard to the sign
regulations of §
82-461 as follows:
      (1)   Appeals may be made where an applicant has been aggrieved by a
decision made by the Zoning Administrator or designee within 21 days of the
decision being rendered. The applicant must submit a written appeal detailing
the nature of the appeal. The Planning Commission may affirm, modify, or
overturn the decision of the Zoning Administrator upon a hearing at a regular
Planning Commission meeting in accordance with §
82-59.
      (2)   Variances may be granted from the regulations contained herein
provided that the Planning Commission shall not permit signs in the right-of-
way or in a location that has been determined to be a violation of required
site distance or a public safety concern. Any request for a variance must be
provided in writing and the hearing will follow the procedures of §
82-59. A request for a variance shall be the minimum necessary to provide
relief to the property owner and the approval for such request shall include
the following:
         (a)   Specific regulations the variance is requested from and relief
sought; and
         (b)   Practical difficulty or unique circumstances which necessitate
the variance.
(1993 Code, § 82-461) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-8-1996(2); Ord.
passed 2-12-1996; Ord. passed 1-11-1999(2); Ord. passed 7-23-2001; Ord. passed
3-11-2002(11); Ord. passed 7-12-2004; Ord. passed 12-12-2005; Ord. passed 7-24-
2006; Ord. passed 9-11-2006; Ord. passed 4-9-2007(2); Ord. passed 4-9-2007(3);
Ord. passed 3-10-2008; Ord. 2022-01, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 82-462 EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the general
area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so
arranged as to reflect lights away from all adjacent residential districts or
adjacent residences.
   (B)   All outdoor lighting in all use districts shall be directed toward and
confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots.
   (C)   All lighting in nonresidential districts used for the external
illumination of buildings, so as to feature the buildings, shall be placed and
shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways
or adjacent property.
   (D)   Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so as not
to interfere with vision of persons on the adjacent highways or adjacent
property.
   (E)   All illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall not be
of a flashing type. Artificial light shall be maintained constant in intensity
and color at all times when in use.
(1993 Code, § 82-462) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-463 CORNER CLEARANCE.
   No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a
height of 2 feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within
the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines
by a straight line drawn between the right-of-way lines at a distance along
each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection, nor shall such
obstruction to vision be permitted at the intersection of any driveway or alley
and a street right-of-way line within a triangular area formed at such
intersection by a straight line drawn between the driveway or alley line and
the street right-of-way line at a distance along each line of 15 feet from
their point of intersection. In those instances where such triangular area
cannot be constructed on the property in question, a 15-foot setback shall be
required between the property line and the driveway or alley. (See
Appendix G)
(1993 Code, § 82-463) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-464 RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAY.
   In all residential districts, so-called entranceway structures, including
but not limited to walls, columns and gates marking entrances to single family
subdivisions or multiple housing projects, may be permitted and may be located
in a required yard, except as provided in §
82-458, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply with all codes
of the city and shall be approved by the Building Department and a permit
issued.
(1993 Code, § 82-464) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-465 FENCES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is in the best interest of all city residents to ensure
attractive and safe neighborhoods. Fence regulations help preserve the
aesthetic quality of the city's neighborhoods while protecting the health,
safety and welfare of all residents.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   The following definitions shall be used in interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter. If a term is not defined herein, the definition
stated in the city's subdivision or zoning regulations shall be used.
      (2)   If the term is not defined in the subdivision or zoning
regulations, the common meaning of the term, as stated in a generally accepted
dictionary, shall be used.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         BUILDING CODE. The current building code adopted and enforced by the
city or its designee.
         CLEAR-VIEW TRIANGLE (CVT). The triangular area near driveways openings
and street intersections intended to provide the required corner clearance, as
described in §
82-463, Corner Clearance.
         FENCE. A structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary,
usually made of posts, boards, chain link, masonry, wire, vinyl or rails, with
a height of at least 24 inches.
         FENCE, ORNAMENTAL. A manmade structure, the surface area of which is
more than 50% open. Ornamental fences do not include chain link fences or
fences of wire construction.
         FINISHED SIDE. The side of a fence that covers the posts and support
structures.
         FRONT YARD. The setback area required by the zoning ordinance for the
zoning district in which the property is located, or the area between the
property line and the principal structure on a parcel, whichever is less. A
corner property has FRONT YARD areas along both street frontages.
         HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the adjacent grade to the highest
portion of a fence.
         REAR YARD. The area of a parcel from the required front yard area or
front of a structure to the back property boundary, and excluding defined side
yard areas.
         RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW). Land dedicated to the public for public use as
streets, utility areas, sidewalks, alleys or pedestrian ways.
         SIDE YARD. The setback area between structures on a parcel and the
side property lines as required by the zoning ordinance for the zoning district
in which the property is located.
   (C)   Permitted fence materials.
      (1)   (a)   All fences shall be constructed in a workman-like manner, and
of generally accepted fencing materials such as painted or treated wood, chain
link, brick, stone, vinyl and wrought iron.
         (b)   Other material that is generally acceptable for fencing shall be
considered as well. The City of Charlotte Zoning Official shall make the
determination as to whether a proposed material is appropriate.
      (2)   No fence shall constitute a blighting influence, nuisance or
hazard.
      (3)   Barbed wire shall not be permitted in a residential zoning
district, and shall be a minimum of six feet high on security fencing in
commercial and industrial areas. Barbed wire must not project over any public
right-of-way.
      (4)   Chain link fences must be constructed so as to have the barbed end
at the bottom of the fence.
      (5)   Fences shall not have any sharp points, nor be electrified nor
carry any charge of electricity intended as a security measure.
   (D)   Residential zoning districts.
      (1)   Residential uses in residential zoning districts shall be permitted
fencing as follows.
         (a)   Front yard. Ornamental fencing, not exceeding 42 inches in
height as measured from the established sidewalk or curb grade may be located
within a front yard. Ornamental fences shall be faced decorative side outward.
Front yard fencing shall not intrude or interfere with any CVT area, as
described in this chapter.
         (b)   Side yard. Fencing shall not exceed six feet, six inches in
height in any side yard area.
         (c)   Rear yard. Fencing shall not exceed six feet, six inches in
height in any rear yard areas.
         (d)   Recorded lots having a lot area in excess of two acres and a
frontage of at least 200 feet are excluded from these regulations.
      (2)   No fence that obstructs view of an intersection or creates a visual
safety hazard shall be permitted. In those cases where a determination is
required, the City of Charlotte Chief of Police or designee shall make such
determination.
         (a)   A CVT shall be required at all intersections and driveways.
         (b)   No fencing shall be permitted in the CVT area.
      (3)   No fence shall be erected where it would unreasonably obstruct the
continued use of, or safe access to any abutting property.
      (4)   In those cases where a fence has an identifiable finished side, the
fence shall be installed so that the finished side faces outward.
   (E)   Commercial, business and industrial zoning districts.
      (1)   All fencing shall meet the requirements of the Building Code.
      (2)   No fence that obstructs view of an intersection or creates a visual
safety hazard shall be permitted.
         (a)   A CVT shall be required at all intersections and driveways.
         (b)   No fencing shall be permitted in the CVT area.
      (3)   No fence shall be erected where it would unreasonably obstruct the
continued use of, or safe access to any abutting property.
      (4)   In those cases where a fence has an identifiable finished side, the
fence shall be installed so that the finished side faces outward.
      (5)   In those cases where screening is required between land uses, the
standards of §
82-467 shall be followed.
   (F)   Swimming pools. All swimming pool fencing shall comply with state
statutory and Building Code requirements.
   (G)   Temporary fences. Temporary fences, including the use of wood or
plastic snow fences to limit the drifting of snow between November 1 and April
1, chain link fences to protect construction and excavation sites, and fences
to protect plants and/or landscaping during construction projects, shall be
permitted without a permit; provided, the fence is not more than five feet in
height
   (H)   Property lines and easement areas.
      (1)   Property lines.
         (a)   Property owners are responsible for locating property
boundaries.
         (b)   A fence may be allowed on a property boundary if written
permission is received from the abutting property owner, and submitted to the
city with the fence permit application.
         (c)   The applicant is responsible for fence maintenance of a fence on
a property boundary. In those cases where the original applicant no longer owns
a property, the current owner of the applicant property will be responsible for
fence maintenance.
         (d)   If written permission is not obtained from the neighboring
property owner, the fence shall be placed a minimum of one foot from the
property boundary.
         (e)   If a neighboring property owner disputes the proposed fence
location due to unknown property boundaries, or if the City of Charlotte Zoning
Official requires one, a certificate of survey from a state-registered land
surveyor shall be required prior to issuance of a fence permit
         (f)   City staff may attempt to assist a property owner in locating
known property boundaries, but this does not constitute a survey if the
boundary is disputed by an abutting property owner.
      (2)   Easement areas.
         (a)   Fencing proposed for easement areas shall be reviewed on a case-
by-case basis to determine its impact on the easement areas.
         (b)   Even if the fence is approved for an easement area by the city,
it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove and replace the
fence should access or maintenance of the easement area be necessary.
         (c)   A fence proposed for an easement area may be denied if it will
obstruct drainage or negatively affect the easement area. A permit may be
issued if the applicant has the written permission of the easement holder.
   (I)   Maintenance.
      (1)   All fences shall be maintained in an upright, vertical condition
and shall not create a blighting influence on the surrounding neighborhood or
area.
      (2)   Maintenance must be done on a regular basis to prevent the fence
from being in a state of disrepair.
      (3)   Failure to maintain or repair a fence, once notified by the city
that maintenance or repairs are necessary, shall constitute a violation of this
section.
   (J)   Permit requirements and fee.
      (1)   Permit requirements.
         (a)   A permit is required when constructing a new fence or extending
an existing fence.
         (b)   A permit is also required when reconstructing more than half of
the linear length of an entire fence.
         (c)   A site plan or plot drawing shall be required before issuance of
a fence permit.
            1.   The plan or drawing shall show the location and dimension of
the fence, location of property line and distance to all structures on the
property.
            2.   The fence height and material shall also be noted on the site
plan, drawing and/or application form.
      (2)   Fee.
         (a)   A fence permit application fee set by City Council from time to
time shall also be required with the fence permit application.
         (b)   This fee shall help cover costs of review of the fence permit
application and is not refundable, even if the fence permit is not approved.
   (K)   Nonconforming fences. Any nonconforming fence may be repaired like-
for-like in height, location and material, up to 50% of the overall linear
footage of the nonconforming section. In no case shall a nonconforming fence be
enlarged or extended, and shall not be replaced except in a conforming manner.
City of Charlotte staff can approve repair to a nonconforming fence under these
criteria.
   (L)   Variances.
      (1)   Conditions of variances. Where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of
this section, a variance may be granted; provided that all the following
conditions are true.
         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific parcel of land involved cause a particular hardship
to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter
of this section were to be carried out.
         (b)   The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based
are unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought, and are not
generally applicable to other property within the same zoning classification.
         (c)   The alleged difficulty or hardship must be caused by this
section and not by any person presently having an interest in the parcel of
land.
         (d)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the neighborhood
in which the parcel of land is located.
         (e)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent properties, will not increase the congestion of the
public streets, will not endanger the public safety; or will not diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (2)   Variance procedures.
         (a)   A person desiring to secure a variance from any provisions of
this section shall fill out and submit to the Zoning Administrator a variance
form, together with the required filing fee as set by the City Council.
         (b)   The fee for the variance application shall be the same as the
fee set by the City Council for a variance from the Zoning Ordinance.
         (c)   Notice of the variance proceedings shall be mailed to adjacent
property owners within 300 feet of the property seeking the variance at least
15 days prior to the variance being heard.
         (d)   The request for variance shall be heard and determined by the
City of Charlotte Zoning Board of Appeals following the required public
hearing.
(1993 Code, § 82-465) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 7-24-1995; Ord.
passed 1-11-1999(3); Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-17-2022)
§ 82-466 FENCES, INDUSTRIAL.
   Industrial fences are permitted as follows.
      (1)   Fences not exceeding 3 feet in height shall be allowed within the
required front yard. All fences shall comply with §
82-463, related to corner clearance.
      (2)   Fences not to exceed 8 feet in height shall be permitted in side
yards, rear yards, and nonrequired front yards. Barbed wire in not more than 3
strands mounted in a wye at the top of the fence shall be permitted, provided
such wye is located to project over the property being fenced.
      (3)   Recorded lots having a lot area in excess of 2 acres and a frontage
of at least 200 feet, and acreage or parcels not included within the boundaries
of a recorded plat, are excluded from these regulations.
      (4)   Fences shall not contain barbed wire, electric current or charge of
electricity.
      (5)   Fences which enclose public or institutional parks, playgrounds, or
public landscaped areas, situated within an area developed with recorded lots,
shall not exceed 8 feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground, and
shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 25% of their total area.
(1993 Code, § 82-466) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-467 WALLS.
   (A)   For those use districts and uses listed below there shall be provided
and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an
obscuring wall as required below, except as otherwise required in subsection
(F) of this section.
Use Requirements
Use                                                                         Requirements
P-1 Vehicular Parking District                                              4'6" high
                                                                            wall
Off-street parking area (other than P-1 Districts)                          4'6" high
                                                                            wall
B-1, B-2, B-3, CBD and OS-1 Districts                                       4'6" high
                                                                            wall
                                                                            4'6" to 8'
                                                                            high wall or
                                                                            fence.
                                                                            Height shall
IRO, I-1, I-2 Districts – open storage areas, loading or unloading areas, provide the
service areas                                                               most
                                                                            complete
                                                                            obscuring
                                                                            wall
                                                                            possible
Auto wash, drive-in restaurant                                              6'0" high
                                                                            wall
Hospital – ambulance and delivery areas                                   6'0" high
                                                                            wall
Utility buildings, stations and/or substations                              6'0" high
                                                                            wall
 
   (B)   The Planning Commission may in its review of site plans for specific
uses allow or require the provision of an earth berm and/or a greenbelt
planting consisting of trees and shrubs to serve as an obscuring wall, where
such obscuring walls are required under this chapter, and where conditions are
such that a more effective and harmonious development with abutting or
neighboring land uses would result. Review and approval shall be required by
the Planning Commission of types of plant materials and their location in such
greenbelt.
   (C)   Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where
underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter
requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential
districts. Upon review of the site plan, the Planning Commission may approve a
reduction in height requirements or may approve an alternate location for the
wall or may waive the wall requirement if in specific cases it would not serve
the purposes of screening the parking area effectively. Required walls may,
upon approval of the Planning Commission, be located on the opposite side of an
alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone
when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the
required wall on a given block will be a major consideration of the Planning
Commission in reviewing such request.
   (D)   Walls and screening barriers shall have no openings for vehicular
traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and
except such openings as may be approved by the Chief of Police and the Building
Official. All walls required in this section shall be constructed of materials
approved by the Building Official to be durable, weather resistant, and
rustproof, and shall be maintained by the property owner or tenant at all times
equal in condition to the completed structure at the time of initial
installation. Walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square
section (height and width) exceed 20% of the surface. Where walls are so
pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the obscuring character
required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement. The arrangement
of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Official.
   (E)   The city may require that suitable maintenance guarantee be provided
for the continued maintenance of walls required under this chapter.
   (F)   The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking
areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential districts shall not
be required when such areas are located more than 200 feet distant from such
abutting residential district.
   (G)   The Board of Appeals may waive or modify the requirements of this
section where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served.
      (1)   In consideration of request to waive all requirements between
nonresidential and residential districts, the Board shall refer the request to
the Planning Commission for a determination as to whether or not the
residential district is considered to be an area in transition and will become
nonresidential in the future.
      (2)   In such cases as the Planning Commission determines the residential
district to be a future nonresidential area, the Board may temporarily waive
wall requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of
subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the Planning Commission
shall make a determination, as described in this section, for each subsequent
waiver prior to the granting of such waiver by the Board. (See
Appendix I.)
(1993 Code, § 82-467) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-468 USE RESTRICTION.
   No portion of a lot or parcel once used in complying with the provisions of
this chapter for yards, lot area per family, density as for a development in
the multiple-family district, or percentage of lot occupancy in connection with
an existing or proposed building or structure shall again be used as part of
the lot or parcel required in connection with any other building or structure
existing or intended to exist at the same time.
(1993 Code, § 82-468) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-469 FRONTAGE ON A PUBLIC STREET.
   No zoning lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless
the lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
This provision shall not apply to mobile home parks which are regulated in
accord with Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 et seq., as
amended.
(1993 Code, § 82-469) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-470 ACCESS TO MAJOR THOROUGHFARE OR COLLECTOR STREET.
   For uses making reference to this section, vehicular access shall be
provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare or collector street.
Provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major
thoroughfare or collector street where such access is provided to a street
where the property directly across the street between the driveway and the
major thoroughfare or collector street is zoned for multiple-family use or any
nonresidential uses, is developed with permanent uses other than single-family
residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, will
be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception
shall apply only if the Planning Commission finds that there are special
circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in
traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare.
(1993 Code, § 82-470) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-471 SITE PLAN REVIEW FOR ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   A nonsealed site plan shall be submitted for the Planning Commission
approval for the following.
      (1)   When, in the opinion of the Building Department a drawing or plan
is needed for proper Planning Commission review.
      (2)   For building additions or accessory buildings in excess of 1,000
square feet in the RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, IRO, I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (3)   Whenever a single family dwelling is converted to a use other than
a two family dwelling and such use would not otherwise require a sealed site
plan by this section and if such use abuts a single or two family dwelling, the
Planning Commission shall review such plan to ensure that the proposed use will
not have an adverse impact on the abutting single family or two family
dwellings. In its review, the Commission may require landscaping, fencing, the
reduction of on-site lighting or similar measures to ensure that the impact of
the proposed use on nearby residents is minimized.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   Reserved.
      (6)   Reserved.
   (B)   A sealed site plan shall be to the City Building Department for the
following:
      (1)   Any new development in an RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, IRO, I-
1 and I-2 Districts;
      (2)   Any expanded use, change of use, building addition or accessory
building in RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, IRO, I-1, or I-2 District which
requires additional off-street parking as required in §
82-455 over and above 15% of that existing;
      (3)   Any nonresidential class A nonconforming use;
      (4)   Any nonresidential use or change of use in the R-1, R-2 or RT
Districts;
      (5)   Any new construction (not including additions) of a non-residential
nature in the R-1, R-2 or RT Districts except single family and two family
dwellings. This shall not include uses which are conducted from a residence
where the business operator lives (i.e. day care, bed and breakfast, home
occupations);
      (6)   Any additions to non-residential structures in the R-1, R-2 or R-
T Districts where the addition exceeds 1,000 square feet or where additional
off-street parking is required over and above 15% of existing parking spaces
provided as required in §
82-455. This shall not include uses which are conducted from a residence where
the business operator lives (i.e. day care, bed and breakfast, home
occupations).
   (C)   Applications for sealed site plan approval for all projects shall
consist of the following.
      (1)   Application form and appropriate fee as adopted by the City
Council.
      (2)   Ten full-size copies of the site plan and 1 reduced copy, no larger
than 11 inches x 17 inches which can be photocopied.
      (3)   A scale of not less than 1 inch = 50 feet if the subject property
is less than 3 acres and 1 inch = 100 feet if 3 acres or more.
      (4)   Date, north point, and written and graphic scale.
      (5)   Legal description; lot line dimensions, tax parcel number(s), and
address of the site.
      (6)   Name and address of the property owner of record, developer, and
any architect, planner, designer, engineer or other licensed professional
responsible for the preparation of the site plan.
      (7)   Vicinity map, showing the location of the site, in relation to the
nearest cross street and section corner.
      (8)   General information about the site:
         (a)   Zoning district of the site and all adjacent properties;
         (b)   Land use of the site and all adjacent properties and buildings
within 100 feet of subject property;
         (c)   Proposed use of the site;
         (d)   Parcel area in acres or square feet, including property line
dimensions;
         (e)   The location of all existing structures on the subject property
and within 100 feet of the subject property, including buildings, drives,
parking areas, wells, septic tanks, drain fields, utilities, poles, ditches,
underground storage tanks, above ground storage areas, and the like;
         (f)   Existing deed restrictions, if any;
         (g)   Location, width and purpose of existing easements;
         (h)   Soil type information;
         (i)   Location and type of natural features on or adjacent to the
site, such as woods, streams, marshes, wetlands, fence rows, individual trees
of 6 inches or larger in caliper when not located in a woods, and the 100 year
flood area;
         (j)   Existing topography on the site.
      (9)   General information about the proposed development on the site:
         (a)   The location of all proposed structures on the subject property
(length and width of all buildings must be labeled);
         (b)   Ground floor and total floor area to be constructed;
         (c)   Floor coverage ratio (ground floor area/lot area);
         (d)   Floor area ratio (total floor area/lot area);
         (e)   Number of buildings;
         (f)   Building height, in feet and number of floors;
         (g)   Required yards and setbacks and corner clearance (delineated on
the plan);
         (h)   Number of parking and loading spaces required and supporting
calculations, including provisions for barrier free spaces;
         (i)   Size of parking spaces, aisles, and angle of proposed parking
spaces with a clear indication of all paved areas;
         (j)   Proposed fences or screens, location, height, type and typical
details;
         (k)   Proposed site lighting location, type, height, intensity,
direction, and other typical details;
         (l)   Proposed deed restrictions, if any;
         (m)   Location and screening of trash storage areas. (Per §
82-460(6)) If no outdoor trash areas are intended, the plan shall so state;
         (n)   Proposed identification and advertising signs location,
dimensions and area, height, illumination, typical copy;
         (o)   Proposed on-site traffic control signs location, type, height;
         (p)   Proposed building address number locations, typical copy,
dimensions.
      (10)   Utilities plan demonstrating the general proposed utility layout
for sanitary sewer, water, storm water, communication (i.e. telephone and cable
TV), electricity, fire hydrants (both on and off site), fire lanes, and natural
gas.
      (11)   Information about the proposed and existing transportation
network:
         (a)   Surface type and right-of-way widths of all existing streets and
alleys abutting the site;
         (b)   Surface type, right-of-way width, easements, location and type
of curbing, length and width of turning lanes, and curve radii for all proposed
drives, alleys and/or streets;
         (c)   The names of all proposed streets, alleys, and drives;
         (d)   Proposed sidewalk and pedestrian paths location, width, surface
types, and typical cross section;
         (e)   Acceleration lanes and traffic pattern.
      (12)   Site grading, drainage, and retention plan, including on-site
elevations for pavements, drives, parking lots, curbs, sidewalks and finish
grade at building except in the R-1, R-2, and RT Districts.
      (13)   Landscape plan showing plant materials to be used in accordance
with §
82-460.
      (14)   In addition to the items listed above, residential development
site plans must also indicate:
         (a)   Number and type of dwelling units;
         (b)   Individual lot dimensions and areas;
         (c)   Number and timing of phases;
         (d)   Proposed location of central mailboxes, if applicable;
         (e)   The location of open and/or recreation areas, if applicable.
      (15)   In addition to the items listed above, multiple family
developments must include the following additional items:
         (a)   Total number of rooms;
         (b)   Total number of dwelling units;
         (c)   Number of dwelling units and bedrooms in each building;
         (d)   Percent of 1 room apartments (efficiencies);
         (e)   Special site features (play areas, pools, and the like), if
applicable;
         (f)   Number and timing of phases;
         (g)   The location of central mailboxes, if applicable.
   (D)   In the process of reviewing the site plan, the Planning Commission
shall utilize the following checklist:
      (1)   The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to
and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and
including acceleration and deceleration lane needs;
      (2)   Needs for service drives (marginal access roads);
      (3)   Parking lot layout, including ingress, egress, and driveway widths;
      (4)   Loading and unloading areas and building service areas;
      (5)   Location and requirements for fences, walls and greenbelts;
      (6)   Special site features such as play areas, pools, and the like;
      (7)   Landscape plans showing size and type of plant materials utilized.
   (E)   Mobile home park site plans shall not be required to follow the
procedures given in subsections (A) through (D) of this section. Review of
plans for mobile home parks shall be conducted in accord with R 325.338 Rule 81
of the Michigan Administrative Code.
   (F)   Approval duration. Following approval of the site plan, the Building
Inspector may issue a building permit upon approval of proper construction
plans and shall insure that the development is undertaken and completed in
accordance with the approved plans. For any approved site plan, building
permits must be obtained encompassing a minimum of 25% of the gross floor area
shown on the site plan within 12 months of the date of site plan approval, or
the site plan shall be deemed null and void, without any further action by the
city. The Planning Commission may, upon application in writing stating the
reasons therefore, extend the 12-month period for an additional period of up to
12 months. Renewal must be requested in writing prior to the expiration of the
site plan approval. The site plan may be renewed twice and the Planning
Commission may require compliance with any ordinances adopted after the
applicant received the original approval.
   (G)   The intent of this subsection is to permit improvement and minor
modification to a conforming use and building which does not meet all of the
site improvement regulations of this chapter. The intent is to permit partial
compliance with the article requirements for site improvements for developed or
partially developed sites which predate the zoning ordinance standards for
landscaping, paving and non- safety site related improvements. Such
improvements or expansions may be permitted by the Planning Commission during
site plan review without a complete upgrade of all site elements under the
following conditions.
      (1)   A finding by the Planning Commission that the applicant is
proposing reasonable site improvements on the overall site in relation to the
scale and construction cost of the building and site improvements or expansion.
For a change in use requiring site plan review, the site shall be brought
toward conformity with the minimum standards of the ordinance as much as
reasonably possible.
      (2)   The applicant has addressed all safety related site issues on the
overall site.
      (3)   (a)   For landscaping, the applicant shall bring the portion of the
site proposed to be changed or expanded into full compliance with current
landscaping requirements of the article. For the remainder of the site where no
changes or expansions are proposed, the applicant shall bring the site toward
conformity with current landscaping standards at twice the rate of the building
or parking lot expansion, whichever is greater. (For example, a site plan
showing a 10% expansion of the building floor area and 15% expansion of the
number of parking spaces shall require a minimum 30% of the landscaping, in
terms of landscaping area and quantity of plants, on the portion of the site
where no changes or expansions are proposed).
         (b)   This landscaping requirement shall apply to the paving of any
portion of an existing gravel parking lot that is 5,000 square feet or greater
in area of the paving of parking lots for uses which require 17 or more parking
spaces in accordance to §
82-455.
      (4)   The improvements of minor expansion shall not increase
noncompliance with site requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   For nonconforming uses or structures in the B-3 zone, the site must
be designated as a class A nonconforming use or structure by the Planning
Commission, as set forth in §
82-453(B), and the site plan must demonstrate compliance with all applicable
class A conditions, as set forth in §
82-453(C).
(1993 Code, § 82-471) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992; Ord. passed 1-8-1996(2); Ord.
passed 4-12-1999; Ord. passed 10-11-1999(2); Ord. passed 3-13-2000;
Ord. passed 10-9-2000(2); Ord. passed 9-10-2001(4))
§ 82-472 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does
not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which
standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained
within such area.
      (1)   Smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater
than that density described as No. 2 on the Ringlemann chart; provided that the
following exceptions shall be permitted.
         (a)   Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not
darker than No. 3 on the Ringlemann chart for a period aggregating 4 minutes in
any 30 minutes.
         (b)   Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not
darker than No. 3 of the Ringlemann chart for a period, aggregating 3 minutes
in any 15 minutes, when building a new fire or when breakdown of equipment
occurs such as to make it evident that the emission was not reasonably
preventable.
      Method of measurement. For the purposes of grading the density of smoke,
the Ringlemann chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of
Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard.
However, the umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated
with the Ringlemann chart.
      (2)   Dust, dirt and fly ash. No person, firm or corporation shall
operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any
process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of
coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating
while using such process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and
approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity
of gasborne or airborne solids of fumes emitted into the open air, which is
operated in conjunction with such process, furnace, or combustion device so
that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains
per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees
Fahrenheit.
      Method of measurement. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of
such devices these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of
excess air in the stack does not exceed 50% at full load. The foregoing
requirement shall be measured by the ASME test code of dust separating
apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely
eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The
Building Official may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to
show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination
of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made.
      (3)   Glare and radioactive materials. Glare from any process, such as or
similar to arc welding, or acetylene torch cutting, which emits harmful
ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any
point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or
hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, including
electromagnetic radiation such as x-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted
to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when
measured at the property line.
      (4)   Fire and explosive hazards.
         (a)   In the I-1 Industrial District, the storage, utilization or
manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate
burning, as determined by the Fire Marshal, is permitted, subject to compliance
with all other performance standards above mentioned.
         (b)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials, goods or
products ranging from free to active burning to intense burning, as determined
by the Fire Marshal, is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard
requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and provided that
the following conditions are met.
            1.   The materials or products shall be stored, utilized or
produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having combustible
exterior walls, which meet the requirements of the Building Code of the city.
            2.   All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40
feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof all such buildings or structures shall
be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with
installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Association.
            3.   The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquified
petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with the state rules and
regulations as established by Public Act 207 of 1941, being M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et
seq., as amended.
      (5)   Noise. The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall
not exceed 60 decibels as measured at the boundary property lines, except where
normal street traffic noises exceed 60 decibels during such periods, the
measurable noise emanating from such premises may equal, but not exceed, such
traffic noises. This provision shall apply in all districts except as specified
in this section for the I Districts.
      I-1 District. In all I-1 Districts, the measurable noise emanating from
the premises used for activities permitted shall not exceed 75 decibels during
the normal work periods of between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and
shall not exceed 70 decibels during the sleeping hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m., as measured at the property lines. Noises shall be muffled so as not to
become objectional due to intermittence, beat frequency or high frequency.
      (6)   Vibration. Machines or operations which cause vibration shall be
permitted in industrial districts, but no operation shall cause a displacement
exceeding 0.003 of 1 inch as measured at the property line.
      (7)   Odors. Creation of offensive odors shall be prohibited.
      (8)   Wastes. All discharges to the city's publicly owned sewage
treatment facility (sanitary sewer system) shall conform to appropriate
regulations in
Chapter 78 relating to sewer services. Mobile home parks shall be governed by
State Department of Health standards.
(1993 Code, § 82-472) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-473 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Intent. An environmental impact assessment (EIA), providing the
information and data specified in this section, in the form described, shall be
required. This section shall not apply to mobile home parks which are under the
jurisdiction of the State Department of Commerce.
      (1)   Whenever a project is proposed by a public agency, or by other
agencies using public funds (excluding city municipal agencies), which
significantly affects the quality of the human environment; or
      (2)   Whenever a project is proposed which, in the opinion of the City
Manager, significantly affects the municipal service systems (transportation,
waste water systems, potable water supply, storm drains, police services, fire
services, library services, solid waste disposal services, emergency medical
services); or
      (3)   When stipulated under the terms of this chapter or other chapters
of this Code; or
      (4)   When required by the Planning Commission in order to assist in
their consideration of a particular development proposal; or
      (5)   When a development proposal is submitted which, in the opinion of
the Planning Commission, constitutes a substantial departure from the intent of
the Master Land Use Plan.
   The requirements contained in this section shall not relieve the project's
sponsor from complying with EIA standards established by other public agencies
having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Submittal and approval requirements. The sponsor of the project shall
submit the following to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Preliminary environmental impact assessment. A preliminary
environmental impact assessment shall be submitted in conjunction with requests
for rezoning or other land development proposals which enable developments
which, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, would require such
submittals. A preliminary environmental impact assessment shall consist of the
applicable information or material required by the following subsections of
this section:
         (a)   Subsection (C), related to physical conditions;
         (b)   Subsection (D), related to project description;
         (c)   Subsection (E), impact analysis, subsections (1) through (4)
inclusive;
         (d)   Other sections or subsection of this chapter as determined by
the City Manager to be particularly important or necessary in order to provide
adequate information regarding a specific rezoning or development proposal.
      (2)   Final environmental impact assessment. A final environmental impact
assessment, including all applicable provisions of this chapter, shall be
submitted in conjunction with applications for site plan approvals, special use
approvals, land development projects, or building permits for developments
which, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, would require such
submittals.
   Prior to granting of building permits for projects covered by this chapter,
provisions satisfactory to the City Council shall be made to assure the
financing and/or installation of all road and utility improvements and the
provision of additional services found, by the environmental impact assessment
process, to be necessary to serve the project.
   (C)   Physical conditions.
      (1)   Legal description of the subject project prepared by a registered
surveyor or civil engineer accompanied by a survey map of the property (scale
1" = 100', unless otherwise provided).
      (2)   Location map (minimum scale 1" = 800') indicating the location of
the subject property in relation to the city's thoroughfare system.
      (3)   Land use and general development plan or schematic of the subject
property (minimum scale 1" = 200') and adjacent properties within 1,000 feet of
its property line. The zoning of properties within this area shall also be
indicated.
      (4)   Site conditions of the subject property (scale 1" = 100', unless
otherwise provided) indicating:
         (a)   Natural features such as streams, trees, bodies of water,
floodplains, soil conditions and topography (maximum 2 foot contour interval);
         (b)   Location and size of existing facilities and utilities
(thoroughfares, water service, sanitary sewer, storm drain, gas lines, electric
lines, and the like).
      (5)   Limitation applicable to the development of the property (if any)
as a result of proximity to airports.
   (D)   Description of intended use with site plans and building elevations.
Final environmental impact assessment shall include:
      (1)   An architectural model, to indicate the scale and massing of
buildings. The requirement for submittal of an architectural model may be
waived by the City Manager when it is determined that the proposed development
will be similar to an existing development available for review, or otherwise
of a nature whereby its scale, massing and potential relationship to adjacent
development can readily be determined without assistance of an architectural
model;
      (2)   Calculation of the quantities of proposed elements or functions of
the development by type: gross and net floor area; number of dwelling units by
type and bedroom count; parking spaces (including handicapped spaces) required
and provided; rights-of- way; landscaped area required and provided, and the
like;
      (3)   Anticipated number of employees, residents, school children by
school type and senior citizens;
      (4)   Anticipated vehicular generation.
   (E)   Project impact analysis. A full analysis and description prepared by
registered engineers, architects, public safety specialists, public facility
specialists, and the like, as applicable, of the proposed project's required
levels of service, as compared to the service levels available, and the means
by which the sponsor intends to serve the project and resolve any potential
deficiencies, relative to the following facility and utility systems and
services.
      (1)   Impact analysis; systems.
         (a)   Thoroughfares. Information should include projections of traffic
volumes generated adjacent to the site as a result of the project to properly
accommodate these volumes.
         (b)   Water service facilities for providing potable water supply,
fire flows and other uses, expressed in average and peak hour needs.
         (c)   Storm drains and retention facilities, including provisions for
retention site landscaping and maintenance.
         (d)   Sanitary sewer, collection and treatment facilities.
         (e)   Solid waste collection, storage and disposal systems.
         (f)   Power, heat and communication systems.
         (g)   School facilities.
         (h)   Transportation facilities and services other than private
automobile. Such project impact analysis and information should take into
account the potential development of adjacent areas which may be developed to
similar intensities.
      The sponsor shall present evidence that he has informed other affected
organizations or agencies of the potential impact of the proposed project on
their facilities and services. In this regard, all communications shall be
submitted from organizations such as power and communications utilities, school
districts, aeronautics authorities, and the like.
      (2)   Impact analysis: services. The sponsor of the proposed development
shall submit information as to the project's impact upon the following service
activities, indicating the steps being taken to alleviate any potential
deficiencies or problems, or to supplement municipal involvement therein:
         (a)   Fire protection and prevention;
         (b)   Public and private safety and security systems;
         (c)   Emergency medical services;
         (d)   Lighting on and adjacent to the site;
         (e)   Recreation and leisure time facilities and activities, including
library services.
      (3)   Impact analysis: economics. Overall analysis or information shall
be presented indicating the public revenue benefits resulting from the proposed
project, as compared to the costs in terms of services and facilities.
      (4)   Impact analysis: natural and social environment. The sponsor of the
proposed development shall submit information and comments which indicate
public advantages and disadvantages unique to the proposed project, or
unavailable except as a result of the project, and shall approach matters such
as, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Environmental improvements (landscaped areas, open space areas,
tree preservation, replacement and enhancement, and other aesthetic benefits);
         (b)   The environmental impact assessment shall contain an indication
of the means by which natural features such as water courses, bodies of water,
stands of trees, and individual trees, apart from stands of trees, having a
caliper of 4 to 10 inches D.B.H., are to be preserved or replaced;
         (c)   Employment opportunities;
         (d)   Service opportunities;
         (e)   Residential opportunities;
         (f)   Recreation and leisure time opportunities.
(1993 Code, § 82-473) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§ 82-474 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   It is the general purpose and intent of the city to carry out the will of
the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to
operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and
intent of the city to provide for such authorization in a manner which will
retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and
aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering
the provisions of this section, attempts have been made to balance these
potentially competing interests and promote the public health, safety and
welfare.
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   Wireless communication facilities shall mean and include all
structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency
spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may
include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers,
telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission
equipment, building, and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not
included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave
facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental
facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which
preempt municipal regulatory authority.
         (b)   Attached wireless communications facilities shall mean wireless
communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as
existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A
wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall
not be included within this definition.
         (c)   Wireless communication support structures shall mean structures
erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support
structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to,
monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles or guyed wires.
         (d)   Co-location shall mean the location by 2 or more wireless
communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common
structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number
of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the
community.
      (2)   Authorization. Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in
this section, wireless communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the
following circumstances, and in the following zoning districts by right:
         (a)   Subject to the standards and conditions set forth below,
wireless communication facilities shall be authorized as a permitted use within
the following zoning districts: I-1 and I-2.
            1.   An existing structure will serve as an attached wireless
communication facility within a nonresidential zoning district, where the
existing structure is not, in the discretion of the Planning Official, proposed
to be either materially altered or materially changed appearance.
            2.   A proposed co-location upon an attached wireless communication
facility which had been preapproved for such co-location as part of an earlier
approval by the city.
            3.   An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless
communication facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-
way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which,
in the discretion of the Planning Official, would materially alter the
structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety
interests.
            4.   A proposed tower in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts subject
to the provisions of (3), "general regulations," and the site plan review
process outlined in §
82-471.
         (b)   Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in this
section, wireless communication facilities shall be authorized as special land
uses within the following zoning districts: OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 and IRO.
         (c)   If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless
communication facility may not be reasonably established as a permitted use
under (a) above, and, is required to be established outside of a district
identified in (b), above, in order to operate a wireless communication service,
then, wireless communication facilities may be permitted elsewhere in the
community as a special land use, subject to the criteria and standards of
subsections (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) below.
      (3)   General regulations.
         (a)   All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be
reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if
approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards
and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be
constructed and maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the
Planning Commission in its discretion.
            1.   Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to
neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
            2.   Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with
the surrounding areas.
            3.   Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable
federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.
            4.   Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed
height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might
result in lower heights.
            5.   The maximum height of a new or modified support structure and
antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable
communication by the applicant (and by other entities to co-locate on the
structure). Towers over 300 feet in height will require a special use permit.
The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching
equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures
within the respective district.
            6.   No support structure shall be located closer than 30 feet to
the property line of any residential district or use, or no closer than equal
to the height of any adjacent residential building, whichever is greater. The
setback of the support structure from any existing or proposed rights-of-way or
other publicly traveled roads shall be no less than the height of the wireless
communication structure.
            7.   Where the proposed new or modified support structure abuts a
parcel of land zoned for a use other than residential, the minimum setback of
the structure, and accessory structures, shall be in accordance with the
required setbacks for main or principal buildings as provided in the zoning
district in which the support structure is located.
            8.   There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure,
for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be
provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and
location determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares
and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the
tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking
facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to
the natural landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the
site.
            9.   The division of property for the purpose of locating a
wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements
and conditions are met.
            10.   Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed
on the roof of a building, it shall be designed, constructed and maintained to
be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment
enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory
building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform with all
district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks.
            11.   The Planning Commission shall, with respect to the color of
the support structure and all accessory buildings, review and approve so as to
minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and
ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly
condition.
            12.   The support system shall be constructed in accordance with
all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils
report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the state. This soils report
shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of soil
conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation
Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics
Commission shall be noted.
            13.   A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement,
shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed
facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous
maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard.
         (b)   Standards and conditions applicable to special land use
facilities. Applications for wireless communication facilities which may be
approved as special land uses shall be reviewed, and if approved, constructed
and maintained, in accordance with the standards and conditions in subsection
(3)(a). In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed
facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of 1 or more of the
following factors:
            1.   Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare;
            2.   Areas of population concentration;
            3.   Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business
centers;
            4.   Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall
buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions;
            5.   Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to
other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate;
            6.   Other specifically identified reason(s) creating facility
need.
         (c)   All proposals shall be reviewed in conformity with the co-
location requirements of this section.
      (4)   Application requirements.
         (a)   A site plan prepared in accordance with §
82-471 shall be submitted, including the location, size, screening and design
of all buildings and structures, including fences and outdoor equipment.
         (b)   The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan
where the support structure is being placed. The purpose of landscaping is to
provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory
buildings and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan
fencing, which is required for protection of the support structure and security
from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities.
         (c)   The application shall include a signed certification by a state-
licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed
structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other
criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in
determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other
facilities.
         (d)   The application shall also include a description of security to
be posted at the time the facility is to be removed when it has been abandoned
or is no longer needed. In this regard, the security shall, at the election of
the applicant, be in the form of:
            1.   Cash;
            2.   Surety bond;
            3.   Letter of credit; or
            4.   An agreement in a form approved by the attorney for the
community and recordable at the office of the Register of Deeds, establishing a
promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a
timely manner as required under this section of the ordinance, with the further
provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of
any costs and attorney's fees incurred by the community in securing removal.
         (e)   The application shall include a map showing existing and known
proposed wireless communication facilities within the city, and further showing
existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within 1 mile
from all borders of the city, which are relevant in terms of potential co-
location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the
extent the information in question is on file with the community, the applicant
shall be required only to update as needed. Any such information which is trade
secret and/or other confidential commercial information which, if released
would result in commercial disadvantage to the applicant, may be submitted with
a request for confidentiality in connection with the development of
governmental policy. M.C.L.A. § 15.243(1)(f). This ordinance shall serve as the
promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request
for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the
attention of the community.
      (5)   Special requirements for facilities proposed to be situated outside
a zoning district in which the facility is permitted by right or special use
permit.
         (a)   For facilities which are not permitted uses under subsection (2)
and proposed to be located outside of a zone identified in subsection (2), an
application shall be reviewed and, if approved, facilities shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with the following additional standards and
requirements.
            1.   At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate
that a location within the district/overlay zone cannot reasonably meet the
coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant.
            2.   Wireless communication facilities shall be of a design such as
(without limitation) a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible
with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general
area, as approved by the city.
            3.   In single-family residential neighborhoods, site locations
shall be permitted on the following sites (not stated in any order of
priority), subject to application of all other standards contained in this
section:
               a.   Municipally owned site;
               b.   Other   governmentally owned site;
               c.   Religious or other institutional site;
               d.   Public park and other large permanent open space areas when
compatible;
               e.   Public or private school site.
      (6)   Co-location.
         (a)   Statement of policy. It is the policy of the city to minimize
the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication
facilities and wireless communication support structures within the community
and encourage the use of existing structures for attached wireless
communication facility purposes. Each licensed provider of a wireless
communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient
facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States
Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number
of wireless communication facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a
result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the city that all users
should co-locate on attached wireless communication facilities and wireless
communication support structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and
intent of this section. If a provider fails or refuses to permit co-location on
a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where co- location is feasible,
the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be
compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic
policy, intent and purpose of the city. The provisions of this subsection are
designed to carry out and encourage conformity with this policy.
         (b)   Feasibility of co-location. Co- location shall be deemed to be
"feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are met:
            1.   The wireless communication provider entity under consideration
for co-location will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation
for co-location;
            2.   The site on which co-location is being considered, taking into
consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to
provide structural support;
            3.   The co-location being considered is technologically
reasonable; for example, the co-location will not result in unreasonable
interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to
the structure, antennas, and the like;
            4.   The height of the structure necessary for co-location will not
be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city, taking into
consideration the several standards contained in this ordinance.
         (c)   Requirements for co-location.
            1.   A special land use permit for the construction and use of a
new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the
applicant demonstrates that a feasible co- location is not available for the
coverage area and capacity needs.
            2.   All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall
be designed and constructed so as to accommodate co-location.
            3.   The policy of the community is for co-location. Thus, if a
party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall
fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and
otherwise feasible co- location, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter
be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered,
expanded or extended in any respect.
            4.   If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless
communication facility fails or refuses to permit a feasible co-location, and
this requires the construction and/or use of a new facility, the party failing
or refusing to permit a feasible co-location shall be deemed to be in direct
violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of the city, and,
consequently such party shall take responsibility for the violation, and shall
be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless communication support
structure within the city for a period of 5 years from the date of the failure
or refusal to permit the co-location. Such a party may seek and obtain a
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if and to the limited extent the
applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context,
shall mean a demonstration that enforcement of the 5 year prohibition would
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless
communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services.
         (d)   Offer of co-location required. An application for a new wireless
communication support structure shall include a letter from the applicant to
all potential users offering an opportunity for co-location.
         (e)   Final approval for a wireless communication support structure
shall be effective for a period of 6 months.
         (f)   Incentive. Review of an application for co-location, and review
of an application for a permit for use of an existing facility shall be
expedited by the city.
      (7)   Removal.
         (a)   A condition of every approval of a wireless communication
facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility
by users and owners upon the occurrence of 1 or more of the following events:
            1.   When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For
purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the
facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of
radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of non-use;
            2.   Six months after new technology is available at reasonable
cost, as determined by the legislative body of the community, which permits the
operation of the communication system without the requirement of the support
structure.
         (b)   The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as
set forth in paragraph (a)(1) above, may be applied and limited to portions of
a facility.
         (c)   Upon the occurrence of 1 or more of the events requiring
removal, specified in paragraph (a)(1) above, the property owner or persons who
had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any
required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and
complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable
condition as reasonably determined by the Planning Official.
         (d)   If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has
not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and
after at least 30 days written notice, the city may remove or secure the
removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and
reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected and/or enforced from
or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing
the facility.
(1993 Code, § 82-474) (Ord. passed 10-11-1999(3); Ord. passed 3-12-2007)
§§ 82-475 – 82-490 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XXII. EXCEPTIONS
§ 82-491 AREA, HEIGHT AND USE EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the following
interpretations and exceptions.
      (1)   Essential services. Essential services serving the city and
essential transportation services authorized by state and federal law shall be
permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the
municipality. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to
be erected for transmission systems defined as all lines conducting electricity
between stations, commonly called high tension towers and lines, shall receive
the review and approval, after a public hearing, of the Board of Appeals. Such
review of the Board of Appeals shall consider abutting property and uses as
they relate to easements, rights-of-way, overhead lines, poles and towers, and
further shall consider injurious effects on property abutting or adjacent
thereto and on the orderly appearance of the city.
      (2)   Voting place. The provisions of this chapter shall not be so
construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting
place in connection with a municipal or other public election.
      (3)   Height limit. The height limitations of this chapter shall not
apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flag poles, public monuments
or wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the Board of Appeals
may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires
authorization as a conditional use.
      (4)   Lot area. Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of
this chapter may be used for any principal use permitted other than conditional
uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter,
permitted in the district in which such lot is located whether or not such lot
complies with the lot area and width requirements of this chapter. Such use may
be made provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed
in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than 1 dwelling
unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit.
      (5)   Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that
adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this
chapter, one- half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered
as part of such lot.
      (6)   Yard regulations. When yard regulations cannot reasonably be
complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of
peculiar shape, topography or due to architecture or site arrangement, such
regulations may be modified or determined by the Board of Appeals.
      (7)   Porches. An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch or paved terrace
may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding 10 feet, but this
shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies.
      (8)   Projections into yards. Architectural features, not including
vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more
than 2 inches for each 1 foot of width of such side yard and may extend or
project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than 3 feet.
      (9)   Access through yards. For the purpose of this chapter access drives
may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to
rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be
considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk,
terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of 9
inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this chapter
not be considered to be a structure and shall be permitted in any required
yard.
      (10)   Lots having water frontage. Those residential lots or parcels
having water frontage and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the
yard on the water side as an open unobscured yard, excepting that a covered
and/or uncovered boat well shall be permitted. Accessory structures shall be
permitted in the setback between the abutting road right-of-way and the main
building providing the front yard setback required in §
82-426 is met.
   (B)   The provisions of subsections (A)(4) through (A)(10) of this section
shall not apply to mobile home parks.
(1993 Code, § 82-491) (Ord. passed 10-12-1992)
§§ 82-492 – 82-495 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XXIII. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 82-496 INTENT.
   The PD Planned Development District is intended to permit the private or
public development or redevelopment of areas throughout the city which shall be
substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the future land use
plan for the city. The reuse and new development patterns of the areas involved
shall provide a desirable environment and shall be harmonious to the general
surrounding uses permitting flexibility in overall development while insuring
adequate safeguards and standards for public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare.
(1993 Code, § 82-496) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
§ 82-497 PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION.
   Application shall be made to the Planning Commission for consideration under
this District. The applicant may be required to submit the following materials
for review and recommendation to the City Council:
      (1)   Property area survey of the exact area being requested;
      (2)   Proof of ownership of land being requested for rezoning;
      (3)   Topographic map of the entire area at a contour interval showing 1
foot changes in elevation. This map shall indicate all natural and man-made
features. (Scale 1 inch = 50 feet);
      (4)   Preliminary plan of the entire area carried out in such detail as
to show the land uses being requested, the densities being proposed where
applicable, the system of collector streets and off- street parking system;
      (5)   Written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the
sponsor indicating the specifics of the development plan as it relates to the
type of dwelling units contemplated and resultant population, the extent of the
nonresidential development and the resultant traffic generated and parking
demands created, and providing supporting documentation such as, but not
limited to, market studies, supporting land use request, and the intended
scheduling of development.
(1993 Code, § 82-497) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
§ 82-498 PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
   Approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council shall be effective for
a period of 3 years. The preliminary plan approval may be extended by the
Council for up to 2 years, upon the request of the applicant. In reviewing and
approving the plan, the following conditions shall be set forth.
      (1)   The preliminary plan shall be reviewed and recommendation shall be
made by the Planning Commission relative to the plan's meeting the general
intent and the requirements of the future land use plan and guidelines for
planned developments.
      (2)   Approval shall be given only after public hearing and shall be
granted by rezoning the area to the PD District. Approval under this section is
based on the plan submitted and the supporting documentation, and the plan,
therefore, is basic to the rezoning.
      (3)   Once an area has been included within the PD District by having
been granted preliminary approval, no development shall take place therein nor
use made of any part thereof, until a final plan has been approved by City
Council.
      (4)   Approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council shall not
constitute approval of the final site plan; however, it shall be deemed as
approval of the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a guide in the
preparation of the final plan.
      (5)   The proposed PD District shall be of such area as to represent a
substantial carrying out of the land use plan, it not being the intention of
this district that an unrelated parcel by parcel rezoning be effectuated.
      (6)   Changes or amendments to the preliminary plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Council. A public hearing may be required if the Council
deems it necessary.
(1993 Code, § 82-498) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
§ 82-499 FINAL PLAN SUBMITTAL.
   A presentation of the final site plan shall be made to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation.
      (1)   A final site plan for the entire area being requested under this PD
District shall be submitted. This plan shall be worked out in detail showing
specific uses, building location, building elevations, off-street parking,
street alignment changes, open spaces, drainage utilities, and other physical
plan details being proposed. The plan may be phased; however, detail relative
to streets, infrastructure, and other items deemed necessary shall be provided
about future phases in order to insure consistency and continuity. Supporting
documentation in the form of building plans and schedules of construction may
also be required.
      (2)   The final plan shall be in substantial compliance with the
Guidelines for Planned Developments of current adoption.
      (3)   The final plan shall reflect the use patterns as approved in the
preliminary plan. Minimum development standards are set forth in §
82-502.
      (4)   A landscape plan shall be submitted with the final plan.
      (5)   Plats, condominium documents, and similarly approved official
documents may be used to satisfy final plan submittal requirements. Final plan,
final plat, and condominium approval may be sought concurrently. Additional
information may be required for final plan approval.
(1993 Code, § 82-499) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
§ 82-500 FINAL APPROVAL.
   Approval of the final plan shall be effective for a period of 2 years. If
development has not commenced in this period, the Planning Commission shall
review progress to date and make a recommendation to the City Council as to
action relative to permitting continuation under original approval. In
reviewing and approving the final plan, the following conditions shall be set
forth.
      (1)   Approval shall be granted by the City Council after review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission. Public hearings may be required on
the final plan.
      (2)   All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public open
spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site.
      (3)   In residential redevelopment areas, any prorated open space shall
be irrevocably committed and retained as open space for park, recreation and
related uses. All such lands dedicated in fee or easement shall meet the
requirements of the City Council.
      (4)   Upon approval by the City Council of this chapter amendment, the
site, building elevations and other development proposals, including the
proposed uses, shall become an integral part of the zoning amendment to the PD
District and for purposes of recordation, shall be referred to as "Planned
Development No.  " which number shall correspond to the number of the amending
ordinance. All proposed plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(1993 Code, § 82-500) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
§ 82-501 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Before approving the plan in either the preliminary or final submittal, the
Planning Commission and the City Council shall determine that:
      (1)   Provisions, satisfactory to the City Council, have been made to
provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the open spaces and
common use areas which are to be provided by the applicant and that maintenance
of such improvements is assured by a means satisfactory of the City Council;
      (2)    The cost of installing all streets, necessary utilities, and other
improvements has been assured by a means satisfactory to the City Council;
      (3)   The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in
conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or amendments requested
shall suspend approval on the overall plan until such changes or amendments
have been reviewed and approved as in the instance of the first submittal;
      (4)   Proceeding with a Planned Development District shall only be
permitted if it is mutually agreeable to the City Council and the developer.
(1993 Code, § 82-501) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
§ 82-502 MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum setback between buildings and/or structures shall be 10
feet.
   (B)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with §
82-455 of the zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Signs shall be in accordance with §
82-461, except no freestanding sign shall exceed 40 square feet per sign face,
and shall not exceed 20 feet in height above grade. Ground signs if used in
lieu of the allowed freestanding sign may have 50 square feet per sign face.
(1993 Code, § 82-502) (Ord. passed 3-10-1997)
ARTICLE XXIV. NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL MX-1 MIXED-USE OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 82-510 MIXED-USE OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   The overlay district, designated MX-1 Mixed-Use Overlay District, is hereby
established.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014)
§ 82-511 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   The purpose of the MX-1 Mixed-Use Overlay District is to:
   (A)   Accommodate mixed-use buildings with neighborhood-serving retail,
service, and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above the
nonresidential space, while allowing that single uses in these buildings are
permissible due to market conditions;
   (B)   Encourage development that exhibits the physical design
characteristics of pedestrian-oriented, storefront-style shopping streets;
   (C)   Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical
activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction; and
   (D)   Encourage the reuse and redevelopment of older and historic
structures, recognizing that amendments to this subchapter may be necessary
from time to time to accommodate this purpose.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014)
§ 82-512 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings specified herein:
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The ratio of a building's gross floor area to the area of
the lot on which the building is located.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two buildings. GROSS FLOOR AREA does not include
basements when at least one-half the floor-to-ceiling height is below grade,
accessory parking (i.e., parking that is available on or off-site that is not
part of the use's minimum parking standard), attic space having a floor-to-
ceiling height less than seven feet, exterior balconies, uncovered steps, or
inner courts.
   MIXED-USE BUILDING. A building that contains at least one floor devoted to
allowed nonresidential uses and at least one devoted to allowed residential
uses.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014)
§ 82-513 APPLICATION TO NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The MX-1 Mixed Use Overlay District is a zoning classification which permits
owners of property within any zone other than R-1 One Family Residential and R-
2 One Family Residential zones to petition City Council to establish an overlay
district, and the district use regulations as set forth herein, on their
property. Upon the filing of such petition, the petition shall be treated as a
request for a zoning change and shall proceed under the Zoning Code in the same
manner as a zoning classification change.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 3-14-2016)
§ 82-514 USES.
   (A)   Uses within the MX-1 Mixed-Use Overlay District. Uses shall be
permitted in accordance with the use table set forth herein. Where indicated
under column P, the use shall be permitted as of right. Where the use is
indicated under column C, the use shall be conditioned upon approval of the
Planning Commission, which conditions and procedures are set forth hereinafter.
The use table is as follows:
USE GROUP
   Use category            P C
      Specific use type
USE GROUP
   Use category                                          P    C
      Specific use type
RESIDENTIAL
   Household Living
      Artist live/work space located above the ground *loor
      Artist live/work space, ground floor                 *
      Dwelling units located above the ground floor   *
      Detached house                                       *
      Multiunit (3+ units Residential)
      Single-room occupancy                                *
      Townhouse                                            *
      Two-flat                                             *
   Group Living
      Assisted living/adult foster care/home for the aged     *
      Group home                                              *
      Nursing home                                            *
      Temporary overnight shelter                             *
      Transitional residences                                 *
      Transitional shelters                                   *
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
      Colleges and universities                          *
      Cultural exhibits and libraries                    *
      Day care                                           *
      Hospital                                                *
      Lodge or private club                                   *
      Public recreation                                  *
      Postal service                                     *
      Public safety services                             *
      Religious assembly                                 *
      School                                                  *
      Utilities and service, minor                       *
      Utilities and service, major                            *
COMMERCIAL
      Adult use                                               *
      Animal services
         Sales and grooming                           *
         Veterinary                                   *
      Drive-through facility                                  *
      Eating and drinking establishments
         Restaurant                                   *
         Tavern                                            *
      Entertainment and spectator sports
         Small (1-149 seats)                          *
      Financial services                                 *
      Food and beverage retail sales                     *
      Gas stations                                            *
      Lodging
         Small (1-16 guest rooms)                     *
      Medical service                                    *
      Office                                             *
      Parking, commercial(non-accessory)                      *
      Personal service, including health clubs and gym   *
      Repair service, consumer, including bicycles       *
      Retail sales, general                              *
INDUSTRIAL
   Manufacturing, Production and Industrial Services
      Artisan (hand tools only; e.g. jewelry or ceramics)     *
OTHER
   Wireless Communications Facilities
      Co-located                                         *
      Freestanding                                            *
   P=  Permitted by right
   C= Conditional use
 
   (B)   Parameters and procedures for conditional uses. Where the use is
determined to be a conditional use, the applicant must seek a permit for such
use by the Planning Commission subject to the conditions imposed in this
section and subject further to such other conditions which in the opinion of
the Planning Commission are necessary to provide adequate protection to the
neighborhood and abutting properties and subject further to Planning Commission
review, including a public hearing, in accordance with §
82-34. Such permit request for conditional use should be filed at the same time
as the petition under §
82-513.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014)
§ 82-515 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   All permitted or conditional uses are subject to the following required
conditions:
   (A)   Indoor/outdoor operations. All permitted uses in the MX-1 District
must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise
expressly authorized. This requirement does not apply to off-street parking or
loading areas, automated teller machines, or outdoor seating areas.
   (B)   Off-street parking.
      (1)   Off-street parking requirements for residential uses shall be the
same as the underlying, non-mixed-use zoning.
      (2)   No off-street parking is required for non-residential uses in MX-
1 Districts unless such uses exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, in
which case off-street parking must be provided for the floor area in excess of
3,000 square feet.
      (3)   Off-street parking spaces must be located to the rear of the
principal building or otherwise screened so as to not be visible from public
right-of-way or residential zoning districts.
   (C)   Transparency.
      (1)   A minimum of 60% of the street-facing building facade between two
feet and eight feet in height must be comprised of clear windows that allow
views of indoor space of product display areas.
      (2)   The bottom of any window or product display window used to satisfy
the transparency standard of division (1) above may not be more than four feet
above the adjacent sidewalk.
      (3)   Product display windows used to satisfy these requirements must
have a minimum height of four feet and be internally lighted.
   (D)   Doors and entrances.
      (1)   Buildings must have a primary entrance door facing a public
sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this
requirement.
      (2)   Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or
businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented plazas, or
courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
   (E)   Vehicle and driveway access. No curb cuts are allowed for lots that
abut alleys.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014)
§ 82-516 AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Commercial establishment size limits. The gross floor area of
commercial establishments in the MX-1 district shall not exceed 15,000 square
feet.
   (B)   Floor-to-floor heights and floor area of ground-floor space.
      (1)   All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-
use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 11 feet.
      (2)   All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-
use building must contain the following minimum floor area:
         (a)   At least 800 square feet or 25% of the lot area (whichever is
greater) on lots with street frontage of less than 50 feet; or
         (b)   At least 20% of the lot area on lots with 50 feet of street
frontage or more.
   (C)   Lot area per unit (density). The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be 750 square feet for mixed-use buildings and 1,000 square feet for all
other buildings.
   (D)   Floor area ratio (FAR). The maximum FAR shall be 4.0.
   (E)   Setbacks.
      (1)   The entire building facade must abut front and street side property
lines or be located within ten feet of such property lines.
      (2)   There is no minimum rear setback except when MX-1 zoned property
abuts R-zoned property, in which case the minimum rear setback required in the
MX-1 zone shall be the same as required for a residential use on the abutting
R-zoned lot.
      (3)   No interior side setbacks are required in the MX-1 District, except
when the MX-1-zoned property abuts R-zoned property, in which case the minimum
side setback required in the MX-1 district shall be the same as required for a
residential use on the abutting R-zoned lot.
   (F)   Building height. The maximum building height shall be 50 feet.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 10-13-2014)
ARTICLE XXV. COMMERCIAL  CANNABIS OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 82-517 TITLE; COMMERCIAL CANNABIS OVERLAY DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   This article shall be known as the “City of Charlotte Commercial Cannabis
Overlay Districts.” The overlay districts, designated as Commercial Cannabis
Overlay District # 1, Commercial Cannabis Overlay District# 2, Commercial
Cannabis Overlay District# 3 (North) and Commercial Cannabis Overlay District #
3 (South) are hereby established.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 82-518 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   The purposes of the Commercial Cannabis Overlay Districts are to:
   (A)   Accommodate the processing, retail sale, testing, and secure
transportation of cannabis I marijuana products within certain districts within
the city limits under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of
2016 (“MMFLA”) as amended, and the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018 (“MRTMA”), as amended.
   (B)   Require concentration of processing, retail sale, testing, and secure
transportation of cannabis/ marijuana products within a smaller geographic area
that may reduce noise, odor, vehicle traffic congestion, excessive parking
needs, and security, fire, and police response.
   (C)   Promote that neighborhood character is preserved, commercial
activities developed and increased, employment opportunities expanded, and
positive planned land use developed.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 82-519 DEFINITIONS.
   See definitions contained in the Charlotte commercial cannabis/marihuana
ordinance used where applicable and are hereby incorporated.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Commercial cannabis/marihuana ordinance, see §§
15-77 through
15-102
§ 82-520 LIMITS ON MARIHUANA OPERATIONS LICENSES AND LOCATIONS; OTHER
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The concentration of any specific use within a smaller geographic area
can be burdensome for reasons of noise, odor, vehicle traffic congestion,
excessive parking needs, security, fire, and police response. It the intent of
this article to ensure that quality of life is not impaired, neighborhood
character is preserved, commercial activities developed and increased,
employment opportunities expanded, and positive planned land use developed.
   (B)   The City Council and Planning Commission are prohibited from waiving
any portion of this article, except where amended by city ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   The maximum number of each type of marihuana operation and
establishment type under the MMFLA and MRTMA permitted in the city is governed
by the applicable zoning district and zoning regulations or as set forth in the
table below and the zoning ordinance. Marihuana operations, facilities and
establishments not specifically authorized in the table are prohibited.
      (2)   Provisions of this section do not apply to the medical use of
marihuana in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act (MMMA).
   (D)   Table of marihuana establishments.
Type of marihuana/cannabis operations   Unlimited number of permitted licenses
and establishments                      within Cannabis Overlay Districts as
                                        designated below
Marihuana retailer/ provisioning center Restricted to Cannabis Overlay
                                        Districts 2-3 (North and South)
Marihuana safety compliance facility    Restricted to Cannabis Overlay District
                                        1
Marihuana secure transporter            Restricted to Cannabis Overlay
                                        Districts 1-3
Marihuana processor                     Restricted to Cannabis Overlay
                                        Districts 1-3 (North and South)
Marihuana grower                        Not permitted
Excess marihuana grower license         Not permitted
Marihuana microbusinesses               Not permitted
Designated consumption establishment    Not permitted
Marihuana related temporary event       Not permitted
No other marihuana/cannabis licenses    Not permitted
permitted
 
   (E)   Cannabis operations and establishment license designations permitted
under this article are governed by type, under division (D) above, and
additional requirements as established under the city commercial cannabis
ordinance (§§
15-77 through
15-102).
      (1)   The operations at a licensed cannabis facility shall be conducted
in compliance with the MMFLA and the MRTMA, and any rules promulgated pursuant
to other laws, rules, and regulations of the State of Michigan and the City of
Charlotte.
      (2)   Cannabis facilities and establishments shall be subject to city
ordinance and the city zoning ordinance, where applicable.
      (3)   Marihuana [cannabis] retail establishment license and provisioning
center (collectively, “retail”). Cannabis retail establishments shall comply
with all of the provisions of the MMFLA and MRTMA and applicable LARA rules and
regulations and city ordinance, as amended.
      (4)   Marihuana [cannabis] processor license. Cannabis processor shall
comply with all of the provisions of the MMFLA and MRTMA and applicable LARA
rules and regulations and city ordinance. The city will restrict locations and
only one cannabis processor licensee under the MMFLA and MRTMA shall be
permitted on one continuous property.
         (a)   All processor operations must be within an enclosed, secured
structure.
         (b)   The location of this establishment shall be permitted up to, but
not beyond, any applicable lot coverage limitations set forth in the city
zoning ordinance.
         (c)   An approved security plan.
         (d)   Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information
as required by the MRTMA, LARA rules, the Marihuana Tracking Act, and all other
applicable laws and regulations.
         (e)   Transfer cannabis and cannabis-infused products only by means of
a secure transporter, or in compliance with LARA rules.
         (f)   Processor shall not produce any products other than useable
cannabis products intended for human consumption.
         (g)   Odor control. Cannabis operations shall be subject to the
provisions of this article and city resolution.
      (5)   Marihuana secure transporter license. Marihuana secure transporter
shall comply with all of the provisions of the MMFLA, MRTMA, and applicable
LARA rules and regulations and city ordinance.
      (6)   Marihuana safety compliance facility license. Marihuana safety
compliance facility shall comply with all of the provisions of the MMFLA and
MRTMA and applicable LARA rules and regulations and city ordinance.
   (F)   Zoning districts permitted for cannabis operations and geographic
boundaries.
      (1)   Special regulations of cannabis operations have been deemed
necessary to limit the intensity and density of this use. Processor, retail
establishments, safety compliance facility, and secure transporter licensees,
shall be a special land use and restricted to and only permitted within the
following city cannabis zoning districts within the permitted geographic
boundaries, identified by legal descriptions and zoning maps, that may be
amended as necessary by city resolution.
         (a)   Cannabis Overlay District #1,
         (b)   Cannabis Overlay District #2,
         (c)   Cannabis Overlay District # 3 (North),
         (d)   Cannabis Overlay District # 3 (South).
      (2)   See Attachment A to Ord. 2023-05, Cannabis Overly District Maps,
sketches, and legal descriptions.
   (G)   Separation distance measurements. The distances described in this
section shall be computed by measuring a straight line from the nearest
property line of the parcel used for the purposes stated in this section to the
nearest property line of the parcel used as a cannabis operations facility.
   (H)   Applicability. The location and co-location of authorized cannabis
operations shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   The following minimum-distancing regulations shall apply to
cannabis operations. Processor and retail licensees shall not be located within
500 feet of a childcare center or a school.
      (2)   Minimum-distancing regulations do not include secure transporters
or safety compliance facilities.
      (3)   A cannabis operations licensee shall not operate at any place in
the city other than the address provided in the application on file with the
City Clerk.
      (4)   Co-location and stacked licenses. There may be only one state
operating license per parcel, except co-location of one retail license and one
processor license are permitted per parcel.
      (5)   Zoning application requirements. Each zoning application shall be
accompanied by a detailed site plan and any information necessary to describe
the proposed use or change of use. Each request shall be considered a new
application, including those for class change, stacking, expansion, transfers
or other modifications that require planning department review or special land
use approval. If more than one use is being requested for a parcel at the same
time (e.g., co-location) only one application shall be processed. Only one
application shall be processed per parcel at a time; once a zoning application
is submitted, any other zoning applications for the same parcel will be
rejected until the first zoning application is decided.
All items must be satisfactorily completed for a zoning application to be
considered eligible for review.
         (a)   Verification. A signed statement by the applicant indicating the
proposed cannabis operations type, including if the proposed type involves co-
location and the number of licenses.
         (b)   Consent. A notarized statement by the property owner that
acknowledges use of the property for a cannabis operations facility and
agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers,
elected officials, employees, and insurers, against all liability, claims or
demands arising out of, or in connection to, the operation of a cannabis
operations facility. Written consent shall also include approval of the owner
and operator for the city to inspect the facility at any time during normal
business hours to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
         (c)   LARA. A copy of official paperwork issued by LARA indicating
that the applicant has successfully completed the prequalification step of the
application for the state operating license associated with the proposed land
use, or proof that the applicant has filed such application for the
prequalification step with LARA, including all necessary application fees.
         (d)   Required LARA cannabis facility plans, and security plans shall
be submitted. Copies of all documents submitted to LARA in connection with the
initial license application, subsequent renewal applications, or investigations
conducted by LARA shall be made available upon request when such information is
necessary and reasonably related to the application review.
      (6)   A comprehensive operation plan for the cannabis establishment which
shall comply with the requirement set forth under the city commercial cannabis
ordinance (§§ 15-77 through 15-102).
      (7)   Site plan. Existing and proposed site changes must be submitted
that demonstrate compliance with this article and city ordinances and codes.
      (8)   Sign and lighting plan. A sign and lighting plan for the exterior
of the building and any interior signs that will be visible to the public from
the public right-of-way shall be submitted with sizes, lighting, and locations.
All lighting fixtures visible to the public shall be identified by location,
type, and intensity.
      (9)   Radius. A map, drawn to scale, containing all childcare centers,
and schools.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 82-521 ODOR CONTROL.
   (A)   No person, tenant, occupant, or property owner, who cultivates, grows,
processes, or uses cannabis for any purpose shall propagate or permit the
emission of objectionable odors that may cause or result in a nuisance to the
public or that endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public, to
emanate from any source on the property to result in such detectable odors that
leave the premises upon which they originated.
   (B)   An odor is per se objectionable if odor is detectable in the ambient
air that is greater than a 7/1 dilution threshold (D/T) for two samples not
less than 15 minutes apart during a one-hour period measured by a field
olfactometer device at the boundaries of the property as determined at the
street right-of-way, or property line.
   (C)   A processor shall install and maintain in operable condition a system
which precludes the emission of objectionable cannabis odor emanating from the
premises.
   (D)   Ventilation, by-product and waste disposal, and water management
(supply and disposal) for the facility shall not produce contamination of air,
water, or soil; or reduce the expected life of the building due to heat and
mold; or create other hazards that may negatively impact the structure and/or
surrounding properties.
   (E)   Air contaminants must be controlled and eliminated by the following
methods:
      (1)   The building must be equipped with an activated air scrubbing and
carbon filtration system that eliminates all air contaminants prior to leaving
the building.
      (2)   Fan(s) must be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to
the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height)
divided by three.
      (3)   The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM.
      (4)   An air scrubbing and filtration system must be maintained in
working order and must be in use at all times. Filters must be changed per
manufacturers’ recommendation to ensure optimal performance.
      (5)   Doors and windows must remain closed, except for the minimum time
length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building.
      (6)   A variance may be granted for an alternative odor control system,
in accordance with the Michigan Mechanical Code, if a mechanical engineer
licensed in the State of Michigan submits a report that sufficiently
demonstrates the alternative system will be equal to or better than the air
scrubbing and carbon filtration system otherwise required.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, AIR CONTAMINANTS means stationary local
sources producing air-borne particulates, heat, odors, fumes, spray, vapors,
smoke or gases in such quantities as to be irritating or injurious to health.
   (G)   A cannabis operation shall not be granted a municipal operating
license until the findings and approvals of this section are completed.
   (H)   Prosecution for violation; civil penalty.
      (1)   Any person or entity failing to comply with this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction or district court citation and
shall be subject to a civil fine as follows: $100 initial violation, $250
second violation, and $500 third (or any subsequent) violation. Municipal civil
infraction violations are made payable at the city Municipal Ordinance
Violation Bureau. Repeat violations are determined based on the date of the
commission of the violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
      (2)   In addition to the remedies described above, the city may institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate
such violation, including injunctive relief.
      (3)   Jurisdiction for district court citations and legal action to
enforce this article, the city code, and state law, vest in the state courts of
Eaton County.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 82-522 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any cannabis business, entity, or person, to
operate within the city’s jurisdiction in violation of this article, MMMA,
MMFLA, MRTMA, LARA rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 82-523 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW, ENVIRONMENTAL; OTHER LAWS REMAIN APPLICABLE.
   (A)   The cannabis facility shall be compliant and subject to all relevant
state law and federal environmental laws and regulations, and city ordinances
and codes that may be adopted and enforced.
   (B)   To the extent the state adopts in the future recodification of the
MMFLA and MRTMA, any additional or stricter law or regulation governing the
sale or distribution of marihuana, cannabis, the recodification, additional or
stricter regulation shall control the cannabis operation of any cannabis
commercial entity in the city. Compliance with any applicable state law or
regulation shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of
any license under this article, and noncompliance with any applicable state law
or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license
issued hereunder.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 82-524 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to the possible denial, suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal of a license under the provisions of this article, any person or
cannabis operation, including, but not limited to, any licensee, manager or
employee of a cannabis commercial entity, who violates any of the provisions of
this article, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and a fine
of $500, or as permitted by law, as established by resolution.
   (B)   In addition, any person, including any person, customer or member of
the public, who violates the provisions of section 4 of the MRTMA, M.C.L. §
333.27954, and who acts in a manner contrary to the acts prohibited therein,
except as may be otherwise provided in M.C.L. § 333.27965, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, to the extent any violation or penalty set
forth herein may be deemed inconsistent with any state law, or inconsistent
with any rule or penalty which is promulgated by the Department, now or
hereafter, including but not limited to those promulgated pursuant to M.C.L. §
333.27958, then the state law or Department rule or penalty shall govern over
the provisions of this article, as determined by state preemption.
   (D)   A violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance, per se. In
addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an
injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate
any violation of this article and such other relief as may be provided by law.
   (E)   Each day on which any violation of this article occurs or continues
constitutes a separate offense, subject to separate sanctions. The paying of a
fine or sanctions under this article shall not exempt the offender from meeting
the requirements of this article.
   (F)   This article shall be administered and enforced by the city or by such
other person(s) as designated by the city.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 8-21-2023)
APPENDIX A: DEFINITION ILLUSTRATIONS
See city offices for images
APPENDIX B: PARKING LAYOUTS
See city offices for images
APPENDIX C: DISTANCE SPACING FOR MULTIPLE DWELLINGS; SIDE YARDS ABUTTING A
STREET
See city offices for images
APPENDIX D: CLUSTER EXAMPLE
See city offices for images
APPENDIX E: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION TERMINOLOGY
See city offices for images
APPENDIX F: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS FOR PARKING AREAS
See city offices for images
APPENDIX G: CORNER CLEARANCE
See city offices for images
APPENDIX H: RESIDENTIAL FENCE SETBACKS
See city offices for images
APPENDIX I: WALLS - TRANSITION DETAILS
See city offices for images
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Statutes Annotated
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED STATUTES ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Section Code Section
M.C.L.A. Section   Code Section
8.3 et seq.        1-2
                   Charter §
15.231 et seq.     1.4;
                   Chapter 2 ;
                   15-84
15.243(1)(f)       82-474
15.261 - 15.275    82-34
                   Charter §
                   4.7; Charter §
15.261 et seq.     8.10;
                   Chapter 2 ;
                   52-2
15.341 et seq.     Charter §
                   4.8
24.201—24.328    66.100
28.451 et seq.     34-293
28.452             34-293
29.1               Chapter 30
29.1 et seq.       82-472
29.41 et seq.      Chapter 30
46.401 et seq.     Charter §
                   11.1
117.1 et seq.      Charter
117.21 et seq.     Charter §
                   1.10
                   Charter §§
117.3(a)           8.7,
                   13.1
117.3(b)           Charter §
                   13.6
                   Charter §§
117.3(c)           13.1,
                   13.3
                   Charter §§
117.3(d)           3.2,
                   3.5,
                   6.1
117.3(e)           Charter §
                   1.3
117.3(f)           Charter §
                   8.2
117.3(g)           Charter §
                   8.1
                   Charter §§
117.3(i)           8.6,
                   8.9,
                   8.21
                   Charter §
                   5.4;
117.3(k)           30-26 ;
                   52-1;
                   66-33
117.3(k)1          Charter §
                   5.1
                   Charter §
117.4a             9.1;
                   Chapter 54
                   Charter §§
117.4a(1)          10.1,
                   10.2
117.4b             Charter §
                   9.1
117.4c             Charter §
                   14.1
                   Charter §
117.4d             9.1;
                   Chapter 54
117.4e(2)          Charter §
                   2.1
117.4f             Charter §
                   14.1
117.4h(1)          Charter §
                   2.1
117.4h(3)          Charter §
                   2.1
117.4h(6)          Charter §
                   2.1
117.4i             1-16
117.4i(c)          Charter §
                   2.1
117.4i(d)          Charter §
                   2.1
117.4i(g)          Charter §
                   3.12
117.4i(j)          Charter §
                   2.1
                   Charter §§
117.4i(k)          1.8,
                   5.6 ;
                   66-33
117.4i(g)          Charter §
                   5.8
117.4j(3)          Charter §
                   2.1
                   Charter §
117.5              9.1;
                   Chapter 54
117.5a             Charter §
                   14.2
117.5b             Charter §
                   5.2
                   Charter §
117.5c             4.3;
                   2-111
117.6 et seq.      Charter §
                   1.2
117.51             1-1
123.51 et seq.     Chapter 38
123.161 et seq.    Charter §
                   14.8
123.361 et seq.    Chapter 50
125.31             Chapter 42
125.31 et seq.     62-34
125.31—125.45    42-26
125.33             82-34
125.71 et seq.     Chapter 22
125.581 et seq.    Chapter 42
125.584            82-6,
                   82-34
125.692            Chapter 22
125.771 et seq.    15-54
125.901 et seq.    Chapter 22
                   2-162,
                   64-2,
                   64-3 ,
125.1401 et seq.   64-12,
                   64-13,
                   64-22,
                   64-23
125.1501 et seq.   Chapter 14
125.1504           14-126
125.1523           14-126
                   22-26,
125.1651—125.168022-27,
                   22-46,
                   22-47
                   82-27,
125.2301 et seq.   82-451,
                   82-469
125.3101           82-5,
                   82-34
125.3306           82-35
125.3601 —125.36082-56
129.12             Charter §
                   7.9
141.101 et seq.    Charter §
                   14.8
141.101—141.138  68-102
141.210            Charter §
                   10.1
                   Charter §
141.421 et seq.    7.1;
                   Chapter 2
141.2101           Chapter 2
                   Charter §§
168.1 et seq.      13.1,
                   13.4
168.30a            Charter §
                   13.12
168.491 et seq.    Charter §
                   13.3
168.492            Charter §
                   13.3
168.544a           Charter §
                   13.6
168.631 et seq.    Charter §
                   13.2
168.644a           Charter §
                   13.6
168.654 et seq.    Charter §
                   1.3
168.706            Charter §
                   13.9
168.851            Charter §
                   13.13
168.852            Charter §
                   13.13
168.861 et seq.    Charter §
                   13.14
168.951 et seq.    Charter §
                   3.12
211.1 et seq.      Charter §
                   8.1
211.2              Charter §
                   8.4
211.7 et seq.      Charter §
                   8.3
211.10 et seq.     Charter §
                   8.4
211.24 et seq.     Charter §
                   8.6
                   Charter §
211.30a            8.9,
                   8.11
211.39             Charter §
                   8.14
211.43b            Charter §
                   7.6
211.44 et seq.     Charter §
                   8.16
211.47             Charter §
                   8.20
                   Charter §§
211.55 et seq.     8.22,
                   8.23
211.691 et seq.    Charter §
                   8.5
211.761 et seq.    54-21
247.183            Chapter 18
247.241 et seq.    Chapter 70
257.1 et seq.      Chapter 66,
                   66-3
257.1—257.923    66-31
257.255            66-2
257.328            66-1
257.605            Chapter 66
257.606            Chapter 66
257.610            Chapter 66
257.624a           6-10
257.624b           6-10
257.625(1)(c)      66-33
257.625            6-10
257.909            66-201
257.951            66-33
259.1 et seq.      2-131
287.290            Chapter 10
324.1101 et seq.   68-1
324.3101 et seq.   68-1 ,
                   68-190
324.80176          6-10
324.81134          6-10
324.82101 et seq.  66-3
324.82127          6-10
330.2031           82-108,
                   82-148
330.2032           82-108,
                   82-148
330.2050           82-108,
                   82-148
333.1101 et seq.   34-422
333.6230           6-10
333.20106          6-10
333.20904          6-10
                   15-76,
333.26421 et seq.  15-81,
                   15-82
333.27101 et seq.  15-81
333.27102          15-81
333.27205(4)       15-84
333.27401(1)(d)    15-84
333.27402(2)(g)    15-85
333.27951 et seq.  15-79,
                   15-81
333.27953(e)       15-78,
                   15-81
333.27954          15-101,
                   82-524
333.27957          15-85
333.27957(1)(c)    15-84
333.27958          15-101, 82-254
333.27958(1)(c)v   15-85
333.27969(3)(d)    15-85
333.27959(7)       15-84
333.27961          15-94
333.27965          15-101, 82-254
338.2301—338.231314-126
338.41 et seq.     46-2
400.60             34-113
400.271 et seq.    Chapter 46
436.701            6-10
436.703            6-10
436.707            6-10
436.1101 et seq.   Chapter 6,
                   34-422
436.1109 et seq.   34-383
436.1703(5)        6-10
436.1703(8)        6-10
436.1703(15)       6-10
445.111 et seq.    Chapter 46
445.371            Chapter 46
480.11 et seq.     66-200
484.2101—484.270118-68
484.2102           58-121
484.3101—484.312058-119,
                   58-121
500.3101           66-1
500.3101—500.317966-1
500.3102           66-1
552.14             34-65
559.101 et seq.    82-4
560.101 et seq.    62-2,
                   82-4
560.259            Chapter 62
600.113(1)         58-116
600.8396           32-5
600.8705           32-3,
                   32-5
600.8707           58-116
600.8709           32-5
600.8727           1-17
                   Charter §§
                   1.6,
                   3.1,
600.9921           3.7,
                   6.5,
                   12.3,
                   13.1
722.1—722.6      6-10
722.111 et seq.    82-108
722.641 et seq.    34-224
722.751 et seq.    34-396
750.01 et seq.     Chapter 34
750.49 et seq.     Chapter 10
750.55             10-1
750.81             34-61
750.92             34-9
750.113            34-109
750.115            34-162
750.145            34-381
750.167            34-193
750.167(1)(c)      34-5
750.167(1)(e)      34-191
750.167(1)(f)      34-218
750.167(1)(h)      34-4
750.167(1)(j)      34-7
750.167(1)(k)      34-8
750.167(1)(l)      34-188
750.167(a)         6-10
750.169            34-192
                   34-186,
750.170            34-353,
                   34-354
750.200 et seq.    Chapter 30
750.213 et seq.    34-355
750.215            34-38
750.222 et seq.    34-316
750.226            34-323
750.227            34-325
750.233            34-318
750.234            34-318
750.235            34-320
750.237            6-10,
                   34-321
750.240            Chapter 30,
                   34-40
750.243a et seq.   34-293
750.271 et seq.    34-112
750.301 et seq.    34-266
750.302            34-266
750.303            34-269
750.304            34-270
750.306            34-271
750.335a           34-216
750.356            34-106
750.359            34-107
750.364            34-108
750.377 et seq.    34-137
750.377a           34-136
750.383a           34-138
750.390            34-63
750.416            34-139
750.448            34-245
750.448 et seq.    34-241
750.449            34-243
750.449a           34-243
750.452            34-242
750.454            34-244
750.479            34-36,
                   34-37
750.493d           34-291
750.520b—750.520g6-10
750.535            34-114
750.540e           34-64
750.546 et seq.    34-161
750.552            34-161
750.561            34-111
752.525            34-192
752.541            34-194
752.542            34-194
752.543            34-196
764.15a            34-65
764.15b            34-65
767.39             34-3
791.265a           82-108
791.502(b)         82-108,
                   82-148
803.222(b)         82-108,
                   82-148
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.     Date Passed   Code Section
—          2-25-1991     82-408,
                           82-409
—          4-23-1991     22-46-
                           22-48
—          6-10-1991     58-116
—          8-22-1991     18-121
                           50-1-
                           50-10,
—          10-28-1991    50-36-
                           50-44,
                           50-56-
                           50-58
—          4-27-1992     66-102
—          9-28-1992     52-72
                           82-1—
                           82-8,
                           82-26—
                           82-35,
                           82-56—
                           82-62,
                           82-81—
                           82-86,
                           82-106—
                           82-110,
                           82-126—
                           82-130,
                           82-146—
                           82-150,
                           82-166—
                           82-170,
                           82-186—
                           82-189,
                           82-206—
                           82-210,
                           82-226—
                           82-230,
                           82-246—
—          10-12-1992    82-250,
                           82-266—
                           82-270,
                           82-286—
                           82-289,
                           82-306—
                           82-318,
                           82-336—
                           82-340,
                           82-356—
                           82-359,
                           82-376—
                           82-378,
                           82-396—
                           82-406,
                           82-426—
                           82-431,
                           82-451—
                           82-455,
                           82-457,
                           82-460—
                           82-473,
                           82-491,
                           85-456,
                           85-458
—          9-27-1993     70-61-
                           70-64
                           50-1-
                           50-10,
—          1-24-1994     50-36-
                           50-44,
                           50-56-
                           50-58
—          5-9-1994(1)   2-101-
                           2-110
—          5-9-1994(2)   62-138,
                           62-139
                           18-101-
                           18-108,
—          8-22-1994     18-122-
                           18-125,
                           18-127-
                           18-129
—          8-22-1994(2)  18-126
—          12-12-1994    82-400
—          3-13-1995     30-91-
                           30-97
—          6-12-1995     32-1-
                           32-7
—          6-12-1995(1)  1-17
                           50-37-
—          6-26-1995     50-39,
                           50-56
—          7-24-1995     82-4,
                           82-465
—          8-28-1995     32-6
—          10-9-1995     34-421-
                           34-425
                           2-102,
—          1-8-1996(1)   2-103,
                           2-106
                           82-56,
—          1-8-1996(2)   82-461,
                           82-471
—          2-12-1996     82-4,
                           82-461
                           50-3,
                           50-4,
—          2-26-1996     50-36,
                           70-64,
                           82-26
—          8-26-1996     66-4
—          1-13-1997(1)  82-108
—          1-13-1997(2)  82-148
—          3-10-1997     82-496-
                           82-502
—          8-11-1997     82-107
—          12-8-1997     22-26
—          2-23-1998     62-34
—          4-27-1998     15-26-
                           15-36
—          5-11-1998     82-4,
                           82-269
—          8-24-1998     66-102
                           58-91,
—          9-14-1998     58-99,
                           58-100
—          9-14-1998(2)  82-455
—          9-14-1998(3)  82-459
—          10-12-1998    82-4,
                           82-288
—          12-14-1998    82-56
—          1-11-1999(1)  82-453
—          1-11-1999(2)  82-461
—          1-11-1999(3)  82-465
—          2-8-1999      2-108
—          4-12-1999     82-471
—          5-10-1999     2-102
—          5-24-1999     70-62
—          7-4-1999      66-102
—          7-12-1999     66-102
                           58-97,
—          9-14-1999(1)  58-101,
                           58-102
—          10-11-1999(1) 82-460
—          10-11-1999(2) 82-471
—          10-11-1999(3) 82-474
—          12-13-1999    66-102
—          12-27-1999    66-102
—          1-10-2000     2-81
                           18-102,
—          2-14-2000     18-103,
                           18-106
—          2-14-2000(2)  66-100,
                           66-102
—          3-13-2000     82-454,
                           82-460
—          6-12-2000     22-49
—          6-12-2000(2)  66-102
—          10-9-2000(1)  62-89
—          10-9-2000(2)  82-471
                           68-1—
                           68-8,
                           68-26—
                           68-32,
                           68-46—
                           68-54,
                           68-66—
                           68-75,
                           68-96—
                           68-102,
—          1-22-2001     68-120,
                           68-121,
                           68-141—
                           68-143,
                           68-156,
                           68-157,
                           68-171—
                           68-176,
                           68-186 ,
                           68-188,
                           68-190—
                           68-195
—          2-12-2001     82-407
—          5-14-2001     82-408,
                           82-409
                           18-1,
                           18-2,
—          5-29-2001     18-36,
                           18-62,
                           18-63,
                           18-68
—          7-23-2001     82-461
—          9-10-2001(3)  82-407
—          9-10-2001(4)  82-471
—          1-14-2002     68-99
—          2-25-2002     74-41
—          3-11-2002(1)  82-408,
                           82-409
—          3-11-2002(2)  82-33
—          3-11-2002(3)  82-4
—          3-11-2002(11) 82-461
—          4-22-2002     2-163
—          5-28-2002     58-91
—          6-10-2002     66-102
—          7-8-2002      22-28
—          8-12-2002     52-1,
                           52-2
—          8-12-2002(2)  64-1-
                           64-10
—          10-14-2002    68-5
—          11-12-2002(1) 58-119-
                           58-141
—          11-12-2002(2) 82-426,
                           82-454
—          12-9-2002     52-74
—          1-13-2003(1)  68-101
                           82-59,
—          1-13-2003(2)  82-357,
                           82-454
—          5-12-2003     22-26,
                           58-116
—          5-27-2003     22-49
                           6-1,
—          7-14-2003     6-2,
                           6-10
                           30-26,
—          9-22-2003     30-27,
                           66-100
—          11-24-2003    54-21
—          1-26-2004     34-219-
                           34-223
—          5-10-2004     58-29
—          7-12-2004     82-4,
                           82-461
—          9-13-2004     6-1,
                           6-10
                           Charter §§
—          11-2-2004     1.3,
                           13.1
—          11-2-2004     Charter §
                           3.2
—          11-2-2004     Charter §
                           3.3
—          11-2-2004     Charter §
                           3.13
—          11-2-2004     Charter §
                           5.7
—          11-2-2004     Charter §
                           9.2
                           66-100,
—          11-22-2004    66-101,
                           66-103
—          12-27-2004    2-179
—          1-10-2005     82-460
—          6-13-2005     82-287,
                           82-288
—          9-26-2005     54-12,
                           54-21
—          12-12-2005    82-461
—          2-13-2006     2-113
                           74-26-
                           74-30,
—          6-26-2006     74-41-74-48,
                           74-56-
                           74-58
—          7-10-2006(1)  10-5
—          7-10-2006(2)  10-6
—          7-10-2006(3)  32-6
—          7-10-2006(4)  34-224
—          7-24-2006     82-461
—          8-14-2006     66-102
—          9-11-2006     82-461
                           82-5,
                           82-6,
                           82-27,
                           82-33A—
—          3-12-2007     82-36,
                           82-56—
                           82-59,
                           82-61,
                           82-81,
                           82-474
—          4-9-2007(1)   82-453
—          4-9-2007(2)   82-461
—          4-9-2007(3)   82-107,
                           82-461
—          6-25-2007     34-225
—          3-10-2008     82-461
                           2-131—
                           2-134,
                           72-1,
—          3-24-2008     72-10—
                           72-12,
                           72-20,
                           72-21,
                           72-30
                           66-31,
—          4-14-2008     66-32,
                           66-100—
                           66-103
                           2-51—
—          7-28-2008     2-59 ,
                           2-66—
                           2-68
                           15-50—
—          9-22-2008     15-60,
                           32-6
                           50-1,
—          10-13-2008    50-4,
                           50-11
                           15-26,
—          12-8-2008     15-33,
                           82-4,
                           82-269
2009-1       2-9-2009      82-108
2009-2       2-23-2009     58-116
2009-3       2-23-2009     52-1,
                           52-2
                           52-26,
                           52-27,
                           52-41—
                           52-46,
2009-4       6-22-2009     52-71—
                           52-74,
                           52-91—
                           52-94,
                           52-100—
                           52-102
Res. 2009-15 7-13-2009     Charter §
                           6.6
2009-05      10-26-2009    2-250—
                           2-252
2009-06      10-26-2009    58-116
2010-01      1-11-2010     10-6
2010-02      8-9-2010      50-12
2010-03      8-9-2010      54-7.5
2010-04      8-9-2010      34-217
2010-05      10-11-2010    66-200,
                           66-201
                           14-26,
2010-06      11-22-2010    14-27,
                           14-33
2011-01      2-28-2011     52-72
2012-01      6-11-2012     82-455
2012-02      5-29-2012     10-4
2012-03      10-8-2012     82-269
                           68-1—
                           68-8,
                           68-26—
                           68-32,
                           68-46—
                           68-54,
                           68-66—
                           68-75,
                           68-96—
2014-01      1-27-2014     68-102,
                           68-120,
                           68-121,
                           68-141—
                           68-143,
                           68-156,
                           68-157,
                           68-171—
                           68-176,
                           68-186—
                           68-196
                           2-57,
2014-02      2-24-2014     2-135—
                           2-141
2014-03      3-10-2014     58-116,
                           58-117
2014-04      9-8-2014      82-454
2014-05      9-8-2014      82-56
2014-06      10-13-2014    82-510—
                           82-516
2015-01      4-13-2015     82-4
2015-02      7-27-2015     54-3
2015-03      10-26-2015    14-120—
                           14-127
2015-04      10-26-2015    30-27
2016-03      3-14-2016     82-513
2016-04      4-25-2016     10-4
                           64-1—
2017-01      2-27-2017     64-10,
                           64-11—
                           64-20
2017-02      3-13-2017     82-288
2017-04      8-28-2017     34-13
2017-07      9-25-2017     6-3,
                           38-2
2017-08      9-25-2017     58-116
2017-09      9-25-2017     64-5
2017-10      10-9-2017     6-10
2018-01      10-8-2018     82-454
                           2-51,
2018-02      6-25-2018     2-52,
                           2-55—
                           2-59
2018-05      9-10-208      82-288
2018-06      11-26-2018    2-161
2019-02      4-8-2019      15-75
2019-03      4-8-2019      34-226—
                           34-229
2019-04      6-10-2019     34-197
2019-05      9-9-2019      66-102
2019-07      10-28-2019    32-6
2019-08      11-12-2019    52-73
2020-03      5-11-2020     10-4
2020-05      7-13-2020     34-293
                           64-2—
2020-09      12-14-2020    64-10,
                           64-12—
                           64-20
2021-01      3-15-2021     58-116
2021-02      3-15-2021     30-27
2021-04      6-7-2021      2-200—
                           2-215
                           2-51,
2021-08      6-17-2021     2-52,
                           2-55,
                           2-60
2021-09      8-16-2021     14-56—
                           14-68
2021-10      8-2-2021      68-99
2021-11      12-6-2021     2-32
2022-01      7-5-2022      82-461
2022-02      8-15-2022     82-107
2022-03      8-1-2022      15-76
2022-04      8-1-2022      52-1,
                           52-2
2022-06      10-17-2022    82-465
                           2-176,
                           2-178—
2022-07      11-10-2022    2-180,
                           2-182,
                           2-184,
                           2-185
2022-08      11-28-2022    32-6, Repeals 34-6
2022-09      1-3-2023      64-21—
                           64-30
2023-01      2-6-2023      66-33
                           64-21,
2023-03      4-3-2023      64-23,
                           64-24
                           30-26—
                           30-31,
                           30-51,
                           30-53,
2023-04      4-17-2023     30-54,
                           30-57,
                           30-59,
                           30-61—
                           30-66
2023-05      8-21-2023     82-517—
                           82-524
2023-06      8-21-2023     15-77—
                           15-102
                           6-3,
2024-01      8-26-2024     6-4,
                           38-2
2024-02      12-9-2024     52-26
                           14-56,
                           14-59,
                           14-60,
2025-01      2-24-2025     14-62—
                           14-65,
                           14-67,
                           14-68
                           14-87—
2025-02      2-24-2025     14-90,
                           14-111
2025-03      4-28-2025     68-172
2025-05      6-23-2025     15-115—
                           15-124
2025-06      5-12-2025     52-1,
                           52-2
2025-07      7-28-2025     10-4
                          
 
 
