CHARLEVOIX, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-7 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 799 of 2019
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING, ENACTING, AND RECODIFYING THE CITY CODE FOR THE CITY OF
CHARLEVOIX, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING THE CODE; AND
PROVIDING WHEN THE CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
THE CITY OF CHARLEVOIX ORDAINS:
WHEREAS, the State of Michigan has authorized recodification as provided for in
MCL 117.5b and the Acts of the Legislature of the State of empower and
authorize the City of Charlevoix to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, the City Council for the City of Charlevoix has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Political
Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form.
THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHARLEVOIX:
SECTION 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Charlevoix,
Michigan."
SECTION 2.   The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Charlevoix,
Michigan," published by American Legal Publishing consisting of Sections 1.1
through 14.11, each inclusive, is adopted.
SECTION 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
SECTION 4.   Such Code shall take effect and be deemed published as of the date
that this Ordinance becomes effective under Michigan Law and the Clerk of the
City of Charlevoix is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code
of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
SECTION 5.   All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing,
acquired, or incurred at the time this ordinance takes effect are saved from
repeal and may be consummated according to the law in force when they commenced
or occurred. This ordinance shall not be construed to affect any prosecution
pending or initiated before the effective date of this ordinance, or initiated
after the effect date for an offense committed before such effective date.
SECTION 6.    Ordinances adopted after February 4, 2019 that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
SECTION 7.    Effective Date: This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30)
days after its enactment.
Ordinance No. 799 was adopted on the 18th day of February, 2019 A.D., by the
Charlevoix City Council as follows:
Motion by:      Perron
Seconded by:      Kalbfell
Yeas:         Kalbfell, Bryan, Hagen, Perron, Oleksy, Cole
Nays:         None
Absent:         None
 
State of Michigan
City of Charlevoix
 
                                                                                                                                               
Joyce M. Golding         Clerk               Luther Kurtz      Mayor
 
CERTIFICATION
I, the undersigned, City Clerk of the City of Charlevoix, Charlevoix County,
Michigan, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of
Ordinance No. 799 of 2019 adopted by the City Council of the City of
Charlevoix, County of Charlevoix, State of Michigan, at a regular meeting held
on February 18, 2019 and published in the Charlevoix Courier on February 22,
2019, the original of which is on file in my office and available to the
public. Public notice of said meeting was given pursuant to and in full
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, being Act 267 of the Michigan Public
Acts of 1876.
Dated: February 19,
2019                                                                             
                                    Joyce M. Golding, City Clerk
CITY CHARTER
for
THE CITY OF CHARLEVOIX
(Elected April 3, 1978)
EFFECTIVE JUNE 5,1978
QUO-NOJ-WON AN-DAH-NOO-KEE-ING BAA-KAD-BEH-NOT-ZEE-ING.
KEEN-NAH-WEH-SAH AN-DAH-NOO-KEE-ING
SHANG-GWOK-O-ZEE-BEENG
BOK-SAN-DAH-NEH-CHEE-ISH-PAN-DAH-MONG
O-GEH-MA-WIN.                           (OTTAWA)
Nature achieves beauty through order. The Citizens of Charlevoix desire to
insure beauty in their lives through the good order of their government.
               Submitted by:
               The Charter Commission
               City of Charlevoix, Michigan
               Elected April 7, 1975
 
               AMENDED
               November 4, 1980
               November 3, 1981
               December 6, 1982
               November 5, 1991
               April 6, 1992
               February 18, 2004
               November 7, 2006
               July 18, 2011
               August 5, 2014
               November 7, 2017
               November 3, 2020
               November 2, 2021
Article I
Establishment of City Government
1.1   City Boundaries
1.2   Ward Boundaries - Alteration Thereof
1.3   Powers - General
1.4   Powers - Scope of
1.5   Powers - Intergovernmental
1.6   Public Welfare
Article II
Form of Government
2.1   Council - Manager Plan
2.2   Council - Membership
2.3   Council - Qualifications
2.4   Council - Terms
2.5   Council - Definition of Vacancy
2.6   Council - Fillings of Vacancies
2.7   Council - Judge of Qualifications
2.8   Council - Oath - Filing Thereof
2.9   Deputy Mayor - Election of
2.10   Mayor - Deputy Mayor - Duties
2.11   Council - Compensation
2.12   Council - Reimbursement
2.13   Council - Property
2.14   Elected Officials - Recall
2.15   Council - Meetings - Minutes and Notices Thereof
2.16   Council - Powers and Limitations
2.17   Council - Investigations
2.18   Council - Overall Control of Municipal Operations
Article III
Administration
3.1   Administration Officials
3.2   Administration Officials - Appointment - Promotion - Compensation
3.3   City Manager - Appointment and Removal
3.4   City Manager - Filling Vacancy
3.5   City Manager - Temporary Absence
3.6   City Manager - Power and Duties
3.7   City Clerk - Appointment - Duties
3.8   City Attorney - Appointment - Duties
3.9   City Treasurer - Appointment - Duties
3.10   City Assessor - Appointment - Duties
3.11   Police Chief - Appointment - Duties
3.12   Fire Chief - Appointment - Duties
3.13   Employee Contracts - Severance Payments
Article IV
Registration, Nominations and Elections
4.1   Electors
4.2   General Election
4.3   Primary Election
4.4   Nomination of Mayor
4.5   Nominations of Council Members
4.6   Primary Election, Number of Candidates
4.7   Election of Mayor
4.8   Election of Council Members
4.9   Elections, Ties
4.10   Special Elections
Article V
Ordinances and Resolutions
5.1   Legislative Power
5.2   Legislation
5.3   Ordinances - Composition - Hearings - Publications
5.4   Ordinances - Emergency
5.5   Ordinance - Penalty
5.6   Ordinance - Effective Date
5.7   Ordinance - Codification
Article VI
Initiative and Referendum
6.1   General Authority
6.2   Commencement of Proceedings
6.3   Petitions
6.4   Procedure after Filing
6.5   Referendum Petitions - Suspension of Effect of Ordinance
6.6   Action on Petitions
6.7   Results of Election
Article VII
General Finances
7.1   Fiscal Year
7.2   Capital Budget
7.3   Previous Capital Budgets
7.4   Publication of Capital Budget
7.5   Adoption of Capital Budget
7.6   Operating Budget
7.7   Summary of Operating Budget
7.8   Public Hearing
7.9   Review of Annual Operating Budget
7.10   Transfer of Appropriations
7.11   Remaining Fund Balances
7.12   Emergency Appropriations
7.13   Expenditure of Funds
7.14   Deposits
7.15   Audits
7.16   System of Accounts
7.17   Contracts and Bids
Article VIII
Taxation
8.1   Taxation - Limit - Collection
8.2   Taxation - Subjects - Rights
8.3   Taxation - Power and Exemptions
8.4   Tax Assessment
8.5   Board of Review
8.6   Board of Review - Powers and Duties
8.7   Board of Review - Notice of Meetings
8.8   Assessment - Notice of Change to Owners
8.9   Board of Review - Meetings
8.10   Board of Review - Appeals
8.11   Board of Review - Second Meeting
8.12   Board of Review - Endorsement of Roll
8.13   Certification to Assessor
8.14   Spreading of the Taxes
8.15   Taxes - Collection of
8.16   Taxes - Due - Liens
8.17   Taxes - Power of Treasurer
8.18   Taxes - Penalties
8.19   Taxes - Payment of
8.20   Tax Roll - Return to County Treasurer
8.21   Protection of Tax Lien
8.22   Tax Collection - County, School and State
8.23   Changes - Additions
Article IX
Special Assessments
9.1   Determination
9.2   Procedure
9.3   Confirmation
9.4   Refund
9.5   Liens
9.6   Changes - Additions
  Article X
Borrowing Power
10.1   Scope of Power
10.2   Bonds - Special Assessments
10.3   Bonds - Issuance of
10.4   Indebtedness Limits
10.5   Use of Bonds - Statement
10.6   Unissued Bonds
Article XI
Franchises
11.1   Franchises - Granting of
Article XII
Utility Franchises and Municipal Ownership
12.1   General Powers
12.2   Management
12.3   Rates
12.4   Disposal of Utility Plants and Property
12.5   Granting of Public Utility Franchises
12.6   Conditions of Public Utility Franchises
12.7   Regulation of Rates
12.8   Use of Public Places by Utilities
12.9   Sale and Assignment of Franchises
Article XIII
Planning and Zoning
13.1   Planning Commission
13.2   Zoning
13.3   Zoning Variances
Article XIV
Transition
14.1   Purpose
14.2   Effective Date
14.3   Initial Election and Terms of Office
14.4   Vacancies
14.5   Terms of Public Officials
14.6   Continuation of Rights - Claims - Contracts, etc
14.7   Continuation of Ordinances, Resolutions and Rules
14.8   Continuation of Boards, Committees and Commissions
14.9   Status of Taxes and Assessments
14.10   Transition Authority
14.11   Submission to Voters; Form of Ballot
ARTICLE I
ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY GOVERNMENT
Section 1.1 CITY BOUNDARIES
   The municipal corporation heretofore established and now existing and known
as “The City of Charlevoix”, shall continue as a municipal corporation under
the same name, and the boundaries of the City existing when this Charter takes
effect shall continue in force until changed in accordance with law.
Section 1.2 WARD BOUNDARIES - ALTERATION THEREOF
   The City of Charlevoix, Charlevoix County, Michigan, shall be divided into
three (3) wards, with their several boundaries described as follows:
(1)   First Ward: All that territory embraced within the corporate limits of
the City of Charlevoix lying Northerly and Easterly of the following described
line:
   BEGINNING at the North extension of the centerline of Grant Street at the
shore of Lake Michigan (on the North side of Pine River Channel); thence
Southerly along the extended centerline of Grant Street to the centerline of
Park Avenue; thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Park Avenue to the
centerline of Sherman Street; thence South along the centerline of Sherman
Street to the centerline of Antrim Street; thence East along the centerline of
Antrim Street to the centerline of Grant Street; thence South along the
centerline of Grant Street to the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue; thence East
along the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue to the centerline of Bridge Street;
thence North along the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of Mason
Street; thence East along the Easterly extension of Mason Street to the shore
of Round Lake; thence Northeasterly to a point in the middle of Round Lake at
the intersection of the Southerly extension of Nettleton Street with the
Easterly extension of Clinton Street; thence Southeasterly to the intersection
of the centerline of the Upper Pine River Channel (Southerly of Park Island)
with Round Lake; thence Southeasterly along said centerline of said Upper
Channel to Lake Charlevoix being the Point of Ending.
(2)   Second Ward: All that territory embraced within the corporate limits of
the City of Charlevoix lying Southerly and Westerly of the following described
line:
   Commencing at the North extension of the centerline of Grant Street at the
shore of Lake Michigan (on the North side of Pine River Channel); thence
Southerly along the extended centerline of Grant Street to the centerline of
Park Avenue; thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Park Avenue to the
centerline of Sherman Street, being the POINT OF BEGINNING of this description;
thence South along the centerline of Sherman Street to the centerline of Antrim
Street; thence East along the centerline of Antrim Street to the centerline of
Grant Street; thence South along the centerline of Grant Street to the
centerline of Hurlbut Avenue; thence East along the centerline of Hurlbut
Avenue to the centerline of Bridge Street; thence South along the centerline of
Bridge Street to the centerline of St. Mary's Drive; thence West along the
centerline of St. Mary's Drive to the centerline of State Street; thence South
along the centerline of State Street to the centerline of Bridge Street; thence
Southwesterly along the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of
Highway M-66; thence Southeasterly along the centerline of Highway M-66 to the
corporate limits of the City of Charlevoix, being the Point of Ending.
(3)   Third Ward: All that territory embraced within the corporate limits of
the City of Charlevoix lying Easterly and Southerly of the following described
line:
   BEGINNING at the centerline of Highway M-66 at the corporate limit of the
City of Charlevoix; thence Northwesterly along the centerline of Highway M-66
to the centerline of Bridge Street; thence Northeasterly along the centerline
of Bridge Street to the centerline of State Street; thence North along the
centerline of State Street to the centerline of St. Mary's Drive; thence East
along the centerline of St. Mary's Drive to the centerline of Bridge Street;
thence North along the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of Mason
Street; thence East along the Easterly extension of Mason Street to the shore
of Round Lake; thence Northeasterly to a point in the middle of Round Lake at
the intersection of the Southerly extension of Nettleton Street with the
Easterly extension of Clinton Street; thence Southeasterly to the intersection
of the centerline of the Upper Pine River Channel (Southerly of Park Island)
with Round Lake; thence Southeasterly along said centerline of said Upper
Channel to Lake Charlevoix being the Point of Ending.
   The City Council shall, by ordinance, when it deems necessary, or when
required by law, alter the boundaries of the several wards of the City.
ANNOTATION: WARD BOUNDARIES REVISED BY ORD. NO. 420, DECEMBER 6, 1982; ORD. NO.
595, April 6, 1992; ORD. NO. 672, February 18, 2002; ORD. NO. 750, July 18,
2011; ORD. NO. 832, May 16, 2022.
Section 1.3 POWERS - GENERAL
   The City has the comprehensive home rule power conferred upon it by the
Michigan Constitution, subject only to the limitations on the exercise of that
power contained in the Constitution and laws of this State or in this Charter.
The City has all other powers which a City may possess under the Constitution
and laws of this State.
Section 1.4 POWERS - SCOPE OF
   The specific mention of particular powers in this Charter shall not be
construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the City stated in this
article.
Section 1.5 POWERS - INTERGOVERNMENTAL
   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more municipal corporations, states or
civil divisions or agencies thereof, or with the United States or any agency
thereof.
Section 1.6 PUBLIC WELFARE
   The City, the City Council and the City Manager shall provide for the public
peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property within the City.
ARTICLE II
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Section 2.1 COUNCIL - MANAGER PLAN
   The form of government provided for in this Charter shall be that known as
the “Council Manager Plan”. Except as otherwise provided by law or by this
Charter, the Council shall have full authority to exercise all powers conferred
upon the City.
Section 2.2 COUNCIL - MEMBERSHIP
   The Council shall consist of six (6) members, two (2) elected from each of
three (3) wards, on a non partisan basis, by the electors of their respective
wards.
Section 2.3 COUNCIL - QUALIFICATIONS
   Members of the Council shall be registered electors of that ward in the City
of Charlevoix from which they are nominated and elected.
Section 2.4 COUNCIL - TERMS
   The Council members shall be elected for a term of two (2) years. The term
of each Council member shall start on the first regular City Council meeting
after their election, except as provided for in Article XIV,
Section 14.3.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 5, 1991.
Section 2.5 COUNCIL - DEFINITION OF VACANCY
   The office of any Council member shall become vacant upon the occurrence of
one or more of the following events:
   a.   Any reason specified by law as creating a vacancy.
   b.   The Council members' death.
   c.   The Council member's resignation tendered to the Council at a regular
meeting and accepted by the Council.
   d.   The Council member's termination of residency in the ward from which
elected, or lack at any time during the term for which elected of any
qualification for the office as prescribed by this Charter or by law.
   e.   The Council member's absence from five (5) consecutive regular meetings
of the Council, or fifty percent (50%) of the regular meetings in any one (1)
calendar year, unless the absences are excused and the reasons entered in the
proceedings of the Council.
   f.   The conviction of the Council member of any felony in any court of any
State of the United States, or in any Federal court.
Section 2.6 COUNCIL - FILLING OF VACANCIES
   When a vacancy occurs on the Council, the Council shall appoint another
person from the ward in which the vacancy occurs to serve for the remainder of
the vacant term. This appointment is to be completed within thirty (30) days of
the time at which the vacancy occurs,
   In the event that three (3) or more vacancies exist simultaneously on the
Council, the Clerk shall call a Special Election as authorized by law, and all
vacancies shall be filled for the remaining portions of the vacant terms.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006. 
Section 2.7 COUNCIL - JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS
   The Council shall be the judge of the continuing qualifications of its
members, and of the grounds causing a vacancy in office. Decisions by the
Council under this section shall be subject to review by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
Section 2.8 COUNCIL - OATH - FILING THEREOF
   Every elected and appointed Council member, before commencing official
duties, shall take and subscribe to the following oath:
“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the constitutions of the
United States of America and the State of Michigan and the Charter of the City
of Charlevoix, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of this office
on behalf of all the citizens of the City, to the best of my ability.”
   The Council member shall file the oath, duly certified by the official
before whom it was taken, in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 2.9 DEPUTY MAYOR - ELECTION OF
   The Council shall elect one (1) of its members to serve as Deputy Mayor at
the organizational meeting of the Council. The Deputy Mayor shall serve until
the next organizational meeting of the Council or until a successor takes
office. If a vacancy occurs in the position of Deputy Mayor, then the Council
shall fill the vacancy at the first meeting after the vacancy occurs.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
Section 2.10 MAYOR - DEPUTY MAYOR - DUTIES
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City. He shall be
President of the Council for all purposes, including those purposes required by
civil or military law, and shall have such other duties as prescribed by this
Charter. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council but have no
vote therein, except in the case of a tie vote of the Council, in which event
the Mayor shall cast the deciding vote. The Mayor shall have no veto power. The
Mayor shall authenticate by signature such instruments as the Council, this
Charter, or the laws of the State or of the United States, may require. The
Deputy Mayor shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor,
or, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Mayor for the balance of the term. During
the temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall not be
disqualified from voting as a member of the Council.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
Section 2.11 COUNCIL - COMPENSATION
   Each Council Member, the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall receive as payment
for services a sum as determined by the local Compensation Commission, which
shall be established in accordance with Public Act 1972, No. 8 as amended.
   Such compensation shall be payable bi weekly or as otherwise determined by
the local Compensation Commission, and except as otherwise provided in the
Charter, shall constitute the only remuneration which may be paid for services
performed by such officers for the discharging of official duties for or on
behalf of the City during their term of office.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 4, 1980 AND AUGUST 5, 2014.
Section 2.12 COUNCIL - REIMBURSEMENT
   The City Council may reimburse a Council member, and/or the Mayor, for any
reasonable expenses incurred on behalf of the City. Claims, supported by
receipts, must be submitted to the Council.
Section 2.13 COUNCIL - PROPERTY
   The Council members and other elected or appointed officials leaving office
shall deliver to the Council within thirty (30) days all City property of every
kind, name, and nature in their custody, which in any way pertains to their
office.
Section 2.14 ELECTED OFFICIALS - RECALL
   Any elected officer provided for in this Charter may be recalled by the
voters of the City in the manner prescribed by law.
Section 2.15 COUNCIL - MEETINGS - MINUTES AND NOTICES THEREOF
   a.   An organizational meeting of the Council shall be held at the first
meeting of the Council after the November General Election. The meeting shall
be held for the purpose of organization at the usual place for holding meetings
of the legislative body of the City, at seven o'clock in the evening (7:00
p.m.), or the first day thereafter that is not a legal holiday, except as
provided in Article XIV. At the organizational meeting, the Council may
consider matters in addition to organizational matters.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
NOTE:
   b.   The regular meetings of the Council shall be held at least twice each
month. These meetings shall be held at the City Hall unless otherwise provided
for by ordinance.
   c.   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the City Clerk upon a
request of the Mayor, or Deputy Mayor, or any three (3) Council members. The
City Clerk shall notify all Council members of any special meeting and the
business to be transacted at that meeting. This notice shall be given to all
Council members in writing at least twelve (12) hours before the time of the
special meeting. Notice shall be served personally or delivered to the
residence of the Council member. However, any special meeting of the Council at
which all members of the Council are present or have, in writing, waived the
notice requirement of this sub section and at which a quorum of the Council is
present, shall be a legal meeting, so long as the other provisions of this
section regarding public notice have been properly completed.
   d.   The City Clerk shall post a notice of the times established for regular
scheduled meetings of the Council in a conspicuous public area of the City Hall
at such times so as to comply with the laws of the State, and in no event fewer
than three (3) days prior to the first (1st) regular scheduled meeting of the
Council. The City Clerk also shall post a notice of all special meetings and
their purposes in a conspicuous public area of the City Hall at such times so
as to comply with the laws of the State, but in no event fewer than twelve (12)
hours prior to the time of the meeting. No business shall be transacted at a
special meeting of the Council except as set forth in the notice of the special
meeting.
   e.   Four (4) Council members shall be a quorum for the holding of all
meetings of the Council, but, in the absence of a quorum, two (2) Council
members may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date. When
reconvening an adjourned meeting, notice of the time and place of that meeting
shall be given in the manner required of a special meeting, as set out in sub
section d, except that in the case of an adjourned regular meeting no statement
of the business to be transacted need be included in the notice.
   f.   The Council may adopt rules and by laws for its procedures that are not
inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State. The Council shall keep
a journal of its proceedings, written in English.   
   g.   The proceedings of the Council shall be published in a local newspaper
of general circulation in the city within ten (10) days after each meeting of
the Council. The publication of a synopsis of these proceedings, prepared by
the City Clerk, showing the substance of each separate action of the Council,
shall constitute compliance with the requirements of this provision.
   h.   All regular and special meetings of the Council and all records of the
municipality shall be open to the public.
Section 2.16 COUNCIL - POWERS AND LIMITATIONS
   a.   Except where authorized by this Charter, no elected official shall hold
any other office or City employment during the term for which elected.
   b.   Upon majority vote of the entire Council, the Council may require the
City Manager to suspend or discharge any City official or employee whom the
City Manager or his subordinates are empowered to appoint or hire. The Council
may offer its opinions and freely discuss with the City Manager anything
pertaining to the appointment, suspension, removal or disciplining of any such
officials or employees.
   c.   The Council and its members shall deal solely through the City Manager
with officials and employees subject to the direction and supervision of the
City Manager. Neither the City Council nor its members, individually, shall
give orders to any such officials or employees, either publicly or privately.
   d.   The Mayor, as President of the Council, may be delegated by the Council
to convey to the City Manager its concerns or its orders with the respect to
the conduct of officials or employees subject to the direction and supervision
of the City Manager, but otherwise the Mayor is bound by the same restrictions
as apply to the Council and its members under “sub section c”, immediately
preceding.
   e.   All Council members, City officials and employees, when engaging in
City business, shall be guided by the conflict of interest laws of the State.
   f.   The Council shall not have the power to sell, divide, lease, partition,
plat, subdivide, or dispose of any City park or cemetery, or any part thereof,
unless specifically approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at
any general or special election, except as provided for in “sub section h” of
this section. 'City park' shall include any property designated as a City park
by official action of Council as a 'City park'. Once property is designated as
a City park, the designation of property as a City park shall not be removed or
changed unless specifically approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon at any general or special election.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2017.
   g.   The Council shall not have the power to sell, divide, lease, partition,
plat, subdivide, or dispose of any City owned interest in real property which
lies within one hundred (100) feet of the water's edge of Lake Michigan, Round
Lake, or Lake Charlevoix, or the connecting waterways, unless specifically
approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at any general or special
election, except as provided for in “sub section h” of this section. This sub
section does not apply to the normal operation of a cemetery.
   h.   The Council may, by a majority vote of the entire Council, when it
deems it in the best public interest, lease for a period of not more than five
(5) years those facilities used in connection with the operation of public
parks and/or beaches, City owned docks with freight storage facilities, and
buildings used in connection with the operation of the City owned airport. The
Council has the power to sell lots and/or plots in any City owned cemetery.
Section 2.17 COUNCIL - INVESTIGATIONS
   The City Council may make investigations into the affairs of the City and
the conduct of any City department, office or agency, and for this purpose may
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the
production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order
issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars
($100.00), or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. The
punitive powers herein stated shall not be exclusive and shall not prejudice
the right to remove officers or discharge employees, and the Council shall have
the power in the name of the City to institute injunctive proceedings, both to
restrain and to enforce performance and observance of the law and ordinances.
Section 2.18 COUNCIL - OVERALL CONTROL OF MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS
   In keeping with its authority to set and control the budget for the City and
its various entities, the Council shall effect management by way of setting
compensation and number of staff in the annual budget and directives it may
give to the City Manager from time to time. When requested by Council, the City
Manager shall promptly report to Council on such management affairs including
but not limited to: the organizational structure of the government; job
descriptions; employee benefits; and, employee compensation.
ANNOTATION: As amended by vote of electors November 2, 2021.
ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.1 ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS
   The administration officials of the City shall be the City Manager, City
Clerk, City Attorney, City Assessor, City Treasurer, Police Chief, and Fire
Chief. The Council may create, combine, separate, or abolish administrative
offices in any manner not inconsistent with law or this Charter, and shall
prescribe the duties thereof, in order to insure the proper operation of the
City government. No action of the City Council, however, shall abolish the
office of the City Manager nor diminish any of the powers of that office as set
forth in this Charter. Except as otherwise herein provided, the qualifications,
duties and compensation of City officers shall be determined by the City
Council.
Section 3.2 ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS - APPOINTMENT - PROMOTION - COMPENSATION
   All appointments, promotions, and compensation of administrative officials
shall be made solely on evidence of merit and fitness.
Section 3.3 CITY MANAGER - APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL
   Upon a majority vote of the entire Council, the City Council shall appoint a
City Manager solely on the basis of professional merit and ability. The Council
may enter into a contract with the City Manager in the customary manner for
such positions. The Council may terminate this contract upon its expiration or
with a vote of not less than 2/3 of the entire Council.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006 AND NOVEMBER 2,
2021.
Section 3.4 CITY MANAGER - FILLING VACANCY
   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of City Manager, or upon his
suspension or removal, the Council, while it is attempting to fill the office,
may appoint an Acting City Manager for a period not to exceed one (1) year,
during which the Acting City Manager shall serve at the will of the Council and
may be immediately removed by majority vote of the entire Council.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 2, 2021.
Section 3.5 CITY MANAGER - TEMPORARY ABSENCE
   When the City Manager is absent from duty, or disabled, a qualified City
administrative official shall be designated by the City Manager to exercise the
powers and perform the duties of the City Manager during his absence or
disability. The City Manager shall file with the City Clerk a list, by name and
title, of three (3) qualified City administrative officials to exercise such
powers and perform such duties. These City administrative officials shall be
listed in the order by which each shall be designated to assume temporarily the
City Manager's duties. During such absence or disability, the Council may
revoke such designation at any time and appoint another City administrative
official to serve until the City Manager shall return or disability shall
cease.
Section 3.6 CITY MANAGER - POWER AND DUTIES
   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative official of the City, and
shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all City affairs
designated to his office by this Charter. The City Manager shall have the
following powers and duties:
   a.   The City Manager shall appoint and, when deemed necessary for the good
of the City, suspend or remove any City employee, except as otherwise provided
by law, this Charter, or personnel rules. The City Manager may authorize any
department head who is subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision
to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that official's
department, office, or agency.
   b.   The City Manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by
law or this Charter.
   c.   The City Manager shall attend all Council meetings except as prescribed
by Section 3.6, and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but may
not vote.
   d.   The City Manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter,
and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by the City Manager, or by
officials subject to direction and supervision by the City Manager, are
faithfully executed.
   e.   The City Manager shall prepare and submit the Annual Operating Budget
and Capital program to the Council.
   f.   The City Manager shall submit to the Council and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
City for the past year, on or before May 1st of each year.
   g.   The City Manager shall make such other reports as the Council may
require concerning the operations of City departments, offices, and agencies.
   h.   The City Manager shall keep the Council fully advised as to the
financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such recommendations
to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as deemed desirable.
   i.   The City Manager shall perform such other duties as are specified by
law, this Charter, or the Council.
Section 3.7 CITY CLERK - APPOINTMENT - DUTIES
   The City Clerk shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire Council
for an indefinite term. The City Clerk may be removed by a majority vote of the
entire Council. The first appointed clerk shall be appointed by the Council
after the term of the current City Clerk expires or upon a vacancy in that
office, whichever occurs first.
   The City Clerk shall be Clerk of the Council and shall, with the Mayor, sign
all ordinances. The City Clerk shall keep a permanent journal of all Council
proceedings and ordinances. In addition, the City Clerk shall perform all other
duties prescribed by law, this Charter, and the Council. The City Clerk may,
with the approval of the City Council, appoint one Deputy Clerk.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 4, 1980 AND AUGUST 5, 2014.
Section 3.8 CITY ATTORNEY - APPOINTMENT - DUTIES
   The City Attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire
Council for an indefinite term. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor
for the City and for all City officials and departments in all matters relating
to their official duties, and shall perform such other duties as the Council
may require. The City Attorney may be removed by a majority vote of the entire
Council.
Section 3.9 CITY TREASURER - APPOINTMENT - DUTIES
   The City Treasurer shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire
Council for an indefinite term. The Treasurer shall assist the City Manager in
the preparation of the Annual Operating Budget and the Capital Program. The
Treasurer shall maintain a system of accounts in accordance with State law. The
Treasurer shall be the chief financial officer of the City. The City Treasurer
may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Council.
Section 3.10 CITY ASSESSOR - APPOINTMENT - DUTIES
   The City Assessor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire
Council for an indefinite term. The City Assessor shall possess all powers
vested in, and shall be charged with all duties imposed upon, assessing
officers by law, this Charter, or the Council. The City Assessor may be removed
by a majority vote of the entire Council.
Section 3.11 POLICE CHIEF - APPOINTMENT - DUTIES
   The Police Chief shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire Council
for an indefinite term. The Police Chief shall supervise the Police Department
in the enforcement of all applicable laws. The Police Chief may be removed by a
majority vote of the entire Council.   
Section 3.12 FIRE CHIEF - APPOINTMENT - DUTIES
   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire Council
an indefinite term. The Fire Chief shall supervise all functions of the Fire
Department. The Fire Chief may be removed by a majority vote of the entire
Council.
Section 3.13 EMPLOYEE CONTRACTS - SEVERANCE PAYMENTS
   The Council may not pay or offer to pay a City employee a severance payment
that exceeds three (3) times the average monthly salary or wages of the
employee for the three (3) months prior to termination. This prohibition shall
not apply to the existing contract with the City Manager who is employed when
this provision becomes effective.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
ARTICLE IV
REGISTRATIONS, NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS
Section 4.1 ELECTORS
   a.   The City Clerk shall register qualified residents during regular
business hours at the City Hall. The City Clerk may also register electors at
places outside the Clerk's office from time to time to facilitate the
registration of all qualified electors of the City.
   b.   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the Constitution and laws
of the State of Michigan shall apply to the conduct of elections held under
this Charter, and to the registration of electors in the City.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
Section 4.2 GENERAL ELECTION
   A non partisan general city election shall be held on the Tuesday
immediately following the first Monday of November in every year.
Section 4.3 PRIMARY ELECTION
   A primary election, if needed, shall be held on the Tuesday immediately
following the first Monday in August, preceding every General Election in
November.   
Section 4.4 NOMINATION OF MAYOR
   Registered electors seeking the office of Mayor shall file nominating
petitions bearing the bona fide signatures of no fewer than twenty five (25)
nor more than forty (40) registered voters residing in the City at large. Such
petitions shall be filed with the City Clerk's office no later than 4:00 p.m.
in the afternoon of the twelfth Tuesday prior to the primary election. [NOTE:
The charter language pertaining to filing nominating petitions for the regular
city election is superseded by Michigan election law MCL 168.44e as amended
under PA 276 of 2012. The candidate nomination petition filing deadline is 4:00
p.m., 15th Tuesday prior to the August election (Resolution 2018-02-01).]
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY THE VOTE OF ELECTORS AUGUST 5, 2014.
Section 4.5 NOMINATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS
   Registered electors seeking the office of Council Member in any ward shall
file nominating petitions bearing the bona fide signatures of no fewer than
twenty five (25) nor more than forty (40) registered voters residing in that
ward. Such petitions shall be filed with the City Clerk's office no later than
4:00 p.m. in the afternoon of the twelfth Tuesday prior to the primary
election. [NOTE: The charter language pertaining to filing nominating petitions
for the regular city election is superseded by Michigan election law MCL
168.44e as amended under PA 276 of 2012. The candidate nomination petition
filing deadline is 4:00 p.m., 15th Tuesday prior to the August election
(Resolution 2018-02-01).]
Section 4.6 PRIMARY ELECTION, NUMBER OF CANDIDATES
   a.   If, for any office, there should be nominated more than twice the
number of persons to be elected to that office, a primary election shall be
held among the electors entitled to vote for that office under this Charter.
The names of the two candidates receiving the most votes shall be placed on the
ballot for that office in the General Election.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS ON NOVEMBER 5, 1991.
   b.   If, upon expiration of the time for filing petitions for any non
partisan primary election, there are nominated for any office no more than
twice the number of persons to be elected to that office, the City Clerk shall
certify to the proper board of election commissioners the names of such
candidates whose petitions have been properly filed and such candidates shall
be the nominees for such offices and shall be so certified. As to such offices
there shall be no primary election and such offices shall be omitted from any
primary election ballot.
Section 4.7 ELECTION OF MAYOR
   The Mayor shall be elected at the annual election, for a two year term by
balloting of the electors of the City at large. The Mayor shall take office at
the first regular City Council meeting after the Mayor's election, except as
provided in Article XIV, Section 14.3. Names of the nominees shall appear on
the ballots and election materials of the primary and of the General Election
without reference to ward residence.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 4, 1980 AND NOVEMBER 3,
1981 AND NOVEMBER 5, 1991 AND AUGUST 5, 2014.
Section 4.8 ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS
   One (1) candidate from each ward shall be elected at the annual General
Election for a two (2) year term on the City Council by the balloting of the
electors of their respective wards. Their terms shall be as set forth in
Article II,
Section 2.4, except as provided in Article XIV,
Section 14.3.
Section 4.9 ELECTIONS, TIES
   In the event of a tie in any Primary or General election, the winner shall
be determined by a procedure through the Board of Canvassers, as provided for
by County officers by statute.
Section 4.10 SPECIAL ELECTIONS
   Special elections may be called at any time for specific purposes by a
majority resolution of the City Council. Special elections shall be conducted
in accordance with State Law. No more than two (2) special elections may be
held within any twelve (12) month period.
ARTICLE V
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section 5.1 LEGISLATIVE POWER
   The legislative power of the City is vested exclusively in the Council,
except as otherwise provided by law.
Section 5.2 LEGISLATION
   a.   All legislation of the City shall be by resolution or by ordinance.
   b.   Resolutions, in the form of motions, may be adopted by majority vote of
the Council members present, except as otherwise provided by this Charter.
   c.   The power of the Council to act by resolution is limited to matters
required or permitted by law or by this Charter, and to matters pertaining to
the internal concerns of the City.
   d.   The Council shall act by majority vote of the Entire Council when
adopting an ordinance, when establishing a rule or regulation, when amending or
repealing an ordinance previously adopted, or when required by law or by this
Charter, except as provided in
Section 5.4c.
Section 5.3 ORDINANCES - COMPOSITION - HEARINGS - PUBLICATIONS
   a.   Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing. The enacting
clause shall be “The City of Charlevoix ordains.........”.
   b.   Following the introduction of any ordinance, the City Clerk shall
publish a summary of the proposed ordinance in a local newspaper of general
circulation in the City, together with a notice setting out the time and place
for a public hearing on the proposed ordinance. The public hearing may not be
held sooner than five (5) days after publication. Copies of the ordinance shall
be distributed without charge at the office of the City Clerk.
   c.   After the public hearing, the Council may consider enacting the
proposed ordinance. The enactment of an ordinance shall require the majority
vote of the entire Council.
   d.   Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, a summary of each
ordinance, including emergency ordinances, shall be published in full in a
local newspaper and the full text of each ordinance shall be posted by the City
in an electronic conveyance with paper copies available for review in the City
Clerk's office. Such posting shall occur within 10 days following the adoption
of the ordinance by the City Council.
ANNOTATION: As amended by vote of electors November 3, 2020.
   e.    Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, every ordinance
shall become effective on the thirtieth (30th) day after enactment, or at any
later date specified therein.
   f.   An ordinance which repeals or amends any existing ordinance or part of
the City Code shall identify, by title and number, the ordinance, sections, or
subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall clearly indicate the matter to
be omitted and the new matter to be added, except in codifying, re-codifying or
continuing in code its municipal ordinances, in full or in part, as provided by
statute.
   g.    Ordinances and codes may be enacted by reference to the extent and in
the manner provided by general law.
Section 5.4 ORDINANCES - EMERGENCY
   a.   To meet a public emergency affecting life, health or property, one or
more emergency ordinances may be enacted. However, an emergency ordinance may
not levy taxes, or grant, renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate
charged by any public utility for its service.
   b.   An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner
required for ordinances generally, except that it shall contain, after the
enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing
the emergency in clear, specific terms.
   c.   An emergency ordinance may be enacted on the date of introduction and
given immediate effect, by a majority vote of the Council members present at
the time of the enactment.
   d.   Every emergency ordinance is automatically repealed on the sixty first
(61st) day after its enactment, unless re enacted pursuant to
Section 5.3.
Section 5.5 ORDINANCE - PENALTY
   An ordinance may provide a penalty for the violation of its provisions. The
penalty shall not exceed the limits provided by law.
Section 5.6 ORDINANCE - EFFECTIVE DATE
   All ordinances shall be recorded in an index book marked “City Ordinances”,
and a record of each ordinance shall be authenticated by the signatures of the
Mayor and City Clerk. Such record and authentication shall be done within
thirty (30) days after the final passage of any ordinance. If any ordinance,
other than an emergency ordinance, is not authenticated and recorded within
thirty (30) days after final passage, the ordinance shall not take effect until
seven (7) days after notice has been published in a local newspaper of general
circulation in the City that the ordinance has been properly authenticated and
recorded.
Section 5.7 ORDINANCE - CODIFICATION
   a.   Within three (3) years after the effective date of this Charter, and at
least every ten (10) years thereafter, the Council shall provide for the
preparation of a general codification of all City ordinances having the effect
of law.
   b.   The general codification shall be enacted by ordinance and shall be
known as the “Charlevoix City Code”. Copies of the Code shall be furnished to
City officials, placed in libraries and public offices for free public
reference, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price
to be fixed by the Council. Except as required by law, the enactment of this
ordinance need not comply with the requirements of Section 5.3. After
publication of the first Charlevoix City Code, new ordinances shall be printed
annually in a form for integration with the City Code currently in effect.
ARTICLE VI
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 6.1 GENERAL AUTHORITY
   a.   INITIATIVE. The registered voters of the City shall have the power to
propose ordinances to the Council and if the Council fails to adopt an
ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at
a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or
Capital Program, or to any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy
of taxes, or salaries of city officials or employees.
   b.   REFERENDUM. The registered voters of the City shall have the power to
require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance, and, if the
Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it
at a City Election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or
Capital Program, or to any emergency ordinance, or ordinance relating to the
appropriation of money or the levy of taxes.
Section 6.2 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS
   Any five (5) registered voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will
constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the
petition and filing it in the proper form, stating their names and addresses,
and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be
sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
   Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the
Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners'
committee.
Section 6.3 PETITIONS
   a.   Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by registered voters of the City equal in number to at least fifteen
(15) percent of the total number of voters registered to vote in the last
regular City Election.
   b.   Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall
be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of
the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout
their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be
reconsidered.
   c.   Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached
to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that
he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon,
that all signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that the circulator
believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they
purport to be, and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read
the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
   d.   Time for Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the Council of the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered.
Section 6.4 PROCEDURE AFTER FILING
   a.   Certificate of Clerk. Within twenty (20) days after the petition is
filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency,
specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and
shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by
certified mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required
number of valid signatures may be amended once, if the petitioners' committee
files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Clerk within two (2) days
after receiving the copy of the Clerk' certificate, excluding weekends and
holidays, and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten
(10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary
petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections b and c of
Section 6.3. Within five (5) days after it is filed, the City Clerk shall
complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and
promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by
certified mail, as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or
amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition
is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to
amend or request Council review under subsection b of this Section within the
time required, the Clerk shall promptly present the certificate to the Council
and the certificate shall be a final determination as to the sufficiency or
insufficiency of the petition.
   b.   Council Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an
amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two
(2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, excluding weekends and
holidays, file a request that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall
review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request
and approve or disapprove it. The Council's decision shall then be the final
determination as to the sufficiency or insufficiency of the petition.
   c.   Court Review: New Petition. A Council determination as to the
sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. Council
determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not
prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
Section 6.5 REFERENDUM PETITIONS - SUSPENSION OF EFFECT OF ORDINANCE
   When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk, the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such
suspension shall terminate when:
   1.   There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or
   2.   The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or
   3.   The Council repeals the ordinance, or
   4.   Thirty (30) days have elapsed after a vote of the City on the
ordinance.
Section 6.6 ACTION ON PETITIONS
   a.   Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed
initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article V or reconsider the
referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a
proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60)
days, or fails to repeal a referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the
date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the
proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City.
   b.   Submission to Voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred
ordinance shall be held no sooner than sixty (60) days and no later than one
(1) year from the date of the final Council vote thereon. If no regular City
election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the
Council may at its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date
within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance
shall be made available at the polls.
Section 6.7 RESULTS OF ELECTION
   a.   Initiative. If a majority of the registered electors voting on a
proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted
upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects
in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If
conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the
greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail, to the extent of such
conflict.
   b.   Referendum. If a majority of the registered electors voting on a
referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
ARTICLE VII
GENERAL FINANCES
Section 7.1 FISCAL YEAR
   The fiscal year and budget year for the City shall begin on April 1st and
end on March 31st of each year. The City Council shall provide an annual
appropriation of money for municipal purposes.
Section 7.2 CAPITAL BUDGET
   On or before February 15 of each year the City Manager shall submit to the
Council a proposed Capital Budget for the next five (5) fiscal years. The
Capital Budget shall state:
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
   a.   A clear summary of its contents.
   b.   A list of all major capital improvements proposed to be undertaken
during the five (5) years ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as
to the necessity for such improvements.
   c.   Cost estimates, methods of financing, and recommended tax schedules for
each improvement.
   d.   Estimated annual costs of operating and maintaining the facilities to
be constructed or acquired.
Section 7.3 PREVIOUS CAPITAL BUDGETS
   Previously adopted Capital Budgets may be revised and extended each year
with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of
construction or acquisition.
Section 7.4 PUBLICATION OF CAPITAL BUDGET
   The Council shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
a general summary of the Capital Budget and a notice stating:
   a.   The times and places where copies of the Capital Budget are available
for inspection by the public, and
   b.   The time and place, not sooner than two (2) weeks after publication,
for a public hearing on the Capital Budget.
Section 7.5 ADOPTION OF CAPITAL BUDGET
   The Council shall adopt by resolution the Capital Budget, with or without
amendments, after a public hearing on or before October 15th of each year.
Section 7.6 OPERATING BUDGET
   On or before February 15th of each year, the City Manager shall submit to
the Council a proposed Annual Operating Budget for the next fiscal year.
Section 7.7 SUMMARY OF OPERATING BUDGET
   The proposed Annual Operating Budget shall provide a complete financing plan
for the next fiscal year for all City funds and activities, including Capital
expenditures, and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such
form as the City Manager deems desirable or the Council may require. The
Proposed Annual Operating Budget shall begin with a clear summary of its
contents, shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed
property tax levy and all proposed expenditures, including debts for the next
fiscal year, and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures of
estimated income and expenditures for the preceding fiscal year, and shall
provide such other information as may be required by the Council.
Section 7.8 PUBLIC HEARING
   Before the final adoption of the Annual Operating Budget, a public hearing
shall be held, at which time the proposed Annual Operating Budget shall be
presented. The time and place of the hearing shall be determined by the Council
and notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least two (2) weeks before the hearing. At the
hearing all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or
against any item in the proposed Annual Operating Budget. A copy of the
proposed Annual Operating Budget shall be on file and available to the public
for inspection during office hours in the office of the City Treasurer for a
period of not fewer than ten (10) days prior to this hearing.
Section 7.9 REVIEW OF ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET
   The Council shall review the proposed Annual Operating Budget and shall make
modifications as it deems advisable. Not later than March 15th the Council
shall adopt by ordinance the Annual Operating Budget for the next fiscal year
and shall provide in such ordinance for a levy, if necessary, to be raised by a
tax upon real and personal property.
Section 7.10 TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS
   a.   If the City Manager certifies during the fiscal year that there are
available revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council by
ordinance may make supplemental appropriations up to the amount of such excess
revenues.
   b.   If it appears probable to the City Manager during the fiscal year that
the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated,
the City Manager shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the
estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken, and recommendations
as to other possible steps. The Council shall then take such further action as
it may deem necessary to prevent any deficit, and for that purpose it may
reduce by ordinance one or more appropriations.
   c.   At any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager may transfer part
or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a
department, office or agency. Upon written request by the City Manager, the
Council may transfer by ordinance part or all of any unencumbered
appropriations balance from one department, office or agency to another.
   d.   No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no
appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be
appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof.
The supplemental and emergency appropriations, and the reduction or transfer of
appropriations authorized by this section, may be made effective immediately
upon adoption.
Section 7.11 REMAINING FUND BALANCES
   Except as provided by law, the balance in any General Fund appropriation
which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year, other than that of
or pertaining to any municipal utility, shall revert to the General Fund.
Section 7.12 EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS
   To meet a public emergency affecting life, health or property, the Council
may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency
ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Article V. To the extent that
there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the
Council may authorize by such emergency ordinance the issuance of emergency
notes in accordance with Article X.
Section 7.13 EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS
   The Council shall provide by resolution appropriate methods and safeguards
for the expenditure of funds and the payment of obligations so as to insure
that no payment shall be made or obligation incurred without an appropriation
having first been approved by the Council, without a sufficient unencumbered
balance in the appropriation, or without insuring that sufficient funds are or
will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due
and payable. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing in this Charter
shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or the
making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by
the issuance of bonds, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease
providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year. Any such action must
be approved by ordinance.
Section 7.14 DEPOSITS
   The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for the City
funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City moneys. The
Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized by
law, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security.
Section 7.15 AUDITS
   An independent audit of all accounts and financial records of the City shall
be made annually. Such audit shall be made by a certified public accountant
experienced in municipal accounting, within one hundred twenty (120) days after
the close of the fiscal year. The Council may secure additional audits at any
time. Each audit, in its entirety, shall be made available for public
inspection at the office of the City Clerk and at the Public Library.
Section 7.16 SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS
   The accounting system of the City shall conform to any uniform system of
municipal accounting that may be provided by the laws of the State.
Section 7.17 CONTRACTS AND BIDS
   The Council shall prescribe by resolution a general framework of necessary
procedures governing financial and contractual dealings with the City. Such
resolution shall include a maximum consideration below which purchases may be
made by the City officials and employees either without specific authorization
from the Council, or without the necessity of competitive bidding, or both. In
addition, such resolution shall include a requirement that in all cases of
contract by competitive bidding, the Council shall reserve the right to reject
any and all bids submitted, and provisions for such rejection and notices of
such right of rejection shall be incorporated in all requests for bids.
ARTICLE VIII
TAXATION
Section 8.1 TAXATION - LIMIT - COLLECTION
   In order to carry out the purposes, powers and duties of the City Government
established by this Charter, the City shall have the power to assess taxes and
to lay and collect rents, tolls and excises. The annual general ad valorem tax
levy for municipal purposes shall not exceed one and one half (1-1/2) percent
(15 mills) of the State Equalized Valuation of all real and personal property
in the City. The City taxes shall be levied and collected in a manner provided
by the general tax laws of the State or by this Charter.
Section 8.2 TAXATION - SUBJECTS - RIGHTS
   The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for
State, County and School purposes under the general tax laws of the State, and
the City shall have the rights, liens, powers and remedies accorded by law to
any political subdivision of the State in connection with the collection of
taxes.
Section 8.3 TAXATION - POWER AND EXEMPTIONS
   The power of taxation shall never be surrendered nor suspended by any grant
or contract to which the City shall be a party. No exemptions from taxation
shall be allowed, except as are expressly required or permitted by law.
Section 8.4 TAX ASSESSMENT
   The City Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll in the manner
and form provided in the general tax laws of the State and at the time required
by the general tax laws of the State.
Section 8.5 BOARD OF REVIEW
   A Board of Review is hereby created. It shall be composed of five (5)
members, appointed by the Council. Three or more members shall constitute a
quorum.
   a.   Two (2) members shall be Council members, appointed by the Council in
January of each year.
   b.   Three (3) members shall be registered electors of the City, not
otherwise holding an elected or appointed position with the City or any other
political subdivision.
   c.   The three (3) non Council members shall be appointed in January after
this Charter takes effect. One (1) shall be appointed for three (3) years, one
(1) for two (2) years, and one (1) for one (1) year. Thereafter, each non
Council member shall be appointed for three (3) years.
   d.   The City Clerk shall take or cause minutes of the Board of Review to be
taken and shall serve as Clerk of the Board of Review; the Assessor shall
provide professional guidance to the board and attend meetings upon request.
ANNOTATION: As amended by vote of electors November 3, 2020.
   e.   The City Council shall provide by resolution for the compensation of
the members of the Board of Review.
Section 8.6 BOARD OF REVIEW - POWERS AND DUTIES
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Board of Review shall have
the same powers and perform the same duties as are conferred by law upon and
required of the Boards of Review in townships.
Section 8.7 BOARD OF REVIEW - NOTICE OF MEETINGS
   The City Clerk shall give notice to the public of the time and place of the
first meeting of the Board of Review by publication as required by law, and in
any event at least seven (7) days before the first day of this Board of Review
meeting. Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the tax roll.
Section 8.8 ASSESSMENT - NOTICE OF CHANGE TO OWNERS
   Notices of changes in assessment shall be delivered to respective property
owners. Such notice shall be delivered in the form and manner prescribed by the
laws of this State. The failure of the property owner to receive notice shall
not invalidate an assessment roll or an assessment on property.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 2, 2021.
Section 8.9 BOARD OF REVIEW - MEETINGS
   The Board of Review shall hold at least two (2) meetings each year at such
places as shall be designated by the Council. The first meeting shall commence
on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in March of each year and shall
continue as long as may be necessary to consider and correct the assessment
roll, and shall be for the purpose of hearing the complaints of all persons
considering themselves aggrieved by the assessments. Sessions of the Board of
Review shall be set by the City Clerk in accordance with State law and may be
set longer if necessary.
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY VOTE OF ELECTORS NOVEMBER 7, 2006.
Section 8.10 BOARD OF REVIEW - APPEALS
   In each case where there is an appeal by a property owner heard at the first
meeting of the Board of Review, the Board shall give notice to each such
property owner of its decision. This notice shall be given in such a manner as
will insure the property owner the opportunity to attend the second meeting of
the Board.
Section 8.11 BOARD OF REVIEW - SECOND MEETING
   The second meeting of the Board of Review shall be held at such times as
provided by statute for the purpose of hearing any further complaints by
persons considering themselves aggrieved by the assessments. The assessment
review shall be considered completed by the first Monday in April.
Section 8.12 BOARD OF REVIEW - ENDORSEMENT OF ROLL
   After the Board of Review completes its review of the assessment roll, the
majority of its members shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a statement
to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the City for the year in
which it has been prepared. The omission of this endorsement shall not affect
the validity of this roll. Upon completion, the roll shall be the assessment
roll of the City for County, School and City taxes and for any other taxes on
real or personal property that may be authorized by law. The assessment roll
shall be conclusively presumed by all Courts and tribunals to be valid and
shall not be set aside except for causes set forth in the general tax laws of
the State.
Section 8.13 CERTIFICATION TO ASSESSOR
   After the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the City
Clerk shall certify to the City Assessor the total amount which the Council
determines shall be raised by general taxes, all amounts of special assessments
which the Council requires to be assessed or reassessed upon any property or
against any person, and all other amounts which the Council may determine shall
be charged, assessed or reassessed against any person or property.
Section 8.14 SPREADING OF THE TAXES
   After the confirmation of the tax roll, the City Assessor shall certify a
copy of the tax roll to the City Treasurer. The tax roll shall be delivered to
the Treasurer before June 1st of each year.
   This shall constitute the City tax roll for the current year. To avoid
fractions and computations on any tax roll, the City Assessor may add to the
amount of the several taxes to be raised an amount prescribed by statute. This
added amount, when collected, shall belong to the City.
Section 8.15 TAXES - COLLECTION OF
   After the spreading of the taxes, the City Treasurer shall collect from the
persons named in the tax roll the various sums stated. The City Treasurer is
granted, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on
the roll, all the powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for
the collection of taxes under the general tax laws of the State.
Section 8.16 TAXES - DUE - LIENS
   The City taxes assessed shall become due on July 1st of each year, and the
amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such
property at the time provided by the general tax laws of the State, and the
lien for these amounts and for all interest and other charges shall continue
until these sums are paid. All personal property taxes shall be a first lien,
prior, superior and paramount, upon all personal property of the persons
assessed at the time provided by the general tax laws of the State and shall
remain so until paid. These tax liens shall have precedence over all other
claims, encumbrances and liens upon the property, whether created by a security
agreement, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after
the assessment of the personal property taxes. No transfer of personal property
assessed for taxes shall operate to divest or destroy this lien except when
such personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail or
wholesale trade.
Section 8.17 TAXES - POWER OF TREASURER
   The City Treasurer shall have the same power and authority as conferred by
law upon township treasurers for collecting taxes by suit, by distraint, or by
the sale of good and chattels. All proceedings for the return and collection of
unpaid taxes, the sale of lands for payment of taxes, and all other proceedings
necessary in the enforcement of these taxes, shall be in all respects, so far
as applicable, the same as are set by the general tax laws of the State.
Section 8.18 TAXES - PENALTIES
   City taxes shall be due on July 1st of the year when levied. All taxes paid
on or before September 1st shall be collected by the City Treasurer without
penalty. An additional charge of one (1) percent shall be added to all unpaid
City taxes on September 1st and an additional charge of one (1) percent shall
be added to all delinquent unpaid taxes on the first day of each month
thereafter until the taxes are paid. This added penalty shall belong to the
City and shall constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to
which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes
to which they are added. If September 1st falls on a Sunday or legal holiday,
taxes shall be collected without penalty on the next business day.
Section 8.19 TAXES - PAYMENT OF
   The City Treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayers of the City not later
than July 1st of each year by publication in a local newspaper of general
circulation in the City, of the time when the City taxes will be due and when
they can be paid without penalty, and that one (1) percent penalty per month
will be charged upon all taxes remaining unpaid after September 1st. As soon as
practical after completion of the tax roll, and in no event later than July
1st, the City Treasurer shall forward a statement of the taxes due, by first
class mail addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are
assessed, as indicated by the tax roll. Failure on the part of the City
Treasurer to mail this statement shall not invalidate the taxes on this roll or
relieve the property assessed from the penalties provided by this Article or by
the general tax laws of the State.
Section 8.20 TAX ROLL - RETURN TO COUNTY TREASURER
   Any taxes on the City tax roll which remain unpaid on March 1st following
the date when the roll was received by the City Treasurer shall be returned to
the County Treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns by
township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. These returns shall
be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the City Treasurer and
shall include all the additional charges and fees hereinbefore provided. These
charges and fees shall, in these returns, be added to the amount assessed on
the tax roll against each description. The taxes so returned shall be collected
in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer, and shall
remain a lien upon the assessed lands until paid.
Section 8.21 PROTECTION OF TAX LIEN
   The City shall have the power to purchase any property within the City at
any tax or other public sale, or to purchase the property directly from the
State or the fee owner, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of
the City for taxes or special assessments. The City may hold, lease or sell
this property. Any such procedure exercise by the City in the protection of its
lien shall be deemed to be for the public purpose.
Section 8.22 TAX COLLECTION - COUNTY, SCHOOL AND STATE
   For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the City for State,
County and School purposes, the City shall be considered the same as a township
and shall collect and account for these taxes, penalties and interest in the
same manner provided by the general tax laws of the State.
Section 8.23 CHANGES - ADDITIONS
   In all matters where this Charter does not fully or adequately provide for
the levy and collection of City, County, State, School or other taxes, the City
Council shall have the power and authority to adopt additional ordinances
necessary to carry out and enforce the general tax laws of the State.
ARTICLE IX
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section 9.1 DETERMINATION
   The Council shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local or
public improvement, including public parking facilities and boulevard lighting
systems, and to determine that the whole or any part of the costs thereof shall
be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted, and
shall so declare by resolution, provided that all special assessments levied
shall be based upon or be in proportion to the benefits derived or to be
derived. Such resolution shall state the estimated cost of the improvement,
what proportion of the cost shall be paid by special assessment, what part, if
any, shall be a general obligation of the City, the number of installments in
which the assessments may be paid, the interest rate on any unpaid assessment
if any, the date on which any such interest shall commence, and shall designate
the districts or land and property on which special assessments shall be
levied.
Section 9.2 PROCEDURE
   The Council shall prescribe by general ordinance the complete special
assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and
specifications, estimates of cost, notice of hearings, making and confirming
assessment rolls for the improvement, the correction of errors in the
assessment rolls, collections of special assessments, the assessment of single
lots or parcels, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by
the special assessment method, subject to the provisions of this Charter and
the laws of the State. The ordinance shall authorize additional assessments, if
the prior assessment proves insufficient to pay for the improvement or is
determined to be invalid, in whole or in part.
Section 9.3 CONFIRMATION
   Confirmation of any special assessment must be made by a majority vote of
the entire Council. This section shall not apply to sidewalk improvement.
Section 9.4 REFUND
   The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual
cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto shall be refunded on a
pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. This refund shall be
made by credit against unpaid future installments to the extent that
installments are still owing, and the balance of the refund shall be in cash.
No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding
evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by the special assessment.
Minimum refund shall be of five dollars ($5.00).
Section 9.5 LIENS
   From the date of confirmation of any roll levying any special assessment,
the full amount of any special assessment and any interest thereon shall be a
lien upon the property subject thereto and shall be a debt of the person to
whom assessed until paid. This lien shall be of the same character and effect
as the lien created by this Charter for City taxes. The assessment shall be
levied upon the respective lots and premises to which they are specially
assessed, and against the persons chargeable therewith, as a tax in the next
City tax roll in a column for special assessments. The amount so levied shall
be enforced and collected in the same manner as other taxes and when collected
shall be paid into the City treasury.
Section 9.6 CHANGES - ADDITIONS
   In any case where the provisions of this Charter, either expressed or
incorporated herein, may prove to be insufficient to carry into full effect the
making of any special assessment, the Council shall provide by general
ordinance any additional steps or procedures required to effect the improvement
by special assessment.
ARTICLE X
BORROWING POWER
Section 10.1 SCOPE OF POWER
   Subject to this Charter and the laws of the State, the Council, by
ordinance, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the
scope of the powers of the City, including parking facilities, street lighting,
and the City's share of the cost of any local improvement, and may issue bonds
of the City or other evidence of indebtedness, and may pledge the full faith,
credit and resources of the City for payment of the obligation created
thereby.   
Section 10.2 BONDS - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
   Subject to the laws of the State, the Council shall have authorization to
borrow money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the
purpose of defraying the cost of any local improvements, or in anticipation of
the payment of any combination of such special assessments, and to issue bonds
therefor. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special
assessment district or may be both an obligation of the special assessment
district or districts and a general obligation of the City. All collections of
each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a
separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest of the bond issued
in anticipation of such special assessment and shall be used for no other
purpose.
Section 10.3 BONDS - ISSUANCE OF
   The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electors shall
be subject to applicable requirements of the laws of the State, and with regard
to public notice in advance of the authorization of these bonds, filing of
petitions for a referendum on these bonds, holding of a referendum, and other
applicable procedures.
Section 10.4 INDEBTEDNESS LIMITS
   The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at
any time exceed the limit permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State,
provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded
those bonds permitted to be so excluded by the Constitution and laws of the
State.
Section 10.5 USE OF BONDS - STATEMENT
   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which it is issued, and it shall be
unlawful for any official of the City to use the proceeds of the bond for any
other purpose. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City
shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk under the seal
of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of
the Mayor and City Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other
evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the City Clerk.
Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall
be marked “Canceled”.
Section 10.6 UNISSUED BONDS
   No unissued bonds of the City shall be issued or sold to secure funds for
any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if
such bonds are not sold within three (3) years after authorization, such
authorization shall be null and void.
ARTICLE XI
FRANCHISES
Section 11.1 FRANCHISES - GRANTING OF
   The City Council may grant a franchise or license by ordinance for a period
not to exceed five (5) years.
ARTICLE XII
UTILITY FRANCHISES AND MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP
Section 12.1 GENERAL POWERS
   The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted
to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend,
repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including,
but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light,
heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of
them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and
deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services
without its corporate limits as authorized by law.
Section 12.2 MANAGEMENT
   All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as regular
departments of the City government, under the management and supervision of the
City Manager. The City Manager shall appoint department supervisors solely on
the basis of merit.
Section 12.3 RATES
   a.   The Council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just
and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying
the inhabitants of the City and others with such public utility services as the
City may provide. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any
classification of users, nor shall free service be permitted. Higher rates may
be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the City.
   b.   The rates and charges of any municipal utility for the furnishing of
services shall be no higher than necessary to cover the costs of such utility,
including depreciation, capital improvements, and the creating and maintaining
of an emergency fund.
   c.   Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the City of
each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an
appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with
generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service
furnished to or rendered by, other City departments or agencies shall be
recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial
position of each utility and the results of its operation, which report shall
be available at the office of the City Clerk.
   d.   The City Council shall create emergency funds for the Electric, Sewage
and Water utilities to meet contingencies. Each fund shall be not less than
Seventy Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00) and each fund is to be so
administered as to reach that intended minimum level in a period of five (5)
years. Any withdrawal for emergency use must be replaced within five (5) years.
Section 12.4 DISPOSAL OF UTILITY PLANTS AND PROPERTY
   Unless approved by the affirmative vote of two thirds (2/3) of the
registered electors at a regular or special election, the City shall not sell,
exchange, lease or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment,
privilege, or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned
public utility which is needed to continue operating such utility. All
contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer
in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the
City. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange
of any articles of machinery or equipment of any City owned utility which are
worn out or useless, or which have been, or could with advantage to the service
be, replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment, to the leasing of
property not necessary for the operation, or to the exchange of property or
easements for other property or easements. The provisions of this section shall
not extend to the vacation or abandonment of streets, as provided by law.
Section 12.5 GRANTING OF PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES
   a.   Public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions thereof all
amendments thereto shall be granted only by ordinance. No franchise shall be
granted for a period of longer than five (5) years.
   b.   No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will
of the Council shall be enacted or become operative until the same shall have
first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received
the affirmative vote of three fifths (3/5ths) of the electors voting thereon.
No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to
the electorate before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been
filed with the Council, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor
until the grantee named therein has filed with the City Clerk his unconditional
acceptance of all terms of the franchise. No special election for such purpose
shall be ordered unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by
the Council, shall have first been paid to the City Treasurer by the
granted.   
   c.   A franchise ordinance, or renewal or extension thereof or amendment
thereto, which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be
enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted
unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted
and shall have so been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection
for at least four (4) weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance
is so on file.
Section 12.6 CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES
   All public utility franchises granted after adoption of this Charter,
whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to
the following rights of the City, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive
or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchises any provision
within the power of the City to impose or require:
   a.   To repeal the same for misuse, non use, or failure to comply with the
provisions thereof;
   b.   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
   c.   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products
and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   d.   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
   e.   To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges
and other public places and the space above and beneath them;
   f.   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to
be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.
Section 12.7 REGULATION OF RATES
   All public utility franchises shall make provision for fixing rates, fares
and charges, and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals.
The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates,
fares and charges shall, in no event, include a value predicated upon the
franchise, good will or prospective profits.
Section 12.8 USE OF PUBLIC PLACES BY UTILITIES
   Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part
of the cost of improvement, or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and
other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and
save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such
public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property
and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the
City by the City and by other public utilities, insofar as such joint use may
be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In
the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the
Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint
use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall
be final.
Section 12.9 SALE AND ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISES
   The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to
use the same, unless the Council consents. Nothing in this section shall limit
the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to mortgage its
property or franchise, nor restrict the right of the purchaser, upon
foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except that such mortgagee or purchaser
shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and the provisions of this
Charter.
ARTICLE XIII
PLANNING AND ZONING
Section 13.1 PLANNING COMMISSION
   The City Council shall create a Planning Commission in accordance with
statute.
Section 13.2 ZONING
   The City Council shall prescribe by ordinance the zoning laws for the City.
Section 13.3 ZONING VARIANCES
ANNOTATION: AS AMENDED BY THE VOTE OF ELECTORS ON NOVEMBER 5, 1991.
ARTICLE XIV
TRANSITION
Section 14.1 PURPOSE
   The purpose of this Article is to assist in the transition from the existing
Charter to this Charter and it shall constitute a part of this Charter only to
the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end.
Section 14.2 EFFECTIVE DATE
   Except as otherwise provided herein, this Charter shall take effect and
become law on the first (1st) Monday in June, 1978, at 12:01 A.M.
Section 14.3 INITIAL ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE
   a.   The first election of City Council members under this Charter shall
take place on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1978. Three
(3) Council members shall be elected on that occasion, being one (1) Council
member from each of the wards of the City, each of whom shall take office on
the second (2nd) Monday in April, 1979, and serve through December 31, 1980.
The nomination and election of such Council members shall be in accordance with
the provisions of this Charter. The first meeting of the Council under this
Charter shall be held on the first (1st) Monday of July, 1978.
   b.   The Mayor elected in November, 1978, shall take office on the second
(2nd) Monday in April, 1979, and serve through December 31, 1979.
   c.   The City clerk elected in November, 1978, shall take office on the
second (2nd) Monday in April, 1979, and serve through December 31, 1979.
   d.   The City Council members elected in November, 1979, shall take office
on the second (2nd) Monday in April, 1980, and serve through December 31, 1981.
   e.   The office of Treasurer under the Fourth Class Cities Act shall be
abolished and terminated upon the appointment of a Treasurer as hereinbefore
provided, such Treasurer to be appointed on the second (2nd) Monday in April,
1979.
Section 14.4 VACANCIES
   Should a vacancy occur in any office of the City after adoption of this
Charter and prior to April 1, 1979, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner
provided in the existing charter of the City and the person so appointed or
elected shall serve until the time that the term of office to which that person
was appointed or elected expires under the provisions of the existing charter,
except as modified by this Charter.
Section 14.5 TERMS OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Charter, the existing term of any
public official shall not be shortened or extended beyond the period for which
he is elected or appointed, unless he resign or be removed for cause, where
such office is held for a fixed term. Otherwise public officials and employees
shall continue in their offices at the pleasure of the appointing or hiring
official or body.
Section 14.6 CONTINUATION OF RIGHTS - CLAIMS - CONTRACTS, ETC.
   All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative
proceedings of the City shall continue except as modified pursuant to the
provisions of this Charter, and in each case shall be maintained, carried on,
or dealt with by the City department, office, or agency appropriate under this
Charter.
Section 14.7 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND RULES
   All laws, ordinances, resolutions, orders, rules, or regulations in force in
the City at the time this Charter takes effect, to the extent they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in full force
until repealed or amended.
Section 14.8 CONTINUATION OF BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
   All boards, committees, agencies, or commissions of the City in existence at
the time this Charter takes effect, to the extent they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue to function until abolished
or modified by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
Section 14.9 STATUS OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
   All taxes and assessments levied or assessed and all charges thereon and all
fines and penalties imposed, which are uncollected at the time this Charter
takes effect, shall be collected as if such change had not been made. If a
remedy is provided by this Charter, or by any ordinance or resolution, the
remedy shall be deemed cumulative to the remedies under the existing charter.
Section 14.10 TRANSITION AUTHORITY
   In all cases not covered by this Charter, the Council shall supply necessary
details and procedures for the transition from government of the City under the
existing charter to that under this Charter, and may adopt such rules,
resolutions and ordinances as may be required therefor.
Section 14.11 SUBMISSION TO VOTERS; FORM OF BALLOT
   This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the
City of Charlevoix at the General Election to be held on April 3, 1978. All
provisions for the submission of the question of adoption of this Charter at
such election and the counting and certifying of the vote thereon shall be made
by the City Clerk in the manner provided by law. This Charter shall be adopted
if a majority of the ballots cast thereon are in favor of the adoption.
   The form of the ballot for the submission of this Charter to the electors
shall be as follows:
            Shall the Charter proposed for the City
            of Charlevoix by the Charter Commission
            elected on April 7, 1975, be adopted?
            YES   ____
            NO    ____
            A “Yes” Vote will be a vote in favor of adoption of the proposed
Charter.
            A “No” Vote will be a vote against adoption.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section catchlines and other headings
   
10.04   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.05   Continuation of ordinances
   
10.06   Prior rights, offenses and the like
   
10.07   Ordinances repealed not reenacted
   
10.08   Amendments to code
   
10.09   Supplementation of code
   
10.10   Separability of provisions
   
10.11   Notice
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   This code shall constitute and be designated as the “The City of Charlevoix
Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified ordinances”, “this
code” or “code” may be substituted.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, have
the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer, building inspector or other
designated official or employee of the city authorized by this code to issue
municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation
notices.
      CITY. The City of Charlevoix, Michigan.
      CODE. The City of Charlevoix Code, as designated in §
10.01 of this chapter.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to this code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last; except that, if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall
be excluded; and, when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of Charlevoix, Michigan.
      COUNTY. The County of Charlevoix, Michigan.
      JUVENILE. Any person under 17 years of age.
      MINOR. A person under 21 years of age.
      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD AND THE LIKE. Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, the
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Charlevoix, Michigan”. Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any officer of
the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to the officer shall mean and include the officer or his or her
deputy or authorized subordinate.
      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the city and all amendments thereto.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, the
word includes the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations,
the word includes officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for
any violations of the section. The singular includes the plural. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
      STATE, THE STATE or THIS STATE. The State of Michigan.
§ 10.03 SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and
shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor as any part
of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any
catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, subchapter or division.
§ 10.04 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this code:
   (A)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city,
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, any evidence of the city’s
indebtedness, any contract or obligations assumed by the city;
   (B)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City Council;
   (C)   Granting any right or franchise;
   (D)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating and the like any street or public way in the city;
   (E)   Making any appropriation;
   (F)   Levying or imposing taxes;
   (G)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the city;
   (H)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
   (I)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
   (J)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;
   (K)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city
officers or employees;
   (L)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no parking zones, specific
speed zones, parking meter zones and specific stop or yield intersections or
other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;
   (M)   Pertaining to rezoning; and
   (N)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and
permanent nature; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
The ordinances are on file in the city offices.
§ 10.05 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as
those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a continuation
of these ordinances and not as new enactments.
§ 10.06 PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES AND THE LIKE.
   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this code, shall not be affected by the adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.
§ 10.07 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
   (A)   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered re-ordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically
reenacted.
   (B)   The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances shall not impair
or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
§ 10.08 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section                 of the City of
Charlevoix Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:...”. The new provisions
shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: “That the City of Charlevoix Code is
hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered                   , which
section reads as follows:...”. The new section shall then be set out in full as
desired.
§ 10.09 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate divisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other divisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in
catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other divisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary, to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter”, “this subchapter”, “this division” and the like, as the case
may be, or to “§§          through          “ (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code, but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.10 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, division, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and, if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, the decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by the decision.
§ 10.11 NOTICE.
   (A)   Except where otherwise provided or when a different method of notice
is required by state law, any notice required to be given by any section of
this code shall be served:
      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the
same at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable
age or discretion;
      (2)   By mailing said notice by first class mail to such owner at his
last known address; or
      (3)   If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises at least three (3) days before the act or action
concerning which the notice is given is required or is to occur.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear
down any notice made pursuant to this section without the authority of the city
manager, the chief of police, or the city officer responsible for placing said
notice.
(Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this
code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this code or any rule or regulation adopted or
issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by
both the fine and imprisonment; unless there is a fine or penalty specifically
set forth in the ordinance which provides for a greater penalty and, in that
event, the greater penalty shall control. Each act of violation and every day
upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this code whether or
not the penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance.
   (B)   Civil infractions.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 to 600.9948, as
amended.
         AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. The city’s Police Chief, a city police
officer and any other personnel of the city authorized by this division (B) or
any other chapter of this code to issue municipal civil infraction citations or
municipal civil infraction violation notices.
         CITATION. A written complaint or notice to appear in court, upon which
an authorized city official records the occurrence or existence of one or more
municipal civil infractions by the person cited.
         MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. The definition set forth in M.C.L.A. §
600.113(c), as amended.
         MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
         MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice on
which an authorized city official records the occurrence or existence of one or
more municipal civil infractions by the person cited and which directs the
person cited to appear in court regarding the alleged municipal civil
infraction.
         MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice on which
an authorized city official records the occurrence or existence of one or more
municipal civil infractions by the person cited, and directs the person cited
to appear at the city’s Municipal Violations Bureau to pay the fine and costs,
if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines established
under this division (B).
         MUNICIPAL VIOLATIONS BUREAU or BUREAU. The city’s Municipal Violations
Bureau as established by this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 12.1)
      (2)   Municipal Violations Bureau.
         (a)   Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal
Violations Bureau (Bureau) as authorized under § 8396 of the Act.
         (b)   Location, supervision, employees, rules and regulations. The
Bureau shall be located at the city offices and shall be under the supervision
and control of the City Clerk. The City Clerk, subject to the approval of the
City Council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the Bureau
and may appoint any necessary and qualified city employees to administer the
Bureau.
         (c)   Disposition of violations. The Bureau may only dispose of
municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled
pursuant to division (B)(10) below and for which a municipal civil infraction
violation notice (as opposed to a municipal civil infraction citation) has been
issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation
shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the Bureau. Nothing
in this division (B) shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a
municipal civil infraction citation for any violation designated as a municipal
civil infraction in this code, or from prosecuting any violation in a court of
competent jurisdiction, as provided in this code.
         (d)   Scope of Bureau responsibility. The scope of the Bureau’s
authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for
municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs
assessed as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not accept payment
of a fine from any person who denies having committed the municipal civil
infraction or who admits responsibility for the municipal civil infraction only
with explanation. In no event shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to
determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged
violation. In addition, no person shall be required to dispose of a municipal
civil infraction violation at the Bureau and may have the violation processed
before a court of competent jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to
dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any
way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded the person by law.
         (e)   Appearance; payment of fines and costs. A person receiving a
municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay
the specified fine and costs at or before the time specified for appearance in
the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by
mail, in person or by representation.
         (f)   Procedure when admission of responsibility not made or fine not
paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal civil
infraction violation notice, and if an admission of responsibility is not made
and a civil fine and costs, if any prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violation, are not paid at the Bureau within the time specified for appearance
in the municipal civil infraction violation notice, the authorized city
official may file a municipal civil infraction citation with the District
Court. The contents of the municipal civil infraction citation shall comply
with requirements of division (B)(7) below. A copy of the municipal civil
infraction citation issued under this division (B)(2)(f) may be served by first
class mail upon the person named in the citation at the person’s last known
address.
(Prior Code, § 12.2)
      (3)   Commencement of municipal civil infraction action. A municipal
civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized
city official of:
         (a)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the
alleged violator to appear at the city’s Municipal Violations Bureau; or
         (b)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in District Court.
(Prior Code, § 12.3)
      (4)   Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued by authorized city officials under
the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for the issuance
of municipal civil infraction citations under division (B)(5) below. A
municipal civil infraction violation notice shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   The person named in the municipal civil infraction violation
notice shall appear in the Municipal Violation Bureau by mail, in person, or by
representation, within 14 days of the issuance of the municipal civil
infraction violation notice;
         (b)   The address and telephone number of the Municipal Violation
Bureau, and the hours during which the Bureau is open;
         (c)   The amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, as
established in division (B)(10) below; and
         (d)   A statement in bold typeface indicating that failure to appear
at the Municipal Violations Bureau within 14 days of the date of the municipal
civil infraction violation notice was issued to pay the required fine may
result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation.
(Prior Code, § 12.4)
      (5)   Municipal civil infraction citations; general. Municipal civil
infraction citations may be issued by authorized city officials as follows:
         (a)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if
he or she personally witnesses the person commit a municipal civil infraction;
         (b)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if,
based upon personal investigation or upon investigation of a complaint by
someone who allegedly witnessed a person commit a municipal civil infraction,
the authorized city official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction; and
         (c)   A municipal civil infraction citation signed by an authorized
city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the municipal civil infraction citation occurred in the presence of the
authorized city official signing the citation, and if the citation contains the
following statement immediately above the date and signature of the authorized
city official: “I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements
above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief.”
(Prior Code, § 12.5)
      (6)   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance. Each municipal
civil infraction citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a
form approved by the State Court Administrator’s office. The original citation
shall be filed with the District Court. The second copy shall be retained by
the city, and the third copy shall be served on the alleged violator as
provided by division (B)(8) below.
(Prior Code, § 12.6)
      (7)   Municipal civil infraction citations; contents.
         (a)   A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the
following information:
            1.   The name and address of the alleged violator;
            2.   The citation to and brief description of the municipal civil
infraction alleged to have been violated;
            3.   The name, address and telephone number of the 90th District
Court for the county; and
            4.   A statement in bold typeface indicating that failure to appear
at the 90th District Court for the county within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in the entry of a default judgment against the violator on the
municipal civil infraction.
         (b)   The municipal civil infraction citation shall also inform the
alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following:
            1.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by
mail, in person or by representation, at or before the time specified for
appearance in the municipal civil infraction citation;
            2.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction “with
explanation” by mail, in person or by representation, at or before the time
specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction citation; or
            3.   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by
doing either of the following:
               a.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before the
District Court Judge or magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested
by the city; or
               b.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before the District
Court Judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
         (c)   The municipal civil infraction citation shall also inform the
alleged violator of all the following.
            1.   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility “with
explanation” in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to
the 90th District Court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation
within the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction
citation to obtain a scheduled date and time for appearance in court.
            2.   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the 90th District Court in person, by mail, by
telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance in the
municipal civil infraction citation to obtain a scheduled date and time to
appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the municipal civil
infraction citation.
            3.   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the city.
            4.   At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in
person before the District Court Judge or magistrate, without the opportunity
of being represented by an attorney.
            5.   At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in
person before the District Court Judge with the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney.
(Prior Code, § 12.7)
      (8)   Municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction
violation notices; service. Municipal civil infraction citations and municipal
civil infraction violation notices shall be served by an authorized city
official as follows.
         (a)   Except as provided by division (B)(8)(b) below, an authorized
city official shall personally serve a copy of the municipal civil infraction
citation or the municipal civil infraction violation notice upon the person or
persons named therein.
         (b)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the municipal civil
infraction citation or the municipal civil infraction violation notice may be
served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or structure by posting
a copy of the citation or notice on the land, building or structure and by
sending by first class mail, a copy of the citation or notice to the owner or
occupant of the land, building or structure, at the owner’s or occupant’s last
known address.
         (c)   If a municipal civil infraction citation is being issued
pursuant to a failure to admit responsibility and pay the fines and costs to
the Municipal Violations Bureau resulting from a municipal civil infraction
violation notice issued by an authorized city official, the municipal civil
infraction citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator
at his or her last known address.
(Prior Code, § 12.8)
      (9)   Municipal civil infraction citations; court procedure.
         (a)   A person to whom a municipal civil infraction citation is issued
under this division (B) shall appear at or before the time specified in the
citation and may respond to the allegations contained in the citation as
follows.
            1.   If the defendant wishes to admit responsibility for the
municipal civil infraction, the defendant may do so by appearing in person, by
mail or by representation.
            2.   If the defendant wishes to admit responsibility for the
municipal civil infraction “with explanation”, the defendant may do so in
either of the following ways:
               a.   Appearing by mail; and
               b.   By contacting the court in person, by mail, by telephone or
by representation to obtain from the court a scheduled date and time for an
appearance, at which time the defendant shall appear in court in person or by
representation.
            3.   If the defendant wishes to deny responsibility for a municipal
civil infraction, the defendant shall do so by appearing for an informal or a
formal hearing. If the hearing date is not specified on a citation, the
defendant shall contact the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by
representation, to obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for an informal
or a formal hearing. If the hearing date is specified on the citation, the
defendant shall appear on that date. The hearing shall be an informal hearing,
unless a formal hearing is requested by the defendant or the city.
         (b)   If the defendant fails to appear as directed by the citation or
other notice at a scheduled appearance to admit responsibility “with
explanation”, at a scheduled informal hearing, or at a scheduled formal
hearing, the court shall enter a default judgment against the defendant.
(Prior Code, § 12.9)
      (10)   Schedule of civil fines. The City Council may adopt by ordinance a
fine schedule and/or an ordinance may specify a fine for a violation of that
particular ordinance. If no other fine amount is specified by an ordinance of
the City Council, the fines for violations shall be as follows:
 
Offense                                                       Fine
First offense                                                 $100
Second offense within 2 years of initial offense              $300
Third or subsequent offense within 2 years of initial offense $500
 
(Prior Code, § 12.10)
      (11)   Fine sanctions.
         (a)   A person charged with a municipal civil infraction under any
part of the city code and who is served with a municipal civil infraction
violation notice under this shall, upon pleading responsible to the municipal
civil infraction at the Bureau, be assessed a civil fine in accordance with the
civil fine schedule established under this division (B).
         (b)   A person who is charged with a municipal civil infraction under
an ordinance of the city and who is served a municipal civil infraction
citation under this division (B) shall, upon pleading responsible or being
found responsible by the District Court Judge or magistrate, be assessed a
civil fine pursuant to the civil fine schedule as established by the District
Court.
         (c)   In addition to the civil fines assessed pursuant to division (B)
(11)(b) above, the District Court Judge, or magistrate (if expressly authorized
to do so by the Chief Judge of the 90th District Court) may issue and enforce
any order necessary to enforce the ordinance under which the municipal civil
infraction was charged.
         (d)   If a person who has pled responsible or has been found
responsible for a municipal civil infraction does not comply with any court
order enforcing the ordinance under which the municipal civil infraction arose,
then the city may take such other action authorized by law, including, but not
limited to, seeking an order to show cause why the person should not be held in
contempt of court for failure to comply with the court’s original enforcement
order.
(Prior Code, § 12.11)
      (12)   Lien on property.
         (a)   If a defendant does not pay the civil fine or costs as required
by the District Court Judge or magistrate within 30 days after the date on
which payment is due in a municipal civil infraction action brought for a
violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other
structure, the city may obtain a lien against the land, building or structure
involved in the violation by recording a copy of the court order requiring
payment of the fine and costs with the Register of Deeds for the county in
which the land, building or structure is located. The court order shall not be
recorded unless a legal description of the property is incorporated in or
attached to the court order. The lien is effective immediately upon recording
of the court order with the Register of Deeds.
         (b)   The court order recorded with the Register of Deeds shall
constitute notice of pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the
lien shall be sent by the city by first class mail to the owner of record of
the land, building or structure at the owner’s last known address.
         (c)   The lien created by this section may be enforced and discharged
by the city in the manner prescribed by the General Property Act, Public Act
206 of 1893, being M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 to 211.157, or by an duly passed by the
city. However, the property is not subject to sale under § 60 of Public Act 206
of 1893, being M.C.L.A. § 211.60, for non-payment of a civil fine or costs
unless the property is also subject to sale under that section for delinquent
property taxes.
         (d)   A lien created under this section has priority over any other
lien unless one or more of the following apply:
            1.   The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessments;
            2.   The other lien is created before the effective date of the
amendatory act that added this section;
            3.   Federal law provides that the other lien has priority; and
            4.   The other lien was recorded before the lien under this section
is recorded.
         (e)   The city may institute an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of the fines and costs imposed by a court order
for a municipal civil infraction. However, an attempt by the city to collect
the fines or costs by any process does not invalidate or waive the lien upon
the land, building or structure.
         (f)   A lien provided for by this division (B) shall not continue for
a period of longer than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a
fine or costs is recorded, unless within that time an action to enforce the
lien is commenced.
(Prior Code, § 12.12)
(Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 856, passed 1-6-2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
      
34.   DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN
      
35.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
      
36.   ETHICAL CONDUCT
CHAPTER 30: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
   
30.01   Ward boundaries
   
30.02   Alteration of boundaries
§ 30.01 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   The several boundaries of the three wards of the city shall be described as
follows:
   (A)   Revised First Ward description. All that territory embraced within the
corporate limits of the City of Charlevoix lying northerly and easterly of the
following described line: beginning at the north extension of the centerline of
Grant Street at the shore of Lake Michigan (on the north side of Pine River
Channel); thence southerly along the extended centerline of Grant Street to the
centerline of Park Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Park
Avenue to the centerline of Sherman Street; thence south along the centerline
of Sherman Street to the centerline of Antrim Street; thence east along the
centerline of Antrim Street to the centerline of Grant Street; thence south
along the centerline of Grant Street to the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue;
thence east along the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue to the centerline of Bridge
Street; thence north along the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of
Mason Street; thence east along the easterly extension of Mason Street to the
shore of Round Lake; thence northeasterly to a point in the middle of Round
Lake at the intersection of the southerly extension of Nettleton Street with
the easterly extension of Clinton Street; thence southeasterly to the
intersection of the centerline of the Upper Pine River Channel (southerly of
Park Island) with Round Lake; thence southeasterly along said centerline of
said Upper Channel to Lake Charlevoix being the point of ending.
   (B)   Revised Second Ward description. All that territory embraced within
the corporate limits of the City of Charlevoix lying southerly and westerly of
the following described line: commencing at the north extension of the
centerline of Grant Street at the shore of Lake Michigan (on the north side of
Pine River Channel); thence southerly along the extended centerline of Grant
Street to the centerline of Park Avenue; thence southwesterly along the
centerline of Park Avenue to the centerline of Sherman Street, being the point
of beginning of this description; thence south along the centerline of Sherman
Street to the centerline of Antrim Street; thence east along the centerline of
Antrim Street to the centerline of Grant Street; thence south along the
centerline of Grant Street to the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue; thence east
along the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue to the centerline of Bridge Street;
thence south along the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of St.
Mary's Drive; thence west along the centerline of St. Mary's Drive to the
centerline of State Street; thence south along the centerline of State Street
to the centerline of Bridge Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline
of Bridge Street to the centerline of Highway M-66; thence southeasterly along
the centerline of Highway M-66 to the corporate limits of the City of
Charlevoix, being the point of ending.
   (C)   Revised Third Ward description. All that territory embraced within the
corporate limits of the City of Charlevoix lying easterly and southerly of the
following described line: beginning at the centerline of Highway M-66 at the
corporate limit of the City of Charlevoix; thence northwesterly along the
centerline of Highway M-66 to the centerline of Bridge Street; thence
northeasterly along the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of State
Street; thence north along the centerline of State Street to the centerline of
St. Mary's Drive; thence east along the centerline of St. Mary's Drive to the
centerline of Bridge Street; thence north along the centerline of Bridge Street
to the centerline of Mason Street; thence east along the easterly extension of
Mason Street to the shore of Round Lake; thence northeasterly to a point in the
middle of Round Lake at the intersection of the southerly extension of
Nettleton Street with the easterly extension of Clinton Street; thence
southeasterly to the intersection of the centerline of the Upper Pine River
Channel (southerly of Park Island) with Round Lake; thence southeasterly along
said centerline of said Upper Channel to Lake Charlevoix being the point of
ending.
(Ord. 832, passed 5-16-2022)
§ 30.02 ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, as is in accordance with the
provisions of Public Act 279, § 27(a), being M.C.L.A. §§ 117.1 to 117.38, of
1909, added by Public Act 182, § 1, of 1966, alter the boundaries of the
several wards of the city to ensure that said wards are as nearly of equal
population as is practicable and contiguous and compact.
(Prior Code, § 1.702)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Administrative Services
   
31.01   Division of administrative service
   
31.02   City Manager
   
31.03   Department heads
   
31.04   Vacancies
   
31.05   Compliance; all departments
   
31.06   [Reserved]
   
31.07   Voidability of contract
   
31.08   Personnel regulations
   
31.09   Payment of moneys
   
31.10   Approval of legal documents
   
31.11   Bonds
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
§ 31.01 DIVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.
   The administrative service of the city shall be under the supervision and
direction of the City Manager, except as otherwise provided by the City Charter
and shall be divided into offices and departments that City Council, upon
recommendation of the City Manager, may from time to time establish. The duties
of these offices and departments shall be as outlined in the City Charter, the
state statutes and delineated in accompanying job descriptions.
§ 31.02 CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations adopted by the City Council, and the provisions of this code, are
properly enforced. The City Manager shall attend all meetings of the Council,
regular and special unless excused by the City Council. During the absence or
disability of the Manager, the Manager shall designate a qualified city
employee to temporarily perform the duties of the City Manager.
   (B)   The City Manager may delegate to a qualified city employee any action
or decision which the City Manager is authorized to make pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (C)   The City Manager, or one or more subordinate employees he or she may
designate, shall be charged with the efficient purchase of all items and
services for the city. She or he shall also be charged with the disposal of
surplus items. From time to time, the City Manager shall recommend policies,
procedures, and monetary thresholds for purchases; Council will set these
policies by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 1.52) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 836, passed 1-2-2023)
§ 31.03 DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   All administrative officers are responsible to the City Manager for the
effective administration of their respective departments and offices, and all
activities assigned to them. He or she shall employ or appoint all officers and
employees, except as otherwise provided in the City Charter or this code of
ordinances. The City Manager shall make recommendations for all appointments to
be made by the City Council. The City Manager may set aside any action taken by
any administrative officer and may supersede him or her in the functions of the
office.
(Prior Code, § 1.53)
§ 31.04 VACANCIES.
   In case of vacancy in office or during the absence of any administrative
office, the City Manager may designate an interim acting head to perform
personally the functions of the office, until such vacancy is filled in
accordance with the Charter.
(Prior Code, § 1.54)
§ 31.05 COMPLIANCE; ALL DEPARTMENTS.
   All departments of the city shall comply with the following.
   (A)   All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in
their particular field and shall inaugurate with the approval of the City
Manager in the case of departments responsible to him or her or in case of
other departments, with the approval of the officer or body to whom the
department head is responsible, such new practices as appear to be of benefit
to the service and to the public.
   (B)   Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the
Manager as he or she shall direct.
   (C)   Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of
all public records under his or her jurisdiction and shall provide a system of
filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence or
other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or
removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the
City Manager.
   (D)   (1)   All moneys collected by any department shall be deposited daily
with the office of City Treasurer along with record of activities and receipts.
      (2)   Exceptions as to holidays, special events and weekends may be
changed with the permission of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 1.55)
§ 31.06 [RESERVED].
§ 31.07 VOIDABILITY OF CONTRACT.
   A contract involving a prohibited conflict of interest under this subchapter
shall be voidable only by decree of a court of proper jurisdiction in any
action by the state or a political subdivision which is a party thereto, as to
any person that entered into the contract or took assignment thereof, with
actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. In the case of a person other than
an individual, the actual knowledge must be that of an individual or the body
finally approving the contract for the person. An action to void any contract
shall be brought within one year after discovery of circumstances suggesting
the existence of a violation of the constitutional provision as implemented by
this subchapter. To meet the ends of justice, any such decree shall provide for
the reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all moneys, goods,
material, labor or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that
the state or political subdivision has benefitted thereby. This provision shall
not prohibit the parties from arriving at an amicable settlement.
(Prior Code, § 1.58)
§ 31.08 PERSONNEL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   He or she shall be the Personnel Director of the city, with
power to hire and discharge employees of the city not subject to the Charter
regulations. He or she shall enforce all personnel regulations and may prepare
personnel guidelines for all employees subject to approval of the Council.
      (2)   The City Manager may delegate these responsibilities to a
subordinate.
(Prior Code, § 1.59)
   (B)   (1)   The City Manager shall be a resident of the city.
      (2)   (a)   Full-time officers, employees and other personnel of the city
hereinafter employed by the city must be bona fide residents of the Charlevoix
Community School District (school district), except at the time of appointment
or employment when they need not be residents of the School District, but shall
establish residence in the school district within 90 days from the date of
appointment or employment. For good cause shown, the City Manager may allow an
additional 90 days for a total 180 days for newly appointed or employed
officers, employees or personnel of the city to establish residence in the
School District from the date of appointment or employment. A city employee who
is a School District resident may temporarily become a non-School District
resident for a period not to exceed 90 days. For good cause, the City Manager
may extend this time period for up to an additional 90 days.
         (b)   This provision does not apply to the following:
            1.   Any uniformed officer, employee or other personnel governed
under a current collective bargaining agreement to the extent that any
provision in this subchapter is inconsistent with any provision concerning city
residency contained in any current collective bargaining agreement;
            2.   Any part-time officer, employee or other personnel of the
city. For the purposes of this subchapter, part-time employees, officials or
personnel shall be defined as those employees, officials or personnel working
less than 30 hours per week; and/or
            3.   Any seasonal employee, officer or personnel of the city. For
the purposes of this subchapter, SEASONAL OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES OR OTHER
PERSONNEL OF THE CITY shall be defined as those officers, employees or
personnel that do not work more than six consecutive months during any one
calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1.151)
   (C)   All employees, officers and other personnel of the city shall maintain
an up-to-date record of residence address with the City Clerk. Failure of any
employee or officer to comply with this section shall be cause for removal or
discharge from the city service.
(Prior Code, § 1.152)
(Ord. 442, passed 1-21-1985; Ord. 548, passed 6-3-1991; Ord. 616, passed 9-6-
1994)
§ 31.09 PAYMENT OF MONEYS.
   All moneys belonging to the city shall be paid out upon presentation of a
valid voucher approved and signed by the Treasurer and Clerk issued in
accordance with the Charter. All checks drawn by the Treasurer, or his or her
deputy, must be countersigned by the City Clerk or his or her Deputy.
(Prior Code, § 1.60)
§ 31.10 APPROVAL OF LEGAL DOCUMENTS.
   The Mayor shall sign, the City Clerk shall attest to, the City Manager shall
approve as to substance, and the City Attorney shall approve as to form, all
contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the city, unless otherwise
provided for by law, the Charter, ordinance or the provisions of the code.
(Prior Code, § 1.61)
§ 31.11 BONDS.
   Bonds shall be required in accordance with Art. X of the Charter.
(Prior Code, § 1.62)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Boards and commissions generally
Civil Defense Organization
   
32.015   Definitions
   
32.016   Department of Civil Defense
   
32.017   Mayor; powers and duties
   
32.018   City Manager; powers and duties
   
32.019   Civil defense and disaster control plan
   
32.020   Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended
   
32.021   Violations
Housing Commission
   
32.035   Commission continued
   
32.036   Members; terms
   
32.037   Vacancies; removal
   
32.038   Powers and duties
   
32.039   Meetings
   
32.040   Finances
   
32.041   Conflicts of interest
   
32.042   Reports
Shade Tree and Park Commission
   
32.055   Commission continued
   
32.056   Term of office
   
32.057   Compensation
   
32.058   Powers and duties
Downtown Development Authority
   
32.070   Title
   
32.071   Authority
   
32.072   Definitions
   
32.073   Determination of necessity for Development Authority
   
32.074   Establishment; Board
   
32.075   Downtown District boundaries
   
32.076   Sources of revenue; permitted expenditures
Local Officers’ Compensation Commission
   
32.090   Commission created
   
32.091   Duties and powers
   
32.092   Meetings
Planning Commission
   
32.105   Creation
   
32.106   Membership
   
32.107   Training
   
32.108   Removal from office
   
32.109   Meetings
   
32.110   Powers and duties
   
32.111   Approval, ratification and reconfirmation
   
32.112   Definitions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   General provisions. All boards and commissions existing at the time of
the adoption of this code shall be continued and the members serving thereon
shall remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were
appointed.
(Prior Code, § 1.241)
   (B)   Vacancies. Unless otherwise provided, any vacancy occurring in the
membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment.
(Prior Code, § 1.242)
   (C)   Removal. Unless otherwise provided, the appointing authority may
remove any member of any board or commission for cause, but any member shall be
entitled to a public hearing on such removal, on written demand filed with the
appointing authority within ten days after notice of removal has been given to
such member.
(Prior Code, § 1.243)
   (D)   Compensation. Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and
commissions shall serve without compensation as members thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1.244)
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
§ 32.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL DEFENSE. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily
responsible, for protection against and to minimize and repair injury and
damage resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by
natural disaster.
   CIVIL DEFENSE VOLUNTEER. Any person who serves without compensation in the
Civil Defense Organization.
   EMERGENCY. A condition resulting from enemy attack or natural disaster which
cannot be handled by normal operating personnel and facilities.
   NATURAL DISASTER. Any condition seriously affecting or threatening public
health, welfare or security as a result of severe fire, explosion, flood,
tornado, hurricane or similar natural or accidental cause and which is beyond
the control of public or private agencies ordinarily responsible for the
control or relief of such conditions. Riots, strikes, insurrections or other
civil disturbances shall not be included within the meaning of NATURAL
DISASTER.
(Prior Code, § 1.201)
§ 32.016 DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE.
   (A)   The city’s Department of Civil Defense shall utilize to the fullest
extent personnel and facilities of existing city departments and agencies. The
City Manager shall be the Director of said Department and shall be responsible
for its organization, administration and operation.
   (B)   The Department of Civil Defense shall also consist of such assistants,
clerical help, employees and civil defense volunteers as are deemed necessary
by the City Manager for the proper functioning of the organization, which
assistants may include deputy directors in the areas of financial services, law
enforcement, fire control, engineering services and health and medical
services; any of such positions shall, so far as possible, be additional duty
assignments to existing personnel, and it is the intent of this subchapter that
civil defense and disaster assignments be as nearly consistent with normal duty
assignments as possible.
   (C)   The organization of said Department shall also consist of the
employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments and agencies
suitable for or adaptable to civil defense and designated by the City Manager
to participate in the civil defense activity.
(Prior Code, § 1.202)
§ 32.017 MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   In the event of actual or threatened enemy attack or natural disaster,
the Mayor or, in his or her absence or inability to serve, the Deputy Mayor, as
conservator of the peace, shall:
      (1)   Declare a state of emergency within the city thereby placing in
effect the civil defense and disaster control plan required by this subchapter;
      (2)   As soon as possible, thereafter, convene the City Council to
perform its legislative and administrative functions as the situation may
demand. The Council shall have the power to terminate the state of emergency;
      (3)   Request the chief elected official of the county, through the
county’s Emergency Management Coordinator, to declare a local state of
emergency and to request assistance from the state and its agencies;
      (4)   Have the power to command services and the use of equipment and
facilities for such work and duties as the city may require to aid the regular
and volunteer city forces in time of emergency; and
      (5)   Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed necessary to
protect life and property and conserve critical resources, which regulations
may be invoked when necessary for tests of civil defense and disaster plans.
All such regulations shall be subject to approval of the Council as soon as
practicable subsequent to promulgation.
   (B)   The Mayor or, in his or her absence or inability to serve, the Deputy
Mayor shall have power to order civil defense forces to the aid of the state or
political subdivisions thereof subject to Council review as soon as
practicable.
(Prior Code, § 1.203) (Ord. 696, passed 8-2-2004)
§ 32.018 CITY MANAGER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The powers and duties of the City Manager, as the director of Civil
Defense, shall consist of the following.
      (1)   The City Manager shall coordinate the civil defense activities and
make emergency assignments of civil defense duties and civil defense forces in
order to meet the situations not covered in the normal duties of such forces.
      (2)   The City Manager may take all necessary action to conduct tests of
the civil defense and natural disaster plans.
      (3)   When a state of emergency has been declared, the City Manager shall
assemble and utilize civil defense forces and prescribe the manner and
conditions of their use.
      (4)   The City Manager shall designate a line of succession among his or
her department heads to carry out the powers and duties of this division (A) in
the event of his or her absence or his or her inability to serve.
      (5)   The City Manager shall be responsible for public relations,
information and education regarding all phases of civil defense.
      (6)   The City Manager shall be responsible for the development of a
civil defense and disaster control plan and upon adoption, shall be responsible
for such implementation and revision of the plan as to maintain it in a current
state of readiness at all times.
      (7)   The City Manager shall maintain liaison and cooperate with all
other interested and affected agencies, public and private.
      (8)   The City Manager shall coordinate the recruitment and training of
volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the
city for civil defense purposes.
   (B)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to exercise the powers granted
to the Mayor in §
32.017 of this chapter, either in the absence or inability to serve of the
Mayor and Deputy Mayor or where delay in the exercise of such powers would be
contrary to the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 1.205)
§ 32.019 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER CONTROL PLAN.
   (A)   A comprehensive civil defense and disaster control plan shall be
adopted by resolution of the Council upon the recommendation of the City
Manager.
   (B)   In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to the city
organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and
personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the
fullest extent possible.
   (C)   When approved, it shall be the duty of all city departments and
agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to
maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 1.205)
§ 32.020 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS SUSPENDED.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this subchapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all
existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the letter of
same may be inconsistent therewith.
(Prior Code, § 1.206)
§ 32.021 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or
delay the Civil Defense Organization in the enforcement of any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to this subchapter, or to do any act forbidden by
any rule or regulation pursuant to the authority contained in this subchapter.
It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any
emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the Civil
Defense Organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to
such person by the proper officials.
   (B)   Convictions for violations of the provisions of this subchapter shall
be punishable in accordance with §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1.207) Penalty, see §
10.99
HOUSING COMMISSION
§ 32.035 COMMISSION CONTINUED.
   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 et seq., as
amended, the Commission created for the city known as the “Charlevoix Housing
Commission” is continued.
(Prior Code, § 1.251)
§ 32.036 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   Said Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Mayor
of the city with the consent of the City Council. The term of the office of
members of the Commission shall be five years; provided that, members of the
initial Commission shall be as follows: one member for a term of one year; one
member for a term of two years; one member for a term of three years; one
member for a term of four years; and one member for a term of five years. The
term of office of the member initially appointed for a one-year term shall
expire on the third Monday in April 1976, and the term of other Commission
members, in turn, shall expire on the third Mondays in April of succeeding
years.
(Prior Code, § 1.252)
§ 32.037 VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   Members of the city’s Housing Commission shall be residents of the city and,
in the event any Commissioner removes from the city during his or her term of
office his or her position, shall thereby have become vacated. Members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation, and any Commissioner may be
removed from office during his or her term either with or without good cause by
resolution concurred on by not less than three members of the City Council at
any regular or special meeting thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1.253)
§ 32.038 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The city’s Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or
permitted to be vested in the housing commission by said Public Act 18 of 1933,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 et seq., as heretofore or hereafter amended, and any
laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being
intended to vest in the city’s Housing Commission all powers and duties
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 1.254)
§ 32.039 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall meet at regular intervals. The said meeting shall be
public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of
the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. A President and Vice-President shall be elected by the Commission.
The Commission may appoint a Director who may also serve as Secretary, and such
other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The Commission shall
prescribe the duties of all of its officers and employees and may, with the
approval of the City Council, fix their compensation. The Commission may, from
time to time, as necessary, employ engineers, architects and consultants,
within the limitation of its established budget.
(Prior Code, § 1.255)
§ 32.040 FINANCES.
   Funds for the operation of the Commission may be provided by the City
Council, but the Commission shall, as soon as possible, reimburse the city for
all moneys expended by it for the Commission from revenues received from the
sale of bonds.
(Prior Code, § 1.256)
§ 32.041 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   No member of the Housing Commission or any of its officers or employees
shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract for property,
materials or services to be acquired by said Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1.257)
§ 32.042 REPORTS.
   The Commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the City
Council and shall make such other reports as the City Council may, from time to
time, require.
(Prior Code, § 1.258)
SHADE TREE AND PARK COMMISSION
§ 32.055 COMMISSION CONTINUED.
   The Shade Tree and Park Commission of the city shall contain five members.
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. At
least one member of the Board should be appointed on the basis of professional
or educational ability in the field of arboriculture, horticulture, invasive
species management, landscape architecture, or a related field. Not less than
four of the members shall be citizens and residents of the city; a non-resident
may be appointed if she or he possesses unique professional knowledge helpful
to the Board.
(Prior Code, § 1.261) (Ord. 808, passed 11-18-2019; Ord. 829, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 32.056 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the three persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three
years; except that, the term of two of the members appointed to the first
Commission shall be only one and two years, respectively. In the event that a
vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall
be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term.
(Prior Code, § 1.262)
§ 32.057 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 1.263)
§ 32.058 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall have power to study, investigate, plan, advise,
report and recommend to Council, the City Manager or the Mayor any action,
program, plan or legislation which the Commission shall find or determine to be
necessary or advisable for the care, preservation, trimming, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets
and alleys. The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings,
advices, reports and recommendations made by the Commission approving or
concurring therein, and members who do not so approve or concur therein shall
have the right, as a part of such report, to state their reasons for refusing
to approve or concur. The Commission, when requested by Council or the Mayor,
shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any
special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
   (B)   The Commission shall also have the power to review the conditions of
landscaping, tree maintenance, turf and plantings in city parks and make
reports, plans, and recommendations to the City Council, Mayor, and City
Manager as they may from time to time determine is valuable. The City Council,
Mayor, and City Manager may also request the Commission consider various
aspects of policy and seek a recommendation as they may wish; the Commission
shall also perform those duties assigned to it by resolution or ordinance as
Council may, from time to time, determine.
(Prior Code, § 1.264) (Ord. 808, passed 11-18-2019)
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 32.070 TITLE.
   This subchapter, along with
Chapter 34 of this code of ordinances, shall be known and may be cited as the
“Downtown Development Authority Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 1.271) (Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982)
§ 32.071 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 57 of
2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230, and subject to the provisions
thereof unless otherwise specifically provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 1.272) (Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982)
§ 32.072 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The terms used herein shall have the same meaning as given to those
terms in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230, as
amended, or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT 197. Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230.
      AUTHORITY. The Charlevoix Downtown Development Authority created by this
subchapter.
      BOARD. The governing body of the city’s Downtown Development Authority.
      CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor of the city.
      CITY. The City of Charlevoix, Michigan.
      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
      DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. The Downtown District designated by this subchapter as
now existing or hereinafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 1.273) (Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982)
§ 32.073 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY FOR DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best
interests of the public to halt property value deterioration and increase
property tax valuation where possible in the Business District of the city, to
eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by
establishing a Downtown Development Authority, pursuant to Public Act 57 of
2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230.
(Prior Code, § 1.274) (Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982)
§ 32.074 ESTABLISHMENT; BOARD.
   (A)   Established; powers generally. Pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230, as amended, the city does hereby
establish a Downtown Development Authority for the city. The Authority shall
analyze the impact of economic changes and growth in the Downtown District and
develop plans to promote orderly economic growth in the Downtown Development
District. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and
exercise its powers under the title of “Charlevoix Downtown Development
Authority”. The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court in
the state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the
purpose of its establishment as provided by this subchapter and Public Act 57
of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230. The enumeration of a power in
this subchapter or in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to
152.4230, shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the
authority. The Authority shall implement a development plan in the Downtown
District as necessary to achieve the purposes of the Downtown Development Act,
all in accordance with the powers granted by this subchapter and Public Act 57
of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230.
(Prior Code, § 1.275)
   (B)   Downtown Development Authority Board; membership; terms. The Authority
shall be under the supervision and control of a board consisting of the Mayor
and eight members as provided by Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.4201 to 152.4230. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
approval by the City Council. The Board members shall hold office for the terms
provided in Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to
152.4230. All members shall hold office until the Board member’s successor is
appointed. A Board member shall take office by swearing and subscribing to the
constitutional oath of office.
(Prior Code, § 1.277)
   (C)   Powers of the Authority. Except as specifically otherwise provided in
this subchapter, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to
the limitations imposed by law and herein. The Authority, with the approval of
the City Council, may levy an ad valorem tax on the real and tangible personal
property not exempt by law and as finally equalized in the Downtown District.
The tax shall not be more than two mills. The tax shall be collected by the
city at the same time and in the same manner as the city collects its other ad
valorem taxes. The tax shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Downtown
Development Authority and credited to the General Fund of the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 1.278)
   (D)   Directors; bond and director. If a Director is employed as authorized
by Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. § 125.4205, that director shall post
bond in the penal sum of $5,000 as required by such section of such Public Act
57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. § 125.4205, and by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1.279)
   (E)   Meetings.
      (1)   Within 30 days after the appointment of the Board of the Downtown
Development Authority, the Chairperson of such Board shall call a meeting of
the Board. The Chairperson shall open the meeting and call for an election of
other Board officers which shall consist of the following officers:
         (a)   Vice-Chairperson;
         (b)   Treasurer; and
         (c)   Secretary.
      (2)   The Board shall prepare bylaws to govern the procedure of meetings
and powers of its officers.
(Prior Code, § 1.280)
(Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982; Ord. 448, passed 4-15-1985)
§ 32.075 DOWNTOWN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The Downtown District, in which the authority shall exercise its power as
provided by Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230,
shall consist of the following described property in the city, subject to such
changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this section and Public Act 57
of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230 : an area in the city within
the boundaries described as follows: beginning at the intersection of the
centerline of Hurlbut Avenue with the centerline of State Street; thence
northerly along the centerline of said State Street to the easterly extension
of the south line of the north 54 feet of Lot 79 of Upright and Hurlbut’s
addition to the said city; thence westerly along said extension to the
southeast corner of the north 54 feet of Lot 79; thence continuing westerly
along said south line of the north 54 feet of Lots 79, 78 and 77 to the west
line of the east ten feet of Lot 77, said addition; thence northerly along said
west line of the east 10 feet to the centerline of Newman Street; thence
easterly along the centerline of Newman Street to the southerly extension of
the west line of Lot 2 of said Upright and Hurlbut’s Addition; thence northerly
along said extension and along the west line of said Lot 2 and the northerly
prolongation thereof to the centerline of Antrim Street; thence westerly along
the centerline of Antrim Street to the southerly extension of the west line of
Lot 5 of Block 11 of the original plat of the Village of Charlevoix; thence
northerly along said extension and the west line of said Lot 5 to the
centerline of Mason Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Mason
Street to the centerline of Grant Street; thence along the centerline of Grant
Street northerly to its intersection with the centerline of Clinton Street;
thence along the centerline of Clinton Street easterly to its intersection with
the northerly prolongation of the west line of Lot 5 of said Block 10; thence
southerly along said prolongation line and the west line of said Lot 5 to the
southwest corner of said lot; thence along the south line of Lots 5 and 4 of
said block to the southeast corner of said Lot 4; thence along the east line of
said Lot 4 and the northerly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Clinton
Street; thence westerly along the centerline of said Clinton Street to the
southerly extension of the west line of Lot 21, Block 9 of the Village of
Charlevoix; thence northerly along said extension and the west line of Lot 21
and the northerly prolongation thereof to the southwest corner of Lot 4 of said
Block 9; thence continuing northerly along the west line of Lot 4 of said Block
9 to the northwest corner of said Lot 4; thence easterly along the north line
of said Block 9 and the easterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of
State Street; thence northerly along the centerline of State Street to the
centerline of Park Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Park Avenue
to the southerly extension of the west line of the east 16.5 feet of Lot 3,
Block 1, of said Village of Charlevoix; thence northerly along said extension
and said west line of the east 16.5 feet of said lot, 165. feet; thence
northeasterly 30.5 feet to the east line of said Lot 3; thence northerly along
said east line of Lot 3 to its intersection with a line which is parallel with
the south revetment of the entrance channel of Charlevoix Harbor and which is
30 feet south therefrom; thence northwesterly along said line which is parallel
with said channel to its intersection with the southeasterly line of the city
property as described in the lease recorded in Liber 229, page 890, Charlevoix
County Records; thence along the southeasterly line of said Park property
(described as South 59º West) to the northwest corner of Lot 5, Block 17, of
the Village of Charlevoix; thence southerly along said east line of Lot 5 and
southerly prolongation to the said east line of Lot 5 to the centerline of Park
Avenue; thence west along said centerline of Park Avenue to the southerly
extension of the west line of said Lot 5 of said Block 17; thence northerly
along the southerly prolongation of said Lot 5 and continuing along the west
line of said Lot 5 to its intersection with the southeasterly line of said city
property as described in said Liber 229, page 890; thence southwesterly
(described as South 59º West) along said city property to the easternmost
corner of the Beatrice Sommerville property as described in Liber 280, page 33,
Charlevoix County records; thence along the said Sommerville property north
71º55’ West to the northernmost corner of said property; thence continuing
along said Sommerville property south 23º36’ West 20 feet to the southeasterly
line of Palmer Street and being on the southwesterly line of the property
leased to the state as recorded in Liber 229, Page 890, Charlevoix County
records; thence north 64º05’ west along the southwesterly line of said state
property 122.22 feet to the angle point in said state property; thence north
25º55’ east along said state property and extension thereof to the centerline
of the channel; thence northwesterly along the centerline of said channel to
the shore of Lake Michigan; thence northeasterly along the shore of Lake
Michigan to its intersection with the northerly line of Pine River Lane; thence
southeasterly along said lane to the southeasterly corner of the Lake House
Condominium as recorded in Liber 258, page 123, Charlevoix County records;
thence along said condominium line north 10º east 176.60 feet to the angle
point in said boundary line; thence continuing along said condominium boundary
north 52º27’14” west to a point 132 feet south of the south line of Dixon
Avenue; thence, parallel with said south line of Dixon Avenue, to a point 393
feet west of the west line of Michigan Avenue; thence north 165 feet to the
centerline of said Dixon Avenue; thence along the centerline of Dixon Avenue to
a point 220 feet east of Michigan Avenue as it existed prior to June 1941;
thence south 231 feet; thence west 35.2 feet to an angle point in the northerly
line of the former E. James Hiller property described in Liber 187, page 832,
Charlevoix County records; thence south 52º08’25” east along said Hiller
property 261.9 feet; thence continuing along said Hiller property south
1º38’28” west 34.94 feet to the shore of Round Lake; thence southwesterly,
southerly, southeasterly and easterly along said shore to its intersection with
the westerly line of Lot 6, Block 19 of Newman’s Addition to the Village of
Charlevoix; thence southerly along said westerly line of lot 6 to a point 22.5
feet north of the northerly line of Belvedere Avenue; thence west to a point
being 29.76 feet east of the west line of Lot 4, Block 19 of said Newman’s
Addition; thence parallel with the west line of said Lot 4 south 7.6 feet;
thence parallel with the south line of said Lot 4, west six feet; thence south
parallel with said west line of Lot 4 and southerly extension thereof to the
centerline of Belvedere Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of said
Belvedere Avenue to its intersection with the northerly extension of the east
line of the west 40 feet of Lot 2, Block 5, of Mason’s Addition to the Village
(now city) of Charlevoix; thence southerly along said extension and said east
line of the west 40 feet of Lot 2, 125.5 feet; thence west six feet; thence
south 45 feet to the south line of the north 137.5 feet of said Lot 2; thence
westerly along said last mentioned line and continuing along the south line of
the north 137.5 feet of Lot 1 of said Block 5 and the westerly prolongation
thereof to the centerline of Bridge Street; thence south along the centerline
of Bridge Street to the centerline of Hurlbut Avenue; thence westerly along the
centerline of Hurlbut Avenue to the point of beginning; all being a part of
Government Lots 2 and 3 and a part of the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter, all in Section 26, Town 343 North, Range 8 West, and part of
Government Lot 1 and part of the northeast fractional quarter, all in Section
27, Town 34 North, Range 8 West.
(Prior Code, § 1.276) (Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982; Ord. 463, passed 6-2-1986;
Ord. 681, passed 12-2-2002, ratified 6-19-2006)
§ 32.076 SOURCES OF REVENUE; PERMITTED EXPENDITURES.
   The activities of the authority shall be financed from one or more of the
funding sources set out in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to
152.4230, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 1.281) (Ord. 397, passed 4-19-1982)
LOCAL OFFICERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSION
§ 32.090 COMMISSION CREATED.
   Pursuant to §
2.11 of the Charter, a Local Officers’ Compensation Commission is created. It
shall determine the salaries of city elected officials. The Commission shall
consist of five members who are registered electors of the city, appointed by
the Mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and
serving on the Council. The terms of office shall be five years; except that,
of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one,
two, three, four and five years. All first members shall be appointed within 30
days after the effective date of this subchapter. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of an unexpired term. No officer or employee of any
government agency shall be eligible to be appointed to the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1.41)
§ 32.091 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Commission shall determine the salaries of the city elected officials
which determination shall be the salaries unless the legislative body by
resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the
Council rejects the determinations. The determinations of the Commission shall
be effective 30 days following their filing with the City Clerk unless rejected
by the Council. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any
expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to
salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and
accounted for to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1.42)
§ 32.092 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in every odd-
numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its
first meeting, which shall be held on or before 45 days after the effective
date of this chapter. A majority of the members of the Commission constitutes a
quorum for conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall take
no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the
members appointed and serving on the Commission. The Commission shall elect a
Chairperson from among its members. SESSION DAYS means any calendar day on
which the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the
Commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 1.43)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.105 CREATION.
   (A)   There shall be a city’s Planning Commission pursuant to Public Act 33
of 2008, as amended, being the state’s Planning Enabling Act (M.C.L.A. §§
125.3801 et seq.), hereinafter referred to as the “Planning Commission” with
the powers and duties as therein set forth and as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   This subchapter shall be officially known and described as the “City
of Charlevoix Planning Commission Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 1.400)
§ 32.106 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)    The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Mayor and subject to approval by a majority vote of the City Council. To be
qualified to be a member and remain a member of the Commission, the following
qualifications must be met:
      (1)   Shall be a qualified elector of the city, as defined in §
32.112 of this chapter;
      (2)   Shall attend training for commission members, pursuant to §
32.107 of this chapter after an individual’s first appointment and before
reappointment; and
      (3)   Shall meet the conditions provided for each individual member in
divisions (B), (C) and (D) below.
   (B)   Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. If a vacancy occurs,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
provided for an original appointment such that the terms of one-third of all
Commission members continue to expire each year. A member shall hold office
until his or her successor is appointed.
   (C)   The membership shall be representative of the important segments of
the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational and social
development of the city, in accordance with the major interests as they exist
in the city, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education,
public health, government, transportation, industry, commerce, healthcare,
building trades, hospitality, retail, finance, insurance, real estate,
cultural, historic and recreational resources.
   (D)    The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography
of the city to the extent practicable.
(Prior Code, § 1.401) (Ord. 855, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 32.107 TRAINING.
   Appointed members of the Planning Commission shall attend educational
programs designed for training members of state planning commissions if the
adopted city budget for that fiscal year includes funds to pay for tuition,
registration and travel expenses for the training. Nothing in this section
shall prevent a member who has not had training from finishing his or her term
of office unless the member resigns or is removed by action of the City
Council. The member shall be ineligible for reappointment at the conclusion of
the term of office if he or she did not attend training. The Planning
Commission shall include in its bylaws what training programs qualify to meet
this requirement.
(Prior Code, § 1.402)
§ 32.108 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   The City Council may remove a member of the Planning Commission for
misfeasance, malfeasance or non-feasance in office upon written charges and
after a public hearing. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest,
as required by §
32.109(D) of this chapter, shall constitute malfeasance in office.
(Prior Code, § 1.403)
§ 32.109 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall hold not less than four regular meetings
each year and, by resolution, shall determine the time and place of meetings.
Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, a special meeting of the Commission may be
called by the Chairperson or by two other members, upon written request to the
Secretary. Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, the Secretary shall send
written notice of a special meeting to Commission members not less than 48
hours before the meeting.
   (B)   The business that the Planning Commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the
Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275.
Public notice of the time, date and place of a regular or special meeting shall
be given in the manner required by that act.
   (C)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by
the Planning Commission in the performance of an official function shall be
made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246.
   (D)   Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be
considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the
potential conflict of interest to the Planning Commission. The member is
disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a
majority vote of the remaining members of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1.404)
§ 32.110 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Master plan.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall make and approve a master plan as a
guide for development within its planning jurisdiction. The planning
jurisdiction includes areas within the city and may also include any areas
outside of the city that, in the judgment of the Commission, are related to
planning for the city.
      (2)   In preparation of the master plan, the Planning Commission shall do
all of the following, as applicable:
         (a)   Make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present
conditions and future growth within the planning jurisdiction with due regard
to its relation to neighboring jurisdictions;
         (b)   Consult with representatives of adjacent local units of
government in respect to their planning so that conflicts in master plans and
zoning may be avoided; and
         (c)   Cooperate with all departments of the state and federal
governments and other public agencies concerned with programs for economic,
social and physical development within the planning jurisdiction and seek the
maximum coordination of the local unit of government’s programs with these
agencies.
      (3)   The master plan shall address land use and infrastructure issues.
The plan shall include maps, plats, charts and show the Commission
recommendations for the physical development of the city. The master plan shall
also include information pertinent to the future development of the planning
jurisdiction as detailed in Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. § 125.3833
(2).
      (4)   Preparation and adoption of and amendments to the master plan shall
follow the procedures established in Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.3839 through 125.3845.
   (B)   Records.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of
business and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall make an annual report to City Council
concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including
recommendations regarding actions by the City Council related to planning and
development.
   (C)   Capital improvements program. Upon adoption of the master plan, the
Planning Commission shall annually prepare a capital improvements program (CIP)
of public structures and improvements, with the assistance of staff. The CIP
shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of
their priority for the ensuing six-year period, based upon the requirements of
the local unit of government for all types of public structures and
improvements.
   (D)   Review of plats. Upon adoption of the master plan, the Planning
Commission shall review and make recommendations on plats, after publishing and
holding a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1.405)
§ 32.111 APPROVAL, RATIFICATION AND RECONFIRMATION.
   All official actions taken by the city’s Planning Commission preceding the
Commission created by this subchapter are hereby approved, ratified and
reconfirmed. Any project, review or process taking place at the effective date
of this subchapter shall continue with the Commission created by this
subchapter, subject to the requirements of this subchapter, and shall be deemed
a continuation of any previous Planning Commission. This subchapter shall be in
full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication.
(Prior Code, § 1.406)
§ 32.112 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   QUALIFIED ELECTOR. Intending to be consistent with § 10 of the state’s
Election Law, being M.C.L.A. § 168.10, a United States citizen who has been a
resident of the state for six months, the city for 30 days and is 18 years or
older.
   RESIDENCE. Intending to be consistent with § 11 of the state’s Election Law,
being M.C.L.A. § 168.11, the place at which a person habitually sleeps, keeps
his or her personal effects and has a regular place of lodging. If a person has
more than one residence, or if a wife has a residence separate from that of the
husband, that place at which the person resides the greater part of the time
shall be his or her official residence for the purposes of this act. This
section shall not be construed to affect existing judicial interpretation of
the term RESIDENCE.
      (1)   An elector shall not be deemed to have gained or lost a residence
by reason of being employed in the service of the United States or of the
state, while engaged in the navigation of the waters of the state or of the
United States or of the high seas, while a student at an institution of
learning, while kept at any state facility or hospital at public expense, or
while confined in a jail or prison. Honorably discharged members of the armed
forces of the United States or of the state and who reside in the veterans’
facility established by the state may acquire a residence where the facility is
located. The residence of a person who is a patient receiving treatment at a
hospital or other facility pursuant to Public Act 258 of 1974, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 330.1001 to 330.2106, is the village, city or township where
the person resided immediately before admission to the hospital or other
facility.
      (2)   A member of the armed forces of the United States shall not be
deemed a “resident” of the state in consequence of being stationed in a
military or naval place within the state.
(Prior Code, § 1.407)
CHAPTER 33: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Advisory petition; contents; filing
   
33.03   Initiatory resolution
   
33.04   Plans and specifications
   
33.05   City Manager; report
   
33.06   Determination on project; notice
   
33.07   Hearing on necessity
   
33.08   Deviation from plans and specifications
   
33.09   Limitations on preliminary expenses
   
33.10   Assessment roll; filing; review and objections; changes; payments
   
33.11   Lien; creation
   
33.12   Additional assessments; refunds
   
33.13   Additional procedures
   
33.14   Special assessment accounts
   
33.15   Contested assessments
   
33.16   Reassessment for benefits
   
33.17   Combination of projects
   
33.18   Single lot assessments
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COST. When referring to the cost of any local public improvement, shall
include the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices,
advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs
incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor
and the financing thereof.
   LOCAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any construction of or improvement upon public
property which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity
of such improvement, including specifically, but not by way of limitation, the
construction of sewers, waterworks and streets.
(Prior Code, § 1.600)
§ 33.02 ADVISORY PETITION; CONTENTS; FILING.
   (A)   The City Council, to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of
property owners to be assessed desire any particular local public improvement
to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a
petition voluntarily presented; but, in either event, such petition shall be
advisory only.
(Prior Code, § 1.601)
   (B)   Each advisory petition shall be addressed to the Council and contain a
brief description of the improvement sought to be made and shall be signed only
by property owners. Each signature shall be followed by a brief description of
the property owned by the signatory. The signatures on such petitions shall be
verified by the oath of one or more of the circulators of such petition before
filing.
(Prior Code, § 1.602)
   (C)   Advisory petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall refer them
to the City Manager. The petition shall be presented to the Council at its next
regular meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose, together with
the recommendation of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 1.603)
§ 33.03 INITIATORY RESOLUTION.
   Whenever the Council shall have power to make a local public improvement by
special assessment, it shall, by resolution, set forth the improvement intended
to be made and direct the City Manager to prepare a report containing any
information it may require relative to such improvement.
(Prior Code, § 1.604)
§ 33.04 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   The City Manager shall prepare, or cause to be prepared: plans and
specifications of the local public improvement to be made; an estimate of the
life of the improvement and of the cost thereof; a description of the
assessment district or lands affected; and such other pertinent information as
the Council requests.
(Prior Code, § 1.605)
§ 33.05 CITY MANAGER; REPORT.
   The City Manager shall prepare his or her report and set forth therein: a
schedule of all property affected by the proposed local public improvement and
the owners thereof; the assessed valuation of each parcel of land and any tax
delinquencies thereon and whether such land is improved or unimproved; and such
other information as the Council may have requested. The City Manager shall
present this report and the plans and specifications to the Council together
with his or her recommendations as to what proportion of the cost should be
paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general
obligation of the city; the number of installments in which the assessment
should be spread; and the lands which should be included in the special
assessment district.
(Prior Code, § 1.606)
§ 33.06 DETERMINATION ON PROJECT; NOTICE.
   After the City Manager has presented the report required in §
33.02 of this chapter for making any local public improvement as requested in
the resolution of the Council, and the Council has reviewed said report, a
resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting
forth the nature thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of
such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property
especially benefitted; determination of benefits received by affected
properties and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large;
designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected;
placing the complete information on file in the office of the Clerk where the
same may be found for examination; and directing the Clerk to give notice of
public hearing on the proposed improvement at which time and place opportunity
will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one
publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first
class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, said
publication and mailing to be made at least 14 full days prior to the date of
said hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1.607)
§ 33.07 HEARING ON NECESSITY.
   At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the Council may modify
the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as it shall deem to
be in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided that, if the amount of
work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing
shall be held, pursuant to notice prescribed in §
33.03 of this chapter. If the determination of the Council shall be to proceed
with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the preliminary
plans, assessment district and estimates of cost, directing the Engineer to
prepare construction plans and specifications, and directing the Assessor to
prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the Council’s
determination and report the same to the Council for confirmation. The Council
shall approve construction plans and specifications prior to the meeting to
review the special assessment roll.
(Prior Code, § 1.608)
§ 33.08 DEVIATION FROM PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   No deviation from construction plans and specifications, as approved by the
Council, shall be permitted by any official or employee of the city without
authority of the Council by resolution; provided, however, that, minor changes
as authorized by the City Manager may be made without such approval. A copy of
the resolution authorizing such changes or deviations, other than minor changes
authorized by the City Manager, shall be certified by the Clerk and attached to
the original plans on file in his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 1.609)
§ 33.09 LIMITATIONS ON PRELIMINARY EXPENSES.
   The Council shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a
local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of
preparing necessary plans, estimates of cost and publication of notices, shall
be made for the improvement until special assessments to defray the costs of
the same shall have been levied.
(Prior Code, § 1.610)
§ 33.10 ASSESSMENT ROLL; FILING; REVIEW AND OBJECTIONS; CHANGES; PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The Assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and
parcels of land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed local
public improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount
benefitted thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the
estimate of the City Manager as approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1.611)
   (B)   When the Assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he or she
shall file the same with the Clerk for presentation to the Council for review,
confirmation and certification by it.
(Prior Code, § 1.612)
   (C)   Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the Council, by
resolution: shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the
office of the Clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place the
Council will meet to review such special assessment roll; and direct the Clerk
to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity
for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one
publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first
class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, said
publication and mailing to be made at least 14 full days prior to the date of
said hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the Council. At this meeting, all interested
persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the
assessments against them. The Assessor shall be present at every meeting of the
Council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed.
(Prior Code, § 1.613)
   (D)   The Council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review
of such special assessment roll and, at such meeting, or a proper adjournment
thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The
Council may correct said roll as to any special assessment or description of
any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by
resolution, annul such assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be
instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in
the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a
record of such changes as the Council deems justified, the Council determines
that it is satisfied with said special assessment roll, and that assessments
are in proportion reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing
it on file in the office of the Clerk, and directing the Clerk to attach his or
her warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten days, therein commanding the
Treasurer to levy the various sums and amounts appearing on a special
assessment roll for the full amounts or in annual installments as directed by
the Council. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and
shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the local
public improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform
to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in division (F) below.
(Prior Code, § 1.614)
   (E)   All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the
Council shall make payable, at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall
be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll.
(Prior Code, § 1.615)
   (F)   (1)   The Council may provide for the payment of special assessments
in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed 20 in number,
the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll. On all special
assessments confirmed between July 1 and December 31 of any year, the second
installment shall be due on the following July 1 and the remaining installments
shall be due on July 1 of each succeeding year. On all special assessments
confirmed between January 1 and June 30 of any year, the second installment
shall be due July 1 of the following year and the remaining installments shall
be due July 1 of each succeeding year. Interest shall be charged on all
deferred installments at a rate not in excess of that authorized by law,
commencing on confirmation and payable on the due date of each installment; the
full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon
to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. If
special assessment bonds are sold, M.C.L.A. § 141.153 shall apply. Each owner
shall have 60 days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of said
assessment, or the full amount of any installments thereof, without interest or
penalty. Following said 60-day period, the assessment or first installment
thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent, and the same penalties
shall be collected on such unpaid assessments, or unpaid first installments
thereof, as are provided in the City Charter to be collected on delinquent
general city taxes. Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty
until 60 days after the due date thereof, after which time such installments
shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on said installments shall
be collected as are provided in the City Charter to be collected on delinquent
general city taxes.
      (2)   After the Council has confirmed the roll, the City Treasurer shall
notify by mail each property owner on said roll that said roll has been filed,
stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of
the City Treasurer to give said notice or of such owner to receive said notice,
shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment
thereon nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties.
(Prior Code, § 1.616)
§ 33.11 LIEN; CREATION.
   Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon, from
the date of confirmation of the roll shall be and remain a lien upon the
property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by
general law for county and school taxes, and by the City Charter for city
taxes, until paid, and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be
subject to sale therefor the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes
constitute a lien. If special assessments or installments thereof remain
delinquent as of February 28, they shall be returned delinquent, with interest,
penalties and charges added, to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as are city, county and school taxes.
(Prior Code, § 1.617)
§ 33.12 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS; REFUNDS.
   The City Manager shall, after the completion of each local public
improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the
Council. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the
cost of the improvement for which it was made, the Council may make an
additional pro rata assessment; provided, however, that, no such additional pro
rata assessment shall exceed 15% of the original assessment. If the amount of
the special assessment roll for any local public improvement as confirmed by
the Council proves larger than the actual cost thereof as compiled by the City
Manager and certified to the Council, the Council shall make a refund thereof
in accordance with §
9.4 of the City Charter, said refund to be made to the owner of the property as
shown by the current tax rolls of the city on the date that the Council orders
the refund.
(Prior Code, § 1.618)
§ 33.13 ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES.
   In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be
insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the
Council shall provide, by ordinance, any additional steps or procedures
required.
(Prior Code, § 1.619)
§ 33.14 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS.
   Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local public
improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any
money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for
the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1.620)
§ 33.15 CONTESTED ASSESSMENTS.
   No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the
purpose of contesting or enjoining collection of any special assessment unless
within 30 days after confirmation of the special assessment roll written notice
is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action, stating
grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and unless such suit
or action shall be commenced within 60 days of confirmation of the roll.
(Prior Code, § 1.621)
§ 33.16 REASSESSMENT FOR BENEFITS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever the Council shall deem any special assessment invalid
or defective for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the Council shall
have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which
the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has
been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or
not.
      (2)   All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof
shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment.
   (B)   If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected
and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the
reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount
reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the
person making such payment.
(Prior Code, § 1.622)
§ 33.17 COMBINATION OF PROJECTS.
   The Council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose
of effecting a saving in the costs; provided, however, that, for each district
there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the
same.
(Prior Code, § 1.623)
§ 33.18 SINGLE LOT ASSESSMENTS.
   When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to
any single premises, which expense is chargeable against said premises and the
owner thereof under the provisions of this code of ordinances and §
9.2 of the City Charter and is not of that class required to be pro-rated among
the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an
account of the labor, material and services for which such expense was incurred
with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was
incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the
Treasurer, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. The
Treasurer at the end of the quarter shall report to the City Council all sums
so owing to the city and which have not been paid within 30 days after the
mailing of the bill therefor. The Council may, at such time as it may deem
advisable direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all
such charges reported to it together with a penalty of 10%. As an alternative,
the Council may allow property owners to pay a single lot assessment on an
installment basis as described in §
33.10 of this chapter; provided, the terms and interest rate of the installment
program are specified in the resolution directing the Assessor to prepare the
special assessment roll. The special assessment roll shall be filed with the
Clerk who shall advise the Council of the filing of the same and the Council
shall thereupon set a date for the hearing of objections to such assessment
roll.
(Prior Code, § 1.624) (Ord. 706, passed 10-17-2005)
CHAPTER 34: DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN
Section
   
34.01   Title
   
34.02   Authority
   
34.03   Definitions
   
34.04   Approval and adoption of plan
   
34.05   Boundaries of development area
   
34.06   Preparation of base year and subsequent year state-equalized valuation
   
34.07   Payment of tax increments to Downtown Development Authority
   
34.08   Tax Increment Fund; approval of depository; use of moneys
   
34.09   Annual budget
   
34.10   Debt
   
34.11   Annual audit
   
34.12   Refund on final surplus tax increments
   
34.13   Plan review
   
34.14   Governing body determination
   
34.15   Amendments
§ 34.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The Development Plan and
Tax Increment Financing Plan Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 1.284) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 57 of 2018,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230, subject to the provisions thereof
unless otherwise specifically provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 1.285) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The terms used herein shall have the same meaning as given to those
terms in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 to 152.4230, as
amended, or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CAPTURED EQUALIZED VALUATION. The amount in any one year by which the
total current equalized valuation of the development district exceeds the
initial equalized valuation.
      DEVELOPMENT AREA. The area encompassed within the Downtown Development
District as more fully described in the development plan and tax increment
plan, all property being encompassed within the city.
      DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The tax increment and development plan, as amended and
transmitted to the City Council by the Downtown Development Authority for
public hearing, and as may be modified by action of the City Council and
confirmed by Ord. 426, copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
      DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY. The City of Charlevoix Downtown
Development Authority.
      INITIAL EQUALIZED VALUATION. The most recently assessed value as finally
equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the development
area at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
      TAXING JURISDICTION. Each unit of government levying ad valorem tax on
property in the development district.
(Prior Code, § 1.286) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.04 APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   (A)   The development and tax increment financing plan, as originally
adopted on 5-16-1983 and as amended on 8-21-1989, 11-11-1991 and 2-28-1994 (§
34.15 of this chapter) is further amended, approved and adopted to revise the
legal description of the development area incorporated into the plan by
reference as Exhibit B to include the property in the city as described in §
32.075 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   As provided in §
34.15 of this chapter, the development and tax increment financing plan, as
amended, shall continue through 12-31-2013, except as extended by a subsequent
amendment to or modification of the plan by appropriate ordinance.
   (C)   A copy of the development and tax increment financing plan, as
amended, shall be maintained on file in the city clerk’s office cross-indexed
to the development plan and tax increment financing plan ordinance, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 1.287) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.05 BOUNDARIES OF DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   The boundaries of the development area set forth in the development plan
shall include the property in the city as described in §
32.075 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1.288) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983; Ord. 681, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 34.06 PREPARATION OF BASE YEAR AND SUBSEQUENT YEAR STATE-EQUALIZED VALUATION.
   Upon adoption of this chapter and establishment of the state equalized value
of all property in the district, the City Assessor shall prepare an assessment
roll of the district, calculate the initial state equalized valuation of the
district and certify this valuation to the county’s Equalization Office and
Secretary to the DDA Board. Each year thereafter, until the Secretary to the
DDA Board certifies completion of the development plan, the City Assessor shall
prepare assessment and tax rolls for the district, calculate the total amount
of equalized valuation of the district, calculate the captured and non-captured
equalized valuation of the district and certify these valuations to the
county’s Equalization Office, Secretary to the DDA Board and City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1.289) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.07 PAYMENT OF TAX INCREMENTS TO DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   The City Treasurer is authorized, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the
property in the development district, to pay to the Downtown Development
Authority, that portion of the captured taxes (taxes on captured equalized
valuation) provided for in the Downtown Development Authority annual budget as
approved by City Council. Payment shall be made by the City Treasurer in the
normal course of business. The remaining captured taxes not remitted to the
Downtown Development Authority Account will be remitted to the applicable
taxing jurisdictions on a pro-rata basis.
(Prior Code, § 1.290) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.08 TAX INCREMENT FUND; APPROVAL OF DEPOSITORY; USE OF MONEYS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall serve as Treasurer to the Downtown
Development Authority. The Treasurer is hereby authorized to establish a
separate fund, on behalf of the Downtown Development Authority. Tax increment
moneys received and paid to the account of the Downtown Development Authority,
pursuant to the development plan, shall be deposited in this fund. All moneys
in the fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the
development plan and this chapter and any amendment thereto. Except in
emergencies, disbursements from the fund shall require the prior approval of
the Downtown Development Authority board. The Chairperson of the Board may
approve disbursements without the approval of the full board, when a delay
would increase the expense to the fund.
(Prior Code, § 1.291)
   (B)   (1)   The moneys credited to the fund and on hand thereon from time to
time shall be used in the following manner:
         (a)   To pay, to the extent determined desirable by the DDA, the cost
of completing the public improvements as set forth in the development plan,
including any debt service payments;
         (b)   To pay the cost of any additional improvements in the
development plan that are determined necessary by the DDA and approved by the
City Council; and
         (c)   To reimburse the city for expenditures made or funds advanced to
provide any project-related services to the Downtown Development Authority or
the fund or to acquire property, clear land, make preliminary plans and
improvements necessary for the development of the development area in
accordance with the plan.
      (2)   The Downtown Development Authority shall not expend any funds on
any improvements described in the development plan and tax increment financing
plan as secondary improvements without a prior amendment of the development
plan and tax increment financing plan; provided that, any amendments or
modifications of the plan shall not affect the initial equalized valuation and
the initial equalized valuation will remain that established at the time of the
adoption of this chapter notwithstanding any amendments or modifications to
this chapter or the development plan and tax increment financing plan.
(Prior Code, § 1.294)
(Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.09 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The annual budget of the Downtown Development Authority as prepared by the
authority and approved by the City Council shall be based upon the downtown
development plan and tax increment financing plan, but the amount of funds
budgeted for receipt or expenditure in any year shall not be limited to the
amount which may have been established for receipt or expenditure in the
development plan. It shall be the responsibility of the City Treasurer to pay
to the account of the Downtown Development Authority the amounts of funds as
approved in the annual budget of the Downtown Development Authority, without
regard to the estimated cost of development over the life of the plan as
detailed in the tax increment financing plan and development plan.
(Prior Code, § 1.292) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.10 DEBT.
   The Downtown Development Authority may, from time to time, issue bonds to
finance capital improvements provided for under the development plan. Under no
circumstances shall total bonded indebtedness for all primary capital
improvements under the development plan exceed the debt limitation established
in the plan, as it may be amended. Prior to the issuance of any debt, the
Downtown Development Authority shall obtain the approval of the City Council.
In review of annual downtown development budgets, the City Council shall be
required to approve such revenues and expenditures as may be necessary to meet
service payments on debt initially authorized by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1.293) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.11 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   As soon as practical upon the end of each fiscal year, the Downtown
Development Authority shall submit to the City Council, with copies to each
taxing jurisdiction, a report and audit on the status of the Tax Increment
Fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account,
the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the initial and ending
fund balance, the initial, current and captured equalized valuations of the
development district, tax increments received by the Downtown Development
Authority and those shared with the taxing jurisdictions and any additional
information requested by the City Council or deemed appropriate by the Downtown
Development Authority.
(Prior Code, § 1.295) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.12 REFUND ON FINAL SURPLUS TAX INCREMENTS.
   At the completion of the development plan, as it may be amended a final
report shall be prepared and any surplus money in the fund shall be returned by
the Treasurer from the fund to the taxing jurisdiction on a pro rata basis.
Such pro rata distribution shall be determined on the basis of the average tax
rate levied by each jurisdiction over the life of the plan.
(Prior Code, § 1.296) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.13 PLAN REVIEW.
   Prior to each phase of physical construction implemented by or on behalf of
the Downtown Development Authority, pursuant to the development plan and tax
increment financing plan, the development authority shall submit a site plan
for review by the city’s Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.
Prior to any bidding or award of any construction or purchasing contracts, the
Downtown Development Authority shall submit to the City Manager’s office for
approval all detailed plans and specifications for any improvements and/or
construction to be implemented under the development plan.
(Prior Code, § 1.297) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.14 GOVERNING BODY DETERMINATION.
   The City Council hereby determines the following considerations:
   (A)   The tax increment financing plan and development plan meets the
requirements as set forth in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201
to 152.4230;
   (B)   The proposed method of financing the development as detailed in the
tax increment financing plan and development plan is feasible and the authority
has the ability to arrange the financing;
   (C)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes
of this act;
   (D)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of
the city;
   (E)   Public services, including, but not limited to, fire and police
protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to serve the project area;
and
   (F)   Any proposed changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections
and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city.
(Prior Code, § 1.298) (Ord. 426, passed 5-16-1983)
§ 34.15 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this plan may be adopted.
(Prior Code, §§ 1.299—1.305)
CHAPTER 35: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
   
35.01   Purpose
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   Historic District Commission
   
35.04   Establishment of Historic Districts
   
35.05   Permit requirements
   
35.06   Demolition by neglect and enforcement
   
35.07   Appeals
 
   
35.99   Penalties
§ 35.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the heritage of the City of
Charlevoix by preserving historic districts that reflect elements of the city's
history, architecture, and culture; stabilize and improve property values;
promote civic beauty; strengthen the local economy; and foster educational and
cultural opportunities.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in Section 1a of the Local
Historic Districts Act (Act 169 of 1970; M.C.L.A. 399.201a) shall have the same
meaning.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.03 HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Historic District Commission (HDC) and those members presently
serving shall continue to administer the provisions of this chapter. The HDC
shall adhere to all requirements and procedures set forth in the Local Historic
Districts Act (Act 169 of 1970).
   (B)   The HDC shall consist of five members, with qualifications and terms
as prescribed in M.C.L.A. 399.204. Terms of the membership shall be staggered
as best as possible to ensure continuity of membership and terms of three years
each. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
   (C)   The HDC shall only have the authority to review and act upon permit
applications, as detailed in § 35.04 and such other duties and responsibilities
as statute or the City Council may from time to time obligate them.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The City of Charlevoix has previously established the Earl Young Local
Historic District Depot Historic District and the Central Historic District.
   (B)   The boundaries of each historic district shall be described in an
official map and legal description filed with the City Clerk once approved by
City Council.
   (C)   Before establishing or modifying any historic district, a Historic
District Study Committee shall be appointed to conduct the review process in
accordance with M.C.L.A. 399.203. The Historic District Commission shall
fulfill this role unless Council determines a separate study committee is
advisable. The study for potential creation of a new historic district shall
only occur if the Council requests it by resolution outlining the potential
properties and need for the district or if the Council approves a proposal from
the Historic District Commission prescribing the same.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.05 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall perform any work affecting the exterior appearance of
a resource within a historic district without first obtaining a permit issued
under this chapter.
   (B)   The HDC shall review applications based on the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, 36 C.F.R. Part 67, and applicable
local design guidelines if such guidelines may be created and approved by City
Council.
   (C)   A certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed must be issued
by the HDC before any work begins.
   (D)   All other terms in M.C.L.A. 399.205 through 399.215 shall apply to the
chapter.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.06 DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Property owners within a historic district must maintain their
properties to prevent demolition by neglect.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to fines and penalties as
provided in M.C.L. 399.215.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.07 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any decision of the HDC may be appealed to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board as provided in M.C.L.A. 399.205(2).
   (B)   Further appeals may be filed with the Circuit Court of the County of
Charlevoix in accordance with M.C.L.A. 399.211.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 35.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates this chapter is responsible
for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.
   (B)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates this chapter may be ordered
by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully
constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished.
(Ord. 859, passed 3-17-2025)
CHAPTER 36: ETHICAL CONDUCT
Section
   
36.01   Ethical conduct
   
36.02   Conflicts of interest
   
36.03   Statutory prohibitions
   
36.04   Non-discrimination
   
36.05   Promulgation
 
   
36.99   Penalty
§ 36.01 ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   The citizens of the city are entitled to have fair, ethical and
accountable local government that has earned the public's full confidence for
integrity.
   (B)   Furthermore, the effective functioning of democratic government
requires that public officials, both elected and appointed, comply with both
the letter and spirit of the laws and policies affecting the operations of
government; public officials be independent, impartial and fair in their
judgment and actions; public office be used for the public good, not for
personal gain; and public deliberations and processes be conducted openly,
unless legally confidential, in an atmosphere of respect and civility.
   (C)    To this end, the City Council adopts this chapter to assure public
confidence in the integrity of local government and its effective and fair
operation. Serving in local government is the holding of public trust. This
trust should never be undermined.
   (D)   In all actions, employees, the City Manager, and City Council members
will adhere to all local, state and federal laws regulating ethical action.
Various professional codes of ethics and other similar documents may be used to
supplement determinations of ethical conduct.
(Ord. 793 of 2018, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 36.02 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Occurrence of; public presentation. Conflicts of interest will
naturally occur from time to time and in such cases when they may or do in fact
arise, should be presented publicly to diminish the potential of actual or
perceived special interests.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES. Shall refer to those boards, committees,
commissions, or other bodies created by statute, local ordinance, resolution,
local policy and any and all subcommittees those bodies may, from time to time,
create.
      CITY COUNCIL. Except where specifically referred to, shall refer to the
Mayor and each member of the City Council.
      CONFLICT OF INTEREST. May occur when action by the city, either through
its employees, its boards, committees, commissions or other such bodies, or the
City Council, could be construed as impacting negatively or positively an
interest of an employee or Council Member, his or her relatives, business or
financial investments, property, or other interests.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. The spouse, child, parents, brother, sister, half-
sister, half-brother or the spouses of any listed relatives. All relationships
shall include those arising from adoption and marriage.
   (C)   City Council reporting of conflicts of interest.
      (1)   If a case may arise when a Council Member or the Mayor has a
conflict of interest, he or she shall make known the potential conflict in open
session when City Council business might involve such interest. The Council
Member or Mayor need not provide detail on the potential conflict so as to
injure a client or patient relationship.
      (2)   In addition to the general rule on conflicts of interest above, the
following specific conflicts of interest are specifically prohibited:
         (a)   Holding of other offices. No Council Member shall hold any other
city office or employment during the term for which they were elected to the
Council except where specifically allowed by the Charter and/or statute.
         (b)   Voting involving a conflict of interest. No member of the
Council shall vote on any question in which he, she or a member of their
immediate family as defined in this chapter, has a financial interest, other
than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his or her own
conduct. Council Members who may have a financial interest shall state such
interest and then refrain from debating, commenting, or otherwise seeking to
influence the Council on such question.
         (c)   If a member of City Council believes that another member of City
Council has a conflict, he or she shall raise such perceived conflict. If the
member in question does not concede a conflict, the majority of the remaining
Council Members may vote to prohibit that Council Member or the Mayor who may
have a conflict from participating in that item of business. The Council shall
solely be the judge of its own members and the Mayor.
   (D)   Board, Committee, Commission Conflicts of interest.
      (1)   If a case may arise when a member of a board, committee, or
commission has a conflict of interest, he or she shall make known the potential
conflict in open session when the body might conduct business involving such
interest. The member need not provide detail on the potential conflict so as to
injure a client or patient relationship.
      (2)   In addition to the general rule on conflicts of interest above, the
following specific conflicts of interest are specifically prohibited:
         (a)   Voting involving a conflict of interest. No member of the body
shall vote on any question in which he, she or a member of their immediate
family as defined in this chapter, has a financial interest, other than the
common public interest, or on any question concerning his or her own conduct.
Members who may have a financial interest shall state such interest and then
refrain from debating, commenting, or otherwise seeking to influence the
Council on such question.
         (b)   If a member believes that another member has a conflict, he or
she shall raise such perceived conflict. If the member in question does not
concede a conflict, the majority of the remaining body members may vote to
prohibit that member who may have a conflict from participating in that item of
business.
   (E)   City Manager reporting of conflicts of interest.
      (1)   If a case may arise when the City Manager has a conflict of
interest, he or she shall make written notification of such conflict to the
Mayor and the City Clerk. To the extent possible, the City Manager's
involvement in the situation will be minimized to avoid the appearance of
impropriety. The City Manager's conduct shall at all times be in accord with
the ICMA Code of Ethics.
      (2)   It shall not be deemed a conflict of interest by the City Manager
to enforce or cause to be enforced zoning or ordinance violations in keeping
with standard practice. It shall also not be deemed a conflict of interest for
action to be taken by the city to improve or otherwise conduct normal public
activities in the neighborhood where the City Manager may reside.
   (F)   Employee reporting of conflicts of interest. If a case may arise when
an employee of the city or the city's Attorney, Auditor, or other professional
contractor may have a conflict of interest, he, she, or the corporation,
partnership or entity shall promptly report such conflict or potential conflict
to the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine what steps if any may be
necessary to avoid the potential for preferential or adverse action because of
the conflict.
   (G)   Council appearance before other bodies. City Council shall not appear
before or seek to influence members of other Boards, Commissions, or Committees
except when they may be appointed to such body, serve as a member by virtue of
statute or Charter, or may be invited to address the body by a majority vote of
the body.
   (H)   General prohibition. The City Council, board, committee, and
commission members, the City Manager, and city employees should not take any
special advantage of services, goods or opportunity for personal gain that is
not available to the public in general.
(Ord. 793 of 2018, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 36.03 STATUTORY PROHIBITIONS.
   In accord with Public Act 196 of 1973 (being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.342 et seq.) the
following shall apply to members of the City Council, the City Manager, and all
other employees of the city.
   (A)   Confidential information. The City Council, the City Manager, or an
employee shall not divulge to an unauthorized person, confidential information
acquired in the course of employment in advance of the time prescribed for its
authorized release to the public.
   (B)   Personal opinions. The City Council, the City Manager, or an employee
shall not represent his or her personal opinion as that of the city.
   (C)   Use of city resources. The City Council, the City Manager, or an
employee shall use city personnel resources, property, and funds judiciously
and solely in accordance with prescribed constitutional, statutory, and
regulatory procedures and not for personal gain or benefit.
   (D)   Acceptance of gifts. The City Council, the City Manager, or an
employee shall not solicit or accept a gift or loan of money, goods, services,
or other thing of value for the benefit of a person or organization, other than
the state, which tends to influence the manner in which the public officer or
employee or another public officer or employee performs official duties.
   (E)   Use of office for private gain. The City Council, the City Manager or
an employee shall not engage in a business transaction in which the public
officer or employee may profit from his or her official position or authority
or benefit financially from confidential information which the person has
obtained or may obtain by reason of that position or authority. Instruction
which is not done during regularly scheduled working hours except for annual
leave or vacation time shall not be considered a business transaction pursuant
to this division if the instructor does not have any direct dealing with or
influence on the employing or contracting facility associated with his or her
course of employment with this state.
   (F)   Outside employment. The City Council, the City Manager, or an employee
shall not engage in or accept employment or render services for a private or
public interest when that employment or service is incompatible or in conflict
with the discharge of the officer or employee's official duties or when that
employment may tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in
the performance of official duties.
   (G)   Negotiation for private gain. Except in cases of an employment
agreement or contract, the City Council, the City Manager, or an employee shall
not participate in the negotiation or execution of contracts, making of loans,
granting of subsidies, fixing of rates, issuance of permits or certificates, or
other regulation or supervision relating to a business entity in which the
person has a financial or personal interest.
(Ord. 793 of 2018, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 36.04 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The city will not discriminate against any person in the provision of public
service or employment on the basis of gender, race, creed, age, sexual
orientation, language proficiency, income level, or any other legally protected
classification. Such non-discrimination provisions may be limited by state or
federal law.
(Ord. 793 of 2018, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 36.05 PROMULGATION.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to draft policies, procedures, and
other documents necessary to enforce provisions of this chapter. To the extent
deemed necessary, statements from this chapter may be appended to contracts
with outside vendors and contractors. The City Manager may also revise the
city's Personnel Policy as needed to reflect this chapter.
   (B)   Upon approval of this chapter and upon assuming office, the Mayor,
Council Members, board, committee, and commission members, the City Manager and
employees the City Manager may designate from time to time shall affirm their
commitment to ethical conduct and this chapter by signing the form below:
      As a _____ of the City of Charlevoix, I agree to uphold the Ethical
Conduct Ordinance of the City of Charlevoix and conduct myself by the following
model of excellence. I will:

      •   Recognize the worth of all individuals and appreciate their
individual talents, perspectives, and contributions;
      •   Help create an atmosphere of respect and civility where individual
members, city staff, and the public are free to express their ideas and work to
their full potential;
      •   Respect the dignity and privacy of individuals and organizations;
      •   Respect and maintain the nature of confidential and privileged
information and opinions acquired as a result of my position;
      •   Conduct my public affairs with honesty, integrity, fairness and
respect for others;
      •   Avoid and discourage conduct that is divisive or harmful to the best
interests of Charlevoix; and
      •   Keep the common good as my highest purpose and focus on achieving
constructive solutions for the public benefit.

      I affirm that I have read and fully understand the Code of Ethics for the
City of Charlevoix.
      _______________________      ___________
      Signed               Dated
(Ord. 793 of 2018, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations by Council Members and board, commission, and committee
members. Violation of any provision of by a member of the City Council or a
board, commission, committee may be punishable by action of the City Council to
censure, reprimand, or otherwise discipline its own members or those of a
board. Additionally, violations may also be felonies or misdemeanors under
state or federal law.
   (B)   Violations by employees. Violation of any provision may subject an
employee to punishment up to and including termination. In addition to
employment disciplinary action, the city may seek remedy in a court of
competent jurisdiction for damages.
(Ord. 793 of 2018, passed 6-18-2018)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
City Utility Rates
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Basis of charges
   
50.03   Water, sewer and electric rates
   
50.04   Connection charges
   
50.05   Service to city
   
50.06   Rate revision
   
50.07   Billing and collection
   
50.08   Liens
   
50.09   Installment payments
   
50.10   Enforcement
   
50.11   Improvement payments
Utility Extensions
   
50.25   Procedure established
   
50.26   Special assessments
   
50.27   Private financing
   
50.28   New subdivisions
CITY UTILITY RATES
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, public or private corporation or
public agency or instrumentality.
   PREMISES. Each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any
connection to the water distribution system of the city, or the sewage disposal
system of the city, or which is supplied with electricity by the city electric
utility.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 2.131)
§ 50.02 BASIS OF CHARGES.
   All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed as
determined by the meter installed in the premises of water or sewage disposal
service customers by the Department. All sewage disposal service shall be
charged for on the basis of water consumed. No free water service or sewage
disposal service shall be furnished to any person.
(Prior Code, § 2.132)
§ 50.03 WATER, SEWER AND ELECTRIC RATES.
   (A)   Except as herein otherwise provided, water to be furnished by the
system to any premises shall be measured by a meter or meters installed and
controlled by the city, and charges per meter for such metered water service to
any premises within the city connected with the water supply system, for each
quarterly (three months) period, shall be at the following rate or rates: the
rates now in effect for premises within the city shall continue as to such
premises until changed pursuant to resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.133)
   (B)   (1)   Charges for sewage disposal service shall be levied upon all
premises having any sewer connection with the public sewers.
      (2)   The rates now in effect for premises within the city shall continue
as to such premises until changed pursuant to resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.135)
   (C)   The electric rates now in effect for premises within the city shall
continue as to such premises until changed pursuant to resolution of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.137)
§ 50.04 CONNECTION CHARGES.
   The rates now in effect for premises within the city shall continue as to
such premises until changed pursuant to resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.134)
§ 50.05 SERVICE TO CITY.
   (A)   The city shall pay the same water and sewer rates for service to it as
would be payable by a private customer for the same service.
   (B)   All such charges for service shall be payable quarterly from the
current funds of the city, or from the proceeds of taxes which the city, within
constitutional limits, is hereby authorized and required to levy in amounts
sufficient for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2.136)
§ 50.06 RATE REVISION.
   The water and sewer service rates and electrical service rates prescribed in
this subchapter may be altered by resolution of the City Council and, when so
changed, shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.138)
§ 50.07 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Bills for water service, sewage disposal service and electric service
shall be due and payable when rendered and shall be subject to a service charge
for late payment at a rate to be established pursuant to resolution of the City
Council. The Superintendent shall have charge of the reading of all meters. He
or she shall keep a record of all meter readings and shall keep accounts of the
charges for water and sewer service and electric service furnished to all
premises and shall render bills for the same. All water and sewer service
charges and electric service rates shall be collected by the City Treasurer,
who shall credit the same to the proper account. Water and sewer service and
electric service bills shall be payable at the city offices.
(Prior Code, § 2.139)
   (B)   (1)   Charges for water supply service and/or sewage disposal service
shall be billed and collected monthly. A bill shall become due and payable on
the twenty-fifth of the month billed as specified on such bill and, if not paid
by the twenty-sixth day of the month billed, shall be subject to a 10% penalty
which shall be added thereto as an additional charge for that month’s bill. If
there are previous monthly bills yet unpaid, this new billing, plus the 10%
penalty for that month, will be added to the prior bill and constitute the
total arrearage.
      (2)   (a)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service
to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the
title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
            1.   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
            2.   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
            3.   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
         (b)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered.
In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing
procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified,
but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30
days.
         (c)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $20.
§ 50.08 LIENS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Public Act 178 of 1939, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
123.161 through 123.167, the city shall have a lien for the collection of water
or sewer system rates, assessments, charges, tap-in fees, privilege fees or any
other fee or charge relating to water or sewer services or connections. This
lien shall be on any structure, lot or lots on which a structure is located, or
on any land to which sewer system service or water service has been connected
or supplied. This lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution
or connection of the water or sewer service to the property being supplied, but
shall not be enforceable for more than three years. The City Manager or a
designee of the City Manager is authorized, but not required, to file a notice
of lien with the Register of Deeds to give notice of the existence of any lien
or liens.
   (B)   When connection fees may be paid in installments pursuant to §
50.09 of this chapter, a notice of lien must be filed with the Register of
Deeds.
(Prior Code, § 2.141) (Ord. 621, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 50.09 INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   If connection fees to a commercial or industrial facility exceed
$25,000 and if, in the determination of the City Council, the construction or
expansion of the facility will create jobs and provide significant economic
benefit to the city, then the Council may permit, by resolution, the
installment payment of connection fees as follows: one-third shall be paid upon
execution of the written agreement which is required by this subchapter and the
balance shall be paid periodically as determined by the Council as long as all
connection fees, plus interest, are fully paid on or before two years from the
date of water and/or sewer connection. If connection fees to a community
recreational facility exceed $25,000, then the Council may permit, by
resolution, the installment payment of connection fees as follows: one-fifth
shall be paid upon execution of the written agreement which is required by this
subchapter and the balance shall be paid periodically as determined by the
Council as long as all connection fees, plus interest are fully paid on or
before four years from the date of the water and/or sewer connection. The
resolution regarding either facility shall describe the conditions under which
the Council is willing to accept installment payments and shall include, but is
not limited to, the number of installments, the due date of each installment,
the interest rate to be charged and the amount of each installment payment. The
interest rate shall be the bank prime loan rate which is applicable to the week
in which the resolution authorizing installment payments has been adopted, as
published in the Federal Reserve Statistical Release for Selected Interest
Rates. A written agreement regarding either facility shall be executed between
the city and the owner of the land to which the water and/or sewer service will
be connected which contains the terms of the resolution and which grants to the
city the right to accelerate unpaid connection fees. For a commercial or
industrial facility, the agreement shall also include a provision which grants
to the city a lien on the benefitted real property for the unpaid connection
fees and which also grants to the city the power of sale to foreclose on the
lien by advertisement. In addition, the agreement regarding either facility
shall provide that the rights granted to the city in the written agreement may
be exercised if there is a default in the terms of the agreement by the owner
or assignee of the owner. The agreement shall be in a form approved by the City
Attorney. The city shall adopt, by resolution, criteria similar to those
criteria used in the city’s industrial tax abatement policy which will be used
to determine when a commercial or industrial facility construction or expansion
will create jobs and provide significant economic benefit to the city.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         COMMUNITY RECREATION FACILITY. A swimming pool, ice rink, gymnasium or
similar facility, as determined by the City Council, which is open to the
residents of the city at the lowest user fees, if any, even if the facility is
located outside of the city and which is owned by a municipal corporation or a
non-profit corporation.
         CONNECTION FEES. Tap-in fees, privilege fees or any other fee or
charge which arises by virtue of the mere connection to city water and/or sewer
services.
   (B)   A septage pretreatment facility may only connect to the city’s sewer
system pursuant to a written agreement between the city and the owner of the
proposed septage pretreatment facility. This contract must be approved by the
City Council. The contract shall specify the amount of connection fees, the
terms of payment of those connection fees, the applicable sewer rate, the
conditions under which the connection fees or sewer rate may change and the
method of payment of the connection fees. The amount of connection fees and the
method of payment of those connection fees may vary from provisions that would
apply to a sewer user that is not a septage pretreatment facility. The contract
shall include such other provisions as shall be acceptable to the owner of the
septage pretreatment facility and the City Council. The agreement shall be in a
form approved by the City Attorney. The city shall be under no obligation to
permit a septage pretreatment facility to connect to the city’s sewer system
and any such decision is subject to the sole discretion of the City Council to
determine whether any proposal is in the best interests of the city. The term
SEPTAGE PRETREATMENT FACILITY shall mean a facility that receives and treats
non-domestic wastewater that originates from residential type septic systems
including single-family homes, condominiums, apartments and commercial users
such as hotels, motels, offices, restaurants, schools, retail structures and
the like with the exception of restaurant grease interceptors and industrial
process wastewater. Pretreated septage shall comply with the characteristics of
common domestic sewage, as defined in
Chapter 53 of this code of ordinances. The treatment process shall be approved
and licensed by the state and operated pursuant to the contract with the city
as specified in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.142) (Ord. 621, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 641, passed 6-2-1997;
Ord. 707, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 50.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Installment payments; acceleration. If installment payments have been
authorized pursuant to §
50.09 of this chapter and a default in the installment payment agreement
occurs, then the city, in its discretion, may elect to accelerate the unpaid
connection fees. Notice of the acceleration shall be sent by first-class mail
to the address shown on city tax rolls.
   (B)   Installment payments; foreclosure by advertisement. If the city elects
to foreclose on a lien for which installment payments have been accelerated,
then the procedure for foreclosure by advertisement as described in M.C.L.A. §§
600.3201 through 600.3280, as currently amended or later amended, shall be
used, except as follows.
      (1)   Any reference to a “sheriff” shall mean the City’s Police Chief or
the designee of the Police Chief.
      (2)   Any reference to a “mortgage” shall mean the lien described in this
section. The term “mortgagor” shall mean the owner of the land which is subject
to the lien at the time the lien came into existence as provided in §
50.08 of this chapter and the term “mortgagee” shall mean the city.
      (3)   All lands subject to the lien shall be treated as one parcel and
may be sold as one parcel.
      (4)   If the city elects to commence foreclosure, then the sum of $700
shall be added to the amount owing for unpaid connection fees and unpaid
interest. This amount shall be deemed to reimburse the city for staff time,
attorney fees and other expenses not otherwise reimbursed to the city under the
foreclosure by advertisement statute.
   (C)   Liens not involving installment payments. The city may enforce liens
which do not involve installment payments by using the general laws of the
state which provide for the enforcement of tax liens.
   (D)   Alternate remedy. As an alternative to the procedures provided in
divisions (B) or (C) above, the city may elect to treat the lien as a debt and
may commence legal action against the proper parties to collect such debt.
(Prior Code, § 2.143) (Ord. 621, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 50.11 IMPROVEMENT PAYMENTS.
   Often, industrial or commercial property owners considering new construction
or significant expansion request that significant improvements or extensions be
made to public services or utilities provided by the city such as water, sewer
or electric services as well as public roads. As an incentive for the city to
undertake such improvements and to complete them promptly, an industrial or
commercial property owner typically offers and then agrees to pay for all or
part of the cost of the improvements. The city may execute a contract with the
industrial or commercial property owner regarding the improvements to be made,
the amount which will be paid by the industrial or commercial property owner
toward the cost of the improvement and when such payment is due. The contract
shall require complete payment of the cost of the improvement at least prior to
the commencement of water and/or sewer service to the property.
(Prior Code, § 2.144) (Ord. 621, passed 3-20-1995)
UTILITY EXTENSIONS
§ 50.25 PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED.
   The procedures established in this subchapter shall apply in charging and
allocating the pro-rata share to benefitted property owners of all cost and
expense for extending any and all utility services into any area where said
city-owned and operated utilities are not present.
(Prior Code, § 2.161)
§ 50.26 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   In certain instances, the city, by majority vote of its City Council, may
elect to extend utility services at initial city expense. The charge to be
assessed each property owner benefitted and served shall be calculated on the
basis of the actual cost per effective front foot, which shall be determined by
dividing total project cost by effective front footage. Effective front footage
is defined as being determined by modifying actual front footage by a depth
factor as set forth in the state’s Tax Commission Assessing Manual, Depth
Factor Schedule, such manual incorporated in and made part of this subchapter.
The charge to each benefitted property owner shall be assessed at the time of
project completion and shall be paid no later than the time actual service
connections are made to the particular parcel or parcels of land served, which
said charge shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, compounded
annually, accruing from the date of project completion to date of payment.
(Prior Code, § 2.162)
§ 50.27 PRIVATE FINANCING.
   In certain other instances, the city, by majority vote of the City Council,
may consent to a third party extending the utility services; provided, all
applicable local and state laws and regulations are complied with, at the third
party’s initial expense. Other benefitted property owners may, at any time,
elect to make service connections to the extended utility service; provided,
however, that, before such connection is made, the property owner (or owners)
pays to the city, in full, the amount of the assessed charge as to the
particular parcel or parcels of land benefitted, the amount of which the
assessed charge is calculated on the basis of the formula set forth in §
50.26 of this chapter; except that, there shall be no interest charge as set
forth in §
50.26 of this chapter. All moneys received by the city from benefitted property
owners as a condition of their making service connections to the utility
services shall be paid over to the third party or parties, his or their heirs
and assigns, who initially bore the cost and expense of the project, by way of
reimbursement.
(Prior Code, § 2.163) (Ord. 513, passed 4-17-1989)
§ 50.28 NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   Any provision of this subchapter to the contrary notwithstanding, in all new
plats of real property within the city, the plat proprietor shall provide at
said proprietor’s sole expense, within the physical area included in the
boundaries of said plat, water lines, sewer lines, underground electrical
transmission lines, storm water drainage or dispersion or seepage systems,
together with all accessory equipment thereto not charged to or paid for by the
individual platted lot property owner, and shall pay for the cost of all street
construction and improvement, all in accordance with state and city
specifications, with such city specifications to be determined and approved by
the Council of the city by submission by the plat proprietor of a development
plan.
(Prior Code, § 2.164)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Intent and purpose
   
51.03   Prohibited storage or disposal
   
51.04   Prohibited collection
   
51.05   Prohibited placement of waste
   
51.06   Storage regulations
   
51.07   Disposal regulations
   
51.08   Single hauler waste collection and disposal program
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT 451. Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 et seq.
   BULK ITEM. Large solid waste items, including furniture, appliances,
washers, dryers, heaters, carpet, wood, metal, construction and demolition
debris not in excess of one cubic yard, and other items with a weight and
volume greater than allowed for container collection.
   COMMINGLED. Recyclable materials that have been mixed at the site of
generation and placed in the same container for curbside pickup.
   COMPOST. The humus-like product of the composting process.
   COMPOSTABLES. Yard clippings and residential compostables.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Waste building materials, packaging and
rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of
buildings and roads.
   CONTAINER. A vermin-proof, water-tight, wooden, metallic, plastic or masonry
receptacle for the storage and placement of solid waste.
   CURBSIDE. A location near the traveled portion of the roadway or alley used
for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings.
   DESIGNATED FACILITY. A facility that the county has identified as an
approved location for the disposal of solid waste or the collection process and
marketing of yard waste or recyclable material.
   DESIGNATED WASTE HAULER. Any person awarded a contract by the city to engage
in the business of collecting of solid waste, recyclable materials, yard
clippings and bulk items from residential generation sites within the city and
hauling, transporting or disposing of such materials.
   GARBAGE. Animal, fruit and vegetable waste materials resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods in kitchens, stores,
markets, hotels, restaurants and other places where food is stored, cooked or
consumed.
   GENERATOR OF WASTE. Any person who has acquired or stored any waste at a
site of generation.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste or a combination of waste and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
that because of its quantity, quality, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase
in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious
incapacitating, but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. HAZARDOUS WASTE does not
include material that is solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage
discharge, solid or dissolved material in an irrigation return flow discharge,
industrial discharge that is a point source subject to permits under § 402 of
Title IV of the Federal Waste Pollution Control Act, Ch. 758, 86 Stat. 880, 33
U.S.C. § 1342, or is a source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined
by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 et seq. HAZARDOUS
REFUSE shall include explosives, chemicals, radioactive material, highly
inflammable material and any other material that is dangerous and would result
in serious hazards.
   LITTER. All rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass,
cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and
description.
   NEWSPAPER. All newsprint and materials which are part of a newspaper, except
the glossy inserts placed in the newspaper.
   PREMISES. Any area of land used for residential, commercial, industrial or
governmental purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street
address, postal address or box number, tax roll description or other similar
identification has been assigned or is in use by a person having control of
such area.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source-separated materials, site-separated materials,
high-grade paper, glass, metal, plastic, aluminum, newspaper, corrugated paper,
yard clippings and other material deemed to be recyclable materials by the
designated waste hauler unless the waste hauler is capable of sorting
recyclable materials at a designated facility.
   RESIDENTIAL COMPOSTABLES. Fruit and vegetable material which is produced
incidental to the preparation of food for human consumption in residential
structures.
   RESIDENTIAL GENERATION SITE. All single-family residential structures and
multi-family residential structures with four or less residential units per
parcel located within the city.
   RUBBISH. All waste material such as:
      (1)   Which can be economically processed or disposed of and shall
include all ordinary wastes such as paper cartons, rags, boxes, wood,
excelsior, leather, rubber, tree limbs not to exceed three inches in diameter
and other miscellaneous materials. Said listing is by way of inclusion and not
by exclusion. Material shall not exceed four feet in maximum dimension; and
      (2)   Which, due to its nature or size, cannot be economically processed
or disposed of and shall include ashes, cinders, debris from building
construction, metal, barrels, glass containers, broken dishes, crockery and
tree limbs greater than three inches in diameter or four feet in length.
   SITE OF GENERATION. Any premises in or on which litter is generated by any
person.
   SITE-SEPARATED MATERIAL. Glass, metal, wood, paper products, plastics,
rubber, textiles, garbage, yard clippings or other material that may be
recycled that is separated from solid waste for the purpose of conversion into
raw material or new products. SITE-SEPARATED MATERIAL does not include the
residue remaining after glass, metal, wood, paper products, plastics, rubber,
textiles or other recyclable materials is separated from solid waste.
   SITE SEPARATION. The act of removing site-separated material from rubbish.
   SOLID WASTE. Solid waste as the term is defined in Public Act 451 of 1994,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 et seq.
   SPECIALTY WASTE HAULER. A waste hauler that accepts specialty recyclable or
other waste materials in a truck weighing one ton or less.
   WASTE. Solid waste, litter, garbage, recyclable materials, yard clippings,
hazardous waste and all other waste regulated by Public Act 451 of 1994, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 et seq.
   WASTE HAULER. Any person engaged in the business of collecting waste within
the city and hauling, transporting or disposing of such materials.
   YARD CLIPPINGS. Leaves, grass clippings, vegetables or other garden debris,
shrubbery, brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length and two inches
in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus. This term does not include
stumps, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage, sludge or garbage.
YARD WASTE consists of grass clippings, yard trimmings, leaves and general yard
and garden waste materials.
(Prior Code, § 2.1) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 51.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Part 115 of Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501 et
seq., provides that a municipality shall assure that all solid waste is removed
from sites of generation frequently enough to protect the public health and
delivered to solid waste disposal areas authorized to operate pursuant to such
act. The City Council has determined that the collection of solid waste from
certain residential properties would most appropriately be undertaken at this
time by the city, acting by and through contract with the private sector.
Because solid waste collection directly affects the public health, safety and
general welfare and due to the fact that multiple waste haulers result in
excessive wear and tear on city roads, the city shall contract with a single
waste hauler in order to facilitate city governance and control of the solid
waste program for certain residential properties. In addition, the City Council
has determined that it would be in the public interest if the private waste
hauler were selected on a bid basis, requiring demonstration of the waste
hauler’s capability and strength to provide a high level of service to sites of
generation within the city and to promote and protect the public health, safety
and welfare.
   (B)   The City Council has further determined that its solid waste program
should include recycling, consistent with the county solid waste plan.
   (C)   For purposes of establishing and carrying out a program of solid waste
collection, recycling and disposal, the City Council has adopted this chapter
to provide standards and specifications for services to be provided, provide
for administration of the program and operational specifications and provide
penalties for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.2) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 51.03 PROHIBITED STORAGE OR DISPOSAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or dispose of waste, except as
expressly authorized by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.3) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 PROHIBITED COLLECTION.
   All waste shall become the property of the waste hauler at the time the
material is collected at curbside or other designated collection location. It
shall be unlawful for any person other than a waste hauler or the generator of
the waste to collect or cause to be collected any waste after it has been
placed at curbside or other designated collection location.
(Prior Code, § 2.4) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 PROHIBITED PLACEMENT OF WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed waste for
disposal upon the premises of another person or with the waste of another
person placed at curbside without the permission of the owner of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 2.5) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 STORAGE REGULATIONS.
   All waste at any site of generation shall be stored in the following manner.
   (A)   Solid waste. All solid waste shall be:
      (1)   Gathered, stored and placed in a closed container or containers
sufficient in number and size to store such waste;
      (2)   Shielded from public view upon the site of generation; and
      (3)   Not commingled with yard clippings.
   (B)   Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials not commingled with
solid waste shall be:
      (1)   Site-separated from other waste and stored and placed in a
recycling collection container suitable for such purpose or, if newspapers or
other recyclable paper products, be stored and placed in recycling collection
containers, paper bags or tied into bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds;
and
      (2)   Rinsed and cleaned before storage if metal, glass or plastic.
   (C)   Residential compostables. All residential compostables not commingled
with solid waste shall be collected, stored and disposed of pursuant to the
following conditions.
      (1)   Compost piles shall not be located within any drainage easement.
      (2)   Compost piles shall not be located in any side yard or closer than
five feet to any property line.
      (3)   Compost piles shall not exceed four feet by eight feet or six feet
in diameter and shall not exceed four feet in height.
      (4)   Double compost piles may be utilized; provided, the total size does
not exceed the above. Compost piles shall be maintained in a manner to prevent
the escape of offensive odors to adjacent property, the harboring of rodents or
becoming a public nuisance.
   (D)   Yard clippings. All yard clippings shall be site-separated from other
waste and:
      (1)   Stored in a manner that will not harbor rodents or become a public
nuisance; and
      (2)   Not commingled with solid waste or other recyclable materials.
   (E)   Construction and demolition debris. Construction and demolition debris
in excess of one cubic yard shall be collected, stored and disposed of pursuant
to the following conditions.
      (1)   Debris shall be gathered, stored and placed in a closed container
or containers sufficient in number and size to store such waste.
      (2)   Containers for use during construction, remodeling, yard or home
cleanup shall be considered temporary and allowed the lesser of completion of
the project or 30 days. Additional days must have approval of the City Manager.
      (3)   Containers shall not be placed in the public right-of-way or street
except when a permit is obtained from the City Manager pursuant to §
151.22. No permit shall be allowed when the container could reasonably be
placed on private property.
   (F)   Other. The storage of all other waste not expressly prescribed in this
section shall be stored in accordance with Public Act 451 of 1994, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 et seq., at any site of generation.
(Prior Code, § 2.6) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 818, passed 6-1-2020)
Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 DISPOSAL REGULATIONS.
   All waste at any site of generation shall be disposed of in the following
manner.
   (A)   Solid waste. All solid waste shall be removed from the site of
generation within 30 days or before it becomes a nuisance or danger to the
public health, safety or welfare by a waste hauler or transport by a generator
of waste’s own solid waste to a designated facility.
   (B)   Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials not commingled with
solid waste shall be removed from the site of generation within 30 days or
before such materials become a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety
or welfare by a waste hauler or transport by a generator of waste’s own
recyclable materials to a designated facility.
   (C)   Yard clippings. All yard clippings shall be site-separated from other
waste and, unless composted at the site of generation in accordance with §
51.06(C) of this chapter or applied to the site of generation for use in
mulching, enhancing soil, erosion control or compost or a combination of these,
removed from the site of generation before such clippings become a nuisance or
danger to the public health, safety or welfare by:
      (1)   The designated waste hauler;
      (2)   A person engaged in the business of providing landscaping services;
or
      (3)   The city’s Public Works Department.
   (D)   Preparation of yard clippings for disposal. If collected by the
designated waste hauler, twigs, brush and branches shall be prepared as
specified by the designated waste hauler. All other yard clippings shall be
placed in bulk carts or containers or kraft paper bags clearly marked as yard
clippings. Bulk disposal of yard clippings pursuant to rules and regulations of
the city for pick-up by the city shall be allowed.
   (E)   Construction and demolition debris. It shall be the duty of the owner,
contractor or other person responsible for construction work to maintain the
site clean and free of excess debris during construction and to remove from the
premises within 30 days after the completion of such construction work, unless
otherwise authorized by the City Manager, all surplus construction material and
all refuse building material. Such materials shall be removed to a designated
facility by the designated waste hauler, if the total amount of debris is under
one cubic yard, or a specialty waste hauler, as necessary, for construction and
demolition debris in excess of one cubic yard.
   (F)   Other. The disposal of all other waste not expressly prescribed in
this section shall be in accordance with Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 324.101 et seq.
   (G)   Curbside placement.
      (1)   No waste or containers for same shall be placed or left at curbside
for more than 48 hours.
      (2)   It shall be presumed that the owner, lessee or occupant in physical
possession of a site of generation abutting a curbside where waste is located
is the person who placed such waste at the curbside.
      (3)   The presumption of placement may be rebutted by competent evidence.
   (H)   Collection refusal by waste hauler. A waste hauler may refuse to
collect waste from any site of generation if such waste is not prepared for
disposal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.7) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 SINGLE HAULER WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Residential generation sites. Commencing on the effective date of the
contract between the city and the designated waste hauler, collection and
disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings and bulk items
from residential generation sites shall be in accordance with the following
provisions.
      (1)   Except as set forth in this section, no person shall dispose of any
waste generated from a residential generation site within the city other than
by means of the designated waste hauler contracted by the city for such
purpose.
      (2)   The designated waste hauler shall deliver solid waste to a
designated facility for disposal of such materials.
      (3)   Except as set forth in this section, no waste hauler, except the
designated waste hauler, shall engage in the business of collection,
transporting, delivery or disposal of waste generated by residential generation
sites within the city.
      (4)   The designated waste hauler shall comply with Public Act 451 of
1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 et seq., as applicable, and all applicable
federal, state and county laws, local ordinances and rules and regulations in
the collection, transportation and delivery of waste.
      (5)   No person shall knowingly place hazardous waste at curbside or
other designated locations for collection, and the designated waste hauler
shall not knowingly collect or deliver hazardous waste to a processing or
disposal site.
      (6)   Exceptions:
         (a)   Yard clippings in §
51.06(D) of this chapter;
         (b)   Compost in accordance with §
51.06(C) of this chapter;
         (c)   A generator of waste’s own waste transported by the generator of
waste to a designated facility or waste not accepted by the designated waste
hauler and accepted by a specialty waste hauler;
         (d)   Bulk yard clipping collection by the city pursuant to rules and
regulations of the city;
         (e)   Solid waste collected from units in a condominium where the
association for the condominium has entered into an agreement with a waste
hauler for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings
or bulk items for those units;
         (f)   Solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings or bulk items
collected pursuant to a prepaid agreement with a waste hauler entered into
prior to the effective date of this section until the expiration of the prepaid
agreement or one month after the effective date of the contract between the
city and the designated waste hauler, whichever occurs first; and
         (g)   Construction and demolition debris in excess of one cubic yard.
   (B)   Rates, charges, and payments for solid waste and recycling collection
and disposal services. The designated waste hauler shall charge fees for
collection and disposal of waste and shall bill for such services in accordance
with the following.
      (1)   The designated waste hauler shall charge fees for collection and
disposal of waste placed for collection as set forth in the contract between
the designated waste hauler and the city.
      (2)   The designated waste hauler shall send a quarterly invoice, in
advance, to each residential generation site for which services are provided in
the city. Such invoice shall represent charges for services to be rendered in
the following quarter.
      (3)   Unless otherwise specified by the city, the invoice shall be
delivered by regular mail at least three weeks prior to the beginning of the
quarter for which charges are imposed.
(Prior Code, § 2.8) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99 
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations. A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil
infraction and is further declared to be a nuisance per se and subject to
abatement as provided in this code and by state law.
   (B)   City costs. Upon failure of any person to store or dispose of garbage
or refuse in the manner set forth in this chapter and when such improper
storage or disposal creates or is likely to create nuisance by virtue of
littering, odor, putrefaction, rodent or insect attraction, or broken or
hazardous substances, the enforcing officer may take immediate steps to abate
such nuisance. City costs shall include, but not be limited to, actual attorney
fees and expense of removal and abatement.
   (C)   Penalties. Penalties for violations shall be as follows.
      (1)   Residential generation site. All violations of this chapter by
owners or occupants of residential generation sites pertaining to waste
collected or generated on the property of the residential generation site shall
be municipal civil infractions and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of $25.
      (2)   Waste haulers. Penalties for violations by waste haulers shall be
municipal civil infractions as follows: all violations of this chapter by waste
haulers shall be subject to sanctions as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Each day separate offense. Every day that a violation occurs or
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 2.9) (Ord. 792, passed 3-19-2018)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Service connections
   
52.03   Turning on water service
   
52.04   Water meters
   
52.05   Access to meters
   
52.06   Reimbursement for damage
   
52.07   Meter failure; inaccurate meters
   
52.08   Accuracy required
   
52.09   Bill adjustment
   
52.10   Hydrant use
   
52.11   Lawn sprinkling
   
52.12   Additional regulations
   
52.13   Injury to facilities
   
52.14   Cross-connections
Exclusive Water Source
   
52.25   Definitions
   
52.26   Private water wells prohibited; exceptions
   
52.27   Connection to city water service required
   
52.28   Identification of existing wells in the impact area
   
52.29   Notification to Department of Environmental Quality
   
52.30   Nuisance per se
   
52.31   Court action for abatement of nuisances
Work in Environmentally Impaired Area
   
52.40   Definitions
   
52.41   Excavation of soils prohibited; exceptions
   
52.42   Work within road right of way
   
52.43   Issuance of permits within in the impact area
   
52.44   Notification to USEPA and EGLE
   
52.45   Nuisance per se
   
52.46   Court action for abatement of nuisances
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Public Works Department of the city.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works.
   WATER CONNECTION. The part of the water distribution system connecting the
water main with the premises served.
   WATER MAIN. The part of the water distribution system located within
easement lines or streets designed to supply more than one water connection.
(Prior Code, § 2.51)
§ 52.02 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Applications for water connections shall be made to the Department on forms
prescribed and furnished by the Department. Water connections, water connection
upgrades and water meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and
regulations of the Department and upon prior payment of the required connection
fee and installation fee. All meters shall be the property of the city. The
city shall be responsible for maintenance, repair and replacements of water
meters from normal wear and tear; the property owner shall be responsible for
maintenance, repair and replacement for damage to the water meter not from
normal wear and tear, including neglect, freezing pipes or other physical
damage to the meter. Connection fees and connection upgrade fees shall not be
less than the cost of materials, installations and overhead attributable to
such installations. Connection fees, connection upgrade fees and meter
installation fees shall be paid to the city at the time the application is
filed, and shall be in such amounts as the Council shall, from time to time,
determine by resolution. The required connection fee and meter installation fee
shall be charged to each property served. The city shall own all water lines to
the first point of isolation, which is the first curb stop valve. The city
shall own and be responsible for maintaining the water connection from the
point it leaves the main line to the first point of isolation, which is the
first curb stop valve. The property owner shall own and be responsible for
maintaining the water connection from the first point of isolation to the
structure the service line is feeding, even if all or some of the water
connection is within the road right-of-way. The property owner shall notify the
city of any work to be done in the road right-of-way prior to commencing work
in the road right-of-way. The property owner shall be responsible to restore
the road right-of-way to its previously existing condition upon completion of
any work in the road right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 2.52) (Ord. 774, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 52.03 TURNING ON WATER SERVICE.
   No person, other than an authorized employee of the Department, shall turn
on or off any water service; except that, a licensed plumber may turn on water
service for testing his or her work (then it must be immediately turned off) or
upon receiving a written order from the Department; provided that, upon written
permit from the Department, water may be turned on for construction purposes
upon payment of the charges applicable thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2.53) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 WATER METERS.
   (A)   All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise
provided in this code of ordinances. No person, except a Department employee,
shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in
any way with any water meter.
   (B)   On all new installations, there shall be a shut-off on each side of
the meter for the purpose of testing, inspecting and replacement of the meter.
(Prior Code, § 2.54) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 ACCESS TO METERS.
   The Department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any
premises where the Department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any
qualified employee of the Department shall, at all reasonable hours, have the
right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of
reading, testing, removing or inspecting same and no person shall hinder,
obstruct or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his or her
duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
§ 52.06 REIMBURSEMENT FOR DAMAGE.
   Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the
owner, agent or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and
protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot
water or steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the
property to the city on presentation of a bill therefor; and, in cases where
the bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on
until all charges have been paid to the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.56)
§ 52.07 METER FAILURE; INACCURATE METERS.
   (A)   If any meter shall fail to register properly, the Department shall
estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill
accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 2.57)
   (B)   A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found
accurate, a charge of $3 will be made. If the meter is found defective, it
shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made.
(Prior Code, § 2.58)
§ 52.08 ACCURACY REQUIRED.
   A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested it registers not to
exceed 2% more to 2% less than the actual quantity of water passing through it.
If a meter registers in excess of 2% more than the actual quantity of water
passing through it, it shall be considered “fast” to that extent. If a meter
registers in excess of 2% less than the actual quantity of water passing
through it, it shall be considered “slow” to that extent.
(Prior Code, § 2.59)
§ 52.09 BILL ADJUSTMENT.
   If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been
determined to register “fast”, the city shall credit the consumer with a sum
equal to the percent “fast” multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by
said consumer within the three months prior to the test and, if a meter so
tested is determined to register “slow”, the Department may collect from the
consumer a sum equal to the percent “slow” multiplied by the amount of all the
bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three months. When the Department,
on its own initiative, makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without
cost to the consumer, other than his or her paying the amount due the city for
water used by him or her as above provided, if the meter is found to be “slow”.
(Prior Code, § 2.60)
§ 52.10 HYDRANT USE.
   No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his or her
duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant, except in case of emergency,
without first securing a written permit from the Department and paying such
charges as may be prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 2.61) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.11 LAWN SPRINKLING.
   The City Manager, subject to approval by the Council, may regulate, limit or
prohibit the u se of water for any purpose. Such regulations shall restrict
less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate
supply for essential domestic and commercial needs and for firefighting. No
such regulation, limitation or prohibition shall be effective until 24 hours
after the publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 2.62) (Ord. 788, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.12 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations
concerning the water distribution system, connection thereto, meter
installation and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants
and water mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such
rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the City Council. The
rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance
with this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.63) (Ord. 788, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 52.13 INJURY TO FACILITIES.
   No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his or her
duties, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
city water distribution system.
(Prior Code, § 2.64) (Ord. 788, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.14 CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross-Connection Rules
of the state’s Department of Environmental Quality, being R325.11401 through
R325.11407.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Water Department to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply,
where cross-connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be as established by the city’s water utility and as approved by
the state’s Department of Environmental Quality.
   (C)   The representative of the city’s Water Department shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping
system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessees
or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency
any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such
property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, where
requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
   (D)   For all water services connected to the city water supply, testable
backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation to be sure
that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of residential lawn
irrigation backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at least once every
five years, all other testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be
conducted on an annual basis as required by the city and in accordance with the
state’s Department of Environmental Quality and the state’s Plumbing Code
requirements. The city’s Water Department shall notify the water customer in
writing of the required testing or repairs. The water customer shall be
responsible for hiring a certified tester or performing any repairs and
providing Water Department with proof of completion within 30 days from the
date the written notice is sent. The 30-day deadline may be extended by the
Water Department upon showing of good cause by the water customer. Only
individuals that hold an American Society of Sanitary Engineering backflow
tester certification shall be qualified to perform such testing. All cost for
testing and repairs to any backflow prevention assemblies are the
responsibility of the water customer.
   (E)   The city’s Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any
connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
   (F)   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by
the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this section and by the state’s and the county’s Plumbing Code.
Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which
is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner
as:
 
Water Unsafe for Drinking
 
   (G)   This section does not supersede the state’s Plumbing Code.
   (H)   Any person violating the provisions of this section or the written
order of the city’s Water Department in pursuance of this section is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 2.65) (Ord. 731, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 788, passed 3-19-2018)
Penalty, see §
52.99
EXCLUSIVE WATER SOURCE
§ 52.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Charlevoix.
   CITY WATER SERVICE. The water supplied by the city under §§
52.01 through
52.14 of this chapter.
   IMPACT AREA. The property located within the city and described as follows:
      (1)   In the City and Township of Charlevoix, Charlevoix County,
Michigan:
         (a)   Commencing at the north quarter corner of Section 35, Town 34
North, Range 8 West; thence south on north and south quarter line of said
section 1,138.50 feet; thence south 89º39’00” east 303.00 feet, more or less,
to the westerly line of the former C&O Railroad right-of-way, being the point
of beginning of this description; thence continuing south 89º39’00” east 350
feet, more or less, to the shore of Lake Charlevoix; thence southerly along
said shore to the thread of Stover Creek; thence westerly along the thread of
Stover Creek to the easterly line of former Highway M-66; thence northerly
along said highway 469.20 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Stover Road;
thence west along said centerline of Stover Road to a point which is 1,162.26
feet east of the centerline of May Street; thence north 330.00 feet; thence
east 62.44 feet; thence north 165.00 feet; thence east 260.75 feet to the
northwesterly line of the former C&O Railroad right-of-way; thence
northeasterly along said railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning; being
a part of Government Lot 1, Section 35, Town 34 North, Range 8 West. The above
described property extends to the water’s edge of Lake Charlevoix. (This area
is called “Impact Area A” on the map.);
         (b)   Part of Sections 26, 34 and 35, T34N, R8W, City of Charlevoix,
Charlevoix County, Michigan, more fully described as: beginning at the
northeast corner of Section 34, said corner being at the intersection of State
Street and Carpenter Avenue; thence west along the centerline of Carpenter
Avenue to the intersection of Grant Street; thence south 1,906 feet; thence
east to the centerline of US-31; thence northeasterly along the centerline of
US-31 to a point that is 1,419 feet south of the north line of Section 35;
thence east, parallel with the north line of Section 35 to the centerline of
May Street; thence north along the centerline of May Street to the intersection
of Eaton Avenue; thence east along the centerline of Eaton Avenue to the
intersection of Ferry Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Ferry
Avenue and its extension to the south shore of channel between Lake Charlevoix
and Round Lake; thence westerly along said south shore to the intersection of
Antrim Street extended; thence west along the centerline of Antrim Street to
the intersection of Bridge Street; thence south along the centerline of Bridge
Street to the intersection of Wood Avenue; thence west along the centerline of
Wood Avenue to the intersection of State Street; thence south along the
centerline of State Street to the intersection of Carpenter Avenue and the
point of beginning. (This area is called “Impact Area B” on the map.); and
         (c)   A part of the west half of Section 26, and a part of the east
half of Section 27, all in T.34N.R.8W., City of Charlevoix, Charlevoix County,
Michigan, described as follows: commencing at the south section corner common
to said Sections 26 and 27, also being the intersection of the centerline of
State Street with the centerline of West Carpenter Avenue; thence north along
the section line common to said Sections 26 and 27, which is also the
centerline of State Street, 672.9 feet to the centerline of Wood Avenue and the
point of beginning of this description; thence west 898.5 feet to the
intersection of the centerline of Grant Street with centerline of Crain Street;
thence continuing west along the centerline of Crain Street 288.1 feet to
centerline of Beacon Street; thence north parallel with Grant Street 614.5 feet
to the centerline of West Garfield Avenue; thence west along the centerline of
West Garfield Avenue 474.9 feet to the centerline of Sherman Street; thence
north along the centerline of Sherman Street 1,930.1 feet to the centerline of
Park Avenue; thence N.34°W. to the shore of Lake Michigan; thence northeasterly
along the shore of Lake Michigan extended to the south bulkhead of the Pine
River channel; thence southeasterly along the south bulkhead of the Pine River
channel to Round Lakes’ westerly bulkhead; thence southerly along said bulkhead
to the southerly bulkhead of Round Lake; thence easterly along the southerly
bulkhead and/or shore of Round Lake to the north extension of the centerline of
May Street; thence south along said north extension of the centerline of May
Street to the intersection of the centerline of May Street with the centerline
of Belvedere Avenue; thence continuing south along the centerline of May Street
1,165.5 feet to the centerline of East Garfield Avenue; thence west along the
centerline of East Garfield Avenue 837.3 feet to the centerline of Bridge
Street; thence south along the centerline of Bridge Street 643.5 feet to the
centerline of Wood Avenue; thence west along the centerline of Wood Avenue
487.1 feet to the centerline of State Street and the point of beginning. (This
area is called “Impact Area C” on the map.)
      (2)   These are subject to the rights of the public and of any
governmental unit in any part thereof taken, used or deeded for street, road or
highway purposes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1647.jpg]
 
   MDEQ. The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or its successor
agency.
   WATER WELL. An opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of
removing water through non-mechanical or mechanical means for any purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2.71) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 732, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 52.26 PRIVATE WATER WELLS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person, firm, association, corporation or any other entity shall install,
construct, develop, maintain or use a water well within the impact area, except
as follows.
   (A)   A water well may be used if the MDEQ determines that the use of a
water well is not influenced or potentially influenced by contaminated
groundwater and further determines the use of that water well will remain
permanently unaffected by the future migration of contaminated ground water and
proof of those determinations is delivered to the city, the City Manager may
execute a waiver allowing the use of the water well.
   (B)   A water well may be used for ground water monitoring and/or
remediation as part of response activity approved by the MDEQ.
   (C)   A water well may be used in the event of a public emergency.
(Prior Code, § 2.72) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.27 CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SERVICE REQUIRED.
   The owner or occupant of any property or structure within the impact area
that is currently serviced by a private water well shall remove or otherwise
disable the water well and connect to the city’s water service pursuant to §§
52.01 through
52.14 of this chapter within 30 days of the effective date of this subchapter.
The owner or occupant of any property or structure within the impact area that
desires water service at the property or structure shall connect to the city
water service pursuant to §§
52.01 through
52.14 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.28 IDENTIFICATION OF EXISTING WELLS IN THE IMPACT AREA.
   The city will identify existing wells in the impact area by consultation
with the city water supply personnel.
(Prior Code, § 2.74) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 52.29 NOTIFICATION TO DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY.
   If the city ever intends to amend or repeal this chapter, it shall notify
the state’s Department of Environmental Quality, or its successors, of its
intentions no less than 30 days before such amendment or repeal is enacted.
(Prior Code, § 2.75) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 52.30 NUISANCE PER SE.
   A violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance or
nuisance per se and is declared to be offensive to the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 2.76) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.31 COURT ACTION FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   The city may take civil action requesting injunctive relief against any
person, firm, association, corporation or other entity found to be in violation
of this subchapter. This abatement action shall be in addition to any penalty
imposed by §
52.99(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.77) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002)
Work in Environmentally Impaired Area
§ 52.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Charlevoix.
   EGLE. The Michigan Department of Energy, Great Lakes and the Environment, or
its successor agency.
   IMPACT AREA. The property located within the city and described as follows:
Table 1
Properties Requiring ICs Requiring Notification and Mitigation for Intrusive
Activities
Parcel ID Address
Table 1
Properties Requiring ICs Requiring Notification and Mitigation for Intrusive
Activities
Parcel ID      Address
Area A
052-270-253-50 201 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-251-00 203 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-250-00 205 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-249-00 207 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-248-00 209 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-247-00 211 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-246-00 213 Garfield Avenue W
052-270-198-00 200 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-199-00 204 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-192-00 205 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-191-00 207 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-200-00 208 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-190-00 209 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-201-00 210 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-202-00 214 Lincoln Avenue W
052-270-253-00 707 State Street
052-227-026-10 801 State Street
Area B
052-362-006-10 100 Hurlbut Avenue W
052-362-005-00 102 Hurlbut Avenue W
052-362-006-00 701 Bridge Street
052-362-007-00 703 Bridge Street
Area C
052-270-013-00 228 Antrim Street
052-270-013-50 230 Antrim Street
052-270-014-50 302 Antrim Street
052-270-014-00 401 Grant Street
052-290-000-00 305 Hurlbut Avenue W
052-270-070-50 230 Newman Street
IMPACT AREA also includes the following road right of ways:
The intersection of Newman Street and Grant Street and adjacent roadways
A portion of Hamilton Place
Portions of West Lincoln Avenue
Portions of West Garfield Avenue
A portion of Mcleod Place from its intersection with West Garfield Avenue to
beyond its intersection with West Lincoln Avenue
 
   OSHA. Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
   USEPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.41 EXCAVATION OF SOILS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person, firm, association, corporation or any other entity shall excavate
or engage in intrusive activities within the impact area, unless they first
contact the USEPA prior to undertaking intrusive activities anywhere within the
identified impacted area and ensure the mitigation of risks to construction
workers (including municipal employees) with appropriate measures as required
by OSHA.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.42 WORK WITHIN ROAD RIGHT OF WAY.
   No person, firm, association, corporation or any other entity shall excavate
or engage in intrusive activities within the road right of ways within the
impact area, unless they first contact the USEPA prior to undertaking intrusive
activities anywhere within the identified impacted area and ensure the
mitigation of risks to construction workers (including municipal employees)
with appropriate measures as required by OSHA.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.43 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS WITHIN IN THE IMPACT AREA.
   The city will proof of compliance with this subchapter before issuing any
construction or building permits within the impacted area.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.44 NOTIFICATION TO USEPA AND EGLE.
   If the city ever intends to amend or repeal this subchapter, it shall notify
the USEPA and EGLE, or their successors, of its intentions no less than 30 days
before such amendment or repeal is enacted.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.45 NUISANCE PER SE.
   A violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance or
nuisance per se and is declared to be offensive to the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.46 COURT ACTION FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   The city may take civil action requesting injunctive relief against any
person, firm, association, corporation or other entity found to be in violation
of this subchapter. This abatement action shall be in addition to any penalty
imposed by §
52.99(C) of this chapter.
(Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
52.11 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity who
violates any provision of §§
52.25 through
52.31 of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as
defined in Public Act 12 of 1994, amending Public Act 236 of 1961, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 through 600.9939, and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $100. Each day §§
52.25 through
52.31 of this chapter is violated shall be considered as a separate violation.
Any action taken under this division (C) shall not prevent civil proceedings
for abatement or termination of the prohibited activity permitted under §
52.31 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.78) (Ord. 673, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 841, passed 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Use of public sewers required
   
53.03   Private sewage disposal
Building Sewers and Connections
   
53.15   Permit required
   
53.16   Permit fees
   
53.17   Installation costs
   
53.18   Separate building sewer
   
53.19   Old sewers
Use of Public Sewers
   
53.30   Unpolluted water
   
53.31   Storm sewers
   
53.32   Prohibited uses
   
53.33   Specific substances prohibited
   
53.34   Action by Superintendent
   
53.35   Pretreatment
   
53.36   Order of determination; statement by user; annual review; effect
   
53.37   Interceptors
   
53.38   Control manholes
   
53.39   Inspectors; powers and authority
   
53.40   Notice to remediate at city’s option
   
53.41   Health Officer
   
53.42   Restrictions imposed by other laws
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CESSPOOL. An underground pit into which raw household sewage or other
untreated liquid waste is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into the
surrounding soil or is otherwise removed.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Charlevoix.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR or GREASE TRAP. A tank of suitable size and material
located in a sewer line and designed to remove grease and oily wastes from the
sewer.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The legally designated health authority of the city or his
or her authorized representative.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial, manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NUISANCE. Any condition where sewage (or garbage) is exposed to the surface
of the ground or is permitted to drain on or to the surface of the ground, into
any ditch, storm sewer, lake or stream, or when the odor, appearance or
presence of this material has an obnoxious or detrimental effect on or to the
senses and/or health of persons, or when it shall obstruct the comfortable use
or sale of adjacent property.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEEPAGE PIT or DRY WELL. A cistern or underground enclosure constructed of
concrete blocks, bricks or similar material loosely laid with open joints so as
to allow the septic tank overflow or effluent to be absorbed directly into the
surrounding soil.
   SEPTIC TANK. Water-tight receptacle receiving sewage and having an inlet and
outlet designed to permit the separation of solids in suspension from such
wastes and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition therein.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES. Privy, cesspool, seepage pit, septic tank,
absorption field or other devices used in the disposal of sewage or human
excreta.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposal
of sewage and industrial wastes.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flow during normal operations.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUB-SURFACE DISPOSAL FIELD. A facility for the distribution of septic tank
overflow or effluent below the ground surface through a line, or a series of
branch lines, of drain tile laid with open joints to allow the overflow or
effluent to be absorbed by the surrounding soil throughout the entire field.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The City Manager for the City of Charlevoix or his or her
authorized representative or agent.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   UNCONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste water which has not come into contact
with any substance used in or incidental to industrial processing operation and
to which no chemical or other substance has been added; and STORM WATER shall
mean that part of precipitation which reaches the sewers as runoff from natural
land surface, building roofs or pavements or as ground water infiltration.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 53.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Waste deposits. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit
or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private
property, within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Prior Code, § 2.82)
   (B)   Water pollution. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment is provided as
determined by the Superintendent who may seek review by the appropriate agency
of the state or the county.
(Prior Code, § 2.83)
   (C)   Privies and septic tanks. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Prior Code, § 2.84)
   (D)   Sewer connection required. The owner or occupant of any property
situated within the city upon which is located a structure in which water is
used or available for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes,
shall, at his or her own expense, cause such property to be connected to an
available public sanitary or combined sewage collection facility, as and where
required under the terms of Public Act 151 of 1961, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.12701 to
333.12771, as amended (regardless of any population requirements in the Act).
Such owner or occupant shall also be required to install suitable toilet
facilities within such structures.
(Prior Code, § 2.85)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Private sewer systems. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available
so that the provisions of §
53.02 of this chapter do not apply, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system which shall comply with all regulations of the
county’s Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 2.88)
   (B)   Discontinuance of system. At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private disposal system, a direct
connection from sanitary facilities or plumbing shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.89)
Penalty, see §
10.99
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 53.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Only authorized persons shall uncover and make any connections with or
openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
and then only after first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 2.92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.16 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the city before any connection is made to a public
sewer. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent.
   (B)   Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the Superintendent at the
time the application is filed and shall be in such amounts as the Council
shall, from time to time, determine by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.93)
§ 53.17 INSTALLATION COSTS.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from the
installation of the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 2.94)
§ 53.18 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available, nor can one be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 2.95)
§ 53.19 OLD SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings; provided
that, upon examination and test by the Superintendent, the old sewer is found
to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.96)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 53.30 UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, cooling air conditioning water or
uncontaminated water or uncontaminated industrial waste to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   A normal amount of ground water leakage into basements may be drained
to the sanitary sewer; however, any excessive volume of basement drainage as
determined by the Superintendent will not be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 2.100) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.31 STORM SEWERS.
    Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage, including industrial cooling
water, or air-conditioning water or uncontaminated industrial waste shall be
discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent, County Drain Commissioner, State Water
Resources Commission and/or other interested governmental agencies. Industrial
cooling water, unpolluted air-conditioning water or uncontaminated industrial
waste may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet upon approval of the
Superintendent, and, where appropriate, upon approval of the county’s Drain
Commissioner, or the appropriate agency of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.101) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.32 PROHIBITED USES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment facilities, including but not limited
to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the waste as discharged to the
public sewer;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; and/or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood or ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Prior Code, § 2.102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.33 SPECIFIC SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows, velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment facilities, degree of treatability of
wastes and other pertinent factors.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F or 65°C;
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substance which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourth
horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any water or waste having a five-day BOD greater than 300 mg/l or
containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids, except upon approval of the
Superintendent in a written agreement;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing chromium, copper, zinc and similar
objectionable or toxic substances; to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the Superintendent for such materials;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for discharge to the receiving waters;
      (8)   Any discharge of phosphorus, ammonia nitrates, sugars or other
nutrients or wastes containing them which in the opinion of the Superintendent,
are in such quantities as to cause adverse effects or a significant load on the
sewage treatment plant, or cause the stimulation of growths of algae, weeds and
slimes which are or may become injurious to water supply, recreational use of
water, fish, wildlife and other aquatic life, shall be limited to the extent
necessary;
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate;
         (b)   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes,
vegetable tanning solutions;
         (c)   Unusual chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
and/or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs”, as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 2.103) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.34 ACTION BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to,
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
53.33 of this chapter and which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
   (A)   Reject the wastes;
   (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   (C)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
   (D)   Require a special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
person whereby any waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment subject to payment therefor by the person receiving the
service.
(Prior Code, § 2.104)
§ 53.35 PRETREATMENT.
   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities, or additions to, or expansion of existing
treatment facilities, shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent
and of the appropriate state agency. No construction of such facilities shall
be commenced until approval is obtained in writing.
(Prior Code, § 2.105)
§ 53.36 ORDER OF DETERMINATION; STATEMENT BY USER; ANNUAL REVIEW; EFFECT.
   (A)   Generally. The Superintendent may, by a written order of
determination, establish regulations relative to the sewage and industrial
wastes to be received by public sewers. Such regulations may relate to the
following:
      (1)   Temperature of any liquid or vapor to be admitted to the sewer;
      (2)   Grease or oil or other substances that may solidify or become
viscous in the sewer;
      (3)   Gasoline or similar liquid, gas or solid that is flammable or
explosive;
      (4)   Any substances which may tend to settle out in the sewer and cause
stoppage or obstruction to flow;
      (5)   Any liquid which is corrosive or highly acidic or highly alkaline;
      (6)   Toxic or poisonous substances;
      (7)   Iron, copper, chromium, nickel and zinc;
      (8)   Cyanides;
      (9)   Toxic radioisotopes;
      (10)   Highly colored wastes;
      (11)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      (12)   Any substance which may be harmful to pipes, jointing material and
manholes; and
      (13)   Any substance which may seriously interfere with the normal
operation of the sewage treatment facility, such as overloading by slugs of
concentrated material, liquid wastes extremely high in BOD, suspended matter or
chlorine demand.
(Prior Code, § 2.106)
   (B)   Statement by user.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation whose operations entail the
discharge of wastes containing toxic, poisonous or objectionable substances
shall file with the city a written statement setting forth the nature of the
operation contemplated or currently being carried on, the amount of water
required to be used and its source, the proposed point of discharge of said
waste into the sewage system of the city, the maximum amount to be discharged
per second and a fair statement setting forth the expected bacterial, physical,
chemical or other known characteristics of the wastes.
      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt of said statement, the Superintendent
shall make an order of determination setting forth the maximum limits for the
substances listed in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 2.107)
   (C)   Annual review. Any order of determination issued by the Superintendent
may be reviewed annually, and the maximums set forth therein adjusted to
compensate for increased flows in the entire sewer system or increased
contribution of toxic, poisonous or objectionable substances by other users of
the city sewer system. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to apportion
to each industry its fair share of toxic waste discharge in such manner that
the combined waste of all users will not endanger the sewage system or
treatment processes or the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 2.108)
   (D)   Effect of order. Any order of determination issued in pursuance of
this chapter shall be considered a part of this chapter for the specific
industrial user or other establishment involved, and shall be enforceable in
the same manner as this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.109)
   (E)   Enforcing order. The Superintendent, when advised that a particular
industrial user is violating the terms of the order of determination as herein
referred to, may discontinue water and sewer service to such industrial user
until such time as the industry shall conform to the provisions of the order of
determination.
(Prior Code, § 2.110)
   (F)   Pretreatment. Where the wastes from an industrial user exceed the
limits set forth in the Superintendent’s order of determination, said user may
be required, as a condition precedent to its continued right to use the public
sewer, to construct necessary pretreatment facilities to keep wastes discharged
to the public sewers within the order limits.
(Prior Code, § 2.111)
   (G)   Appeal procedure.
      (1)   Any industrial user which is subject to an order of determination
issued by the Superintendent shall have the right to appeal the rulings and
findings of said Superintendent to a board of referees consisting of two
registered professional engineers, one of whom shall be selected by the user
and one by the city. Neither of said referees shall be in the employ of the
party selecting him or her.
      (2)   Within ten days after receiving notice of the selection of the
referees, the city shall file with the referees a copy of the Superintendent’s
determination and the results of the investigation. Ten days thereafter, the
appellant industrial user shall file its reply together with supporting
documentation. The referees may thereafter require additional information and
may, if they choose, hold a hearing at which both sides may present evidence
and arguments. The referees shall render a written opinion within ten days
after the last documents are filed, and such opinion shall be binding upon all
parties. If the referees cannot agree, they shall select a third referee having
the same qualifications and a decision of the majority shall be binding.
      (3)   The referees shall be entitled to reasonable compensation and
expenses, and the cost thereof shall be borne equally by appellant and the
city.
(Prior Code, § 2.112)
§ 53.37 INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   General. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors shall
not be required in private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2.113)
   (B)   Sand interceptors. Sand interceptors shall be installed in garages,
filling stations and other establishments which have washing facilities
producing sandy waste waters.
(Prior Code, § 2.114)
   (C)   Interceptor maintenance. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand
interceptors, and preliminary treatment facilities for any waters or wastes
shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
(Prior Code, § 2.115) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.38 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be located in a safe and accessible
position, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
(Prior Code, § 2.116)
§ 53.39 INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted at all reasonable
hours to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.117)
§ 53.40 NOTICE TO REMEDIATE AT CITY’S OPTION.
   Prior to the imposition of the penalties set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, the city shall not be required but may, at
its sole discretion, issue notice to a person in violation of this chapter
stating the nature of the violation and providing no more than ten days for the
correction of said violation.
(Prior Code, § 2.118) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 53.41 HEALTH OFFICER.
   Nothing stated in these regulations may be construed to limit the power of
the city or Health Officer to order the immediate and complete abatement of a
public nuisance or menace to the public health or of a condition which, in the
opinion of the city, may be a menace to the public health.
(Prior Code, § 2.119)
§ 53.42 RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY OTHER LAWS.
   If any provision of any other provision of the city code and/or the statutes
of the state imposes greater restrictions than herein set forth, then such
provisions and/or statutes shall control.
(Prior Code, § 2.120)
TITLE VI: HEALTH REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 66: PROHIBITION OF RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been ADDED by new legislation (Ord. 796-
2019, adopted 1-7-2018). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
CHAPTER 67: SMOKE FREE AREAS
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been ADDED by new legislation (Ord. 796-
2019, adopted 1-7-2018). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING
      
71.   MUNICIPAL LAUNCH AND PARKING
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
   
70.01   Uniform Traffic Code and Michigan Motor Vehicle Code adopted
   
70.02   References in Code
   
70.03   Copies to be available
   
70.04   Traffic Engineer
   
70.05   Parking
   
70.06   Year-round parking
   
70.07   Winter parking
   
70.08   Snowmobiles
   
70.09   Bicycle, skating, micromobility devices restricted, violation as a
civil infraction
   
70.10   Violations Bureau
§ 70.01 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MICHIGAN MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages (the
"UTC"), as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State
Police, pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 Public Act
306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328, as amended, and all future amendments to the UTC,
are incorporated herein and adopted by reference. The penalties provided by the
UTC are hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 Public Act 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923
(the "Code"), as amended, and all future amendments to the Code, are
incorporated herein and adopted by reference. Penalties. The penalties provided
by the Code are hereby adopted by reference; provided, however, that the City
of Charleovix may not enforce any Code provision for which the maximum period
of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.02 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and
Villages to "Governmental Unit" shall mean the City of Charlevoix.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.03 COPIES TO BE AVAILABLE.
   Copies of the Uniform Traffic Code and the Michigan Vehicle Code shall be
available electronically in the office of the City Clerk and shall be made
available for inspection by request.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   (A)   Traffic Engineer. The Office of Traffic Engineer is hereby
established. The authority of the Traffic Engineer shall be vested in the Chief
of Police and the Chief of Police of the City of Charlevoix shall serve as the
Traffic Engineer. The Traffic Engineer shall exercise the powers and duties
provided in this chapter in a manner consistent with prevailing traffic
engineering and safety practices and in the best interests of this governmental
unit.
   (B)   Traffic Control Orders. 
      (1)   The authority to regulate traffic contained in this chapter shall
be exercised by the Traffic Engineer through the issuance of Traffic Control
Orders specifying the rules and regulations adopted or established. Such
Traffic Control Orders shall become effective upon filing with the City Clerk
and upon the installation of required signage, pavement markings, or traffic
control devices providing notice to the public.
      (2)   Traffic Control Orders may be issued by the Traffic Engineer under
their authority and approved by resolution of the City Council when required by
this chapter. All Traffic Control Orders, resolutions and amendments shall be
maintained by the City Clerk in a separate record known as the Traffic Control
Order Book.
   (C)   Truck routes, load limits. The Traffic Engineer is authorized subject
to approval by resolution of the City Council to designate truck routes,
restrict commercial vehicle access, and impose vehicle weight on designated
streets. Such restrictions shall not take effect until notice is provided
through official signage.
   (D)   Continuation of existing regulations. All traffic and parking
regulations lawfully established and in effect on the effective date of this
Code–including but not limited to parking meter zones, pay station zones,
permit parking areas, loading zones, time-limited parking areas, and weight
restrictions–shall remain in effect unless modified or rescinded in accordance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.05 PARKING.
   (A)   Special parking permits.
      (1)   The city may provide parking permits for service vehicles, repair
and maintenance trucks and other such commercial vehicles to allow parking in
any metered space in the city upon payment of such annual fee as the Council
shall prescribe.
      (2)   Commercial establishments shall pay such annual fee as the Council
shall prescribe for truck unloading zones established at their request by the
City Council.
      (3)   A special request to hood or cover a meter or meters shall be
allowed upon approval of the Chief of Police and on advance payment of a fee as
the City Council may from time to time set by resolution. Such approval shall
be considered for the purpose of construction, refurbishment or maintenance for
an adjacent building or property. Special consideration, at no charge, for the
purpose of funerals or other requests deemed proper by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Parking meter and pay station zones. The Traffic Engineer is
authorized, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council of
Charlevoix, to determine and designate parking meter zones and pay station
zones. The Traffic Engineer may install, operate, maintain, replace, or remove
parking meters, multi-space pay stations, electronic payment systems, or other
parking management devices or technologies deemed necessary to regulate,
control, and monitor the parking of vehicles within such zones.
   (C)   Angle parking zones. The Traffic Engineer shall determine and
establish the location of angle parking zones, subject to approval by
resolution of the City Council and shall erect and maintain appropriate signage
indicting such zones and the applicable parking regulations.
   (D)   Permit parking. The Traffic Engineer is authorized, subject to
approval by resolution of the City Council to establish permit parking zones,
permit fees, fines for violations, applicable hours, and seasonal or annual
periods of enforcement. Such regulations in a Traffic Control Order shall be
documented in Traffic Control Order and maintained as part of the official
record.
   (E)   Meter and paid parking regulations. The Traffic Engineer is
authorized, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council of
Charlevoix, to establish parking fees, fines, enforcement hours, and time
limitations for parking meter zones and pay station zones. The Traffic Engineer
may designate enforcement hours, maximum parking durations, variable pricing,
and location-specific restrictions through Traffic Control Orders. All such
determinations shall be documented in schedules attached to the applicable
Traffic Control Orders.
   (F)   Parking meter, pay stations, and payment systems. 
      (1)   Parking meters, pay stations, or electronic payment systems may be
installed adjacent to individual parking spaces, groups of spaces, or
designated parking areas. Notice of applicable regulations shall be provided by
signage, pavement markings, digital displays, or electronic instructions,
including payment methods, time limits, and enforcement hours.
      (2)   Payment may be made through coins, credit or debit cards, mobile
applications, license-plate-based systems, or other authorized payment methods.
A vehicle shall be considered lawfully parked only when payment has been
properly made and maintained in accordance with posted instructions and
applicable Traffic Control Orders.
   (G)   Parking violations in paid or permit zones. It shall be unlawful to
park a vehicle in any metered parking zones, pay station, or permit parking
zone without complying with the application payment or permit requirements, or
to remain parked beyond the maximum time allowed. Failure to initiate or
maintain payment, or failure to display or register a valid permit where
required, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (H)   Fraudulent payment. It shall be unlawful to use, attempt to use or
cause the use of any fraudulent means, device, or method to avoid lawful
parking payment.
   (I)   Overtime parking. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or
permit a vehicle to remain parked beyond the authorized parking duration in any
metered, paid, or permit parking area.
   (J)   Proof of parking violation. The presence of a vehicle in a regulated
parking area without an active payment record, valid permit, or within an
expired time period shall constitute prima facie evidence of a parking
violation.
   (K)   Tampering or damage. It shall be unlawful to damage, tamper with,
obstruct, alter, or impair the operation of any parking meter, pay station,
signage, or parking payment system.
   (L)   Loading and passenger activity. Commercial vehicles actively loading
or unloading goods, and passenger vehicles actively loading or unloading
passengers, may utilize designated parking spaces without payment for a period
not to exceed 30 minutes, unless otherwise restricted by posted signage and
Traffic Control Order.
   (M)   Enforcement and violations. It shall be the duty of the police
officers or authorized enforcement personnel observing a violation to issue a
citation.
      (1)   Shall record the vehicle identification, location, time and nature
of the violation and may issue a parking violation notice in accordance with
the procedures of the City Traffic Violations Bureau.
      (2)   Each additional enforcement interval beyond issuance of a
violation.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.06 YEAR-ROUND PARKING.
   (A)   Maximum time for parking municipal parking lots.
      (1)   The maximum time limit for parking in city lots shall be 24 hours.
      (2)   A vehicle shall be considered to be continuously parked if it has
not been moved a minimum distance of 200 feet during the specified time period.
      (3)   Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be subject to
citation, towing, or impoundment at the owner's expense.
   (B)   Exceptions. 
      (1)   This chapter does not apply to vehicles parked in designated long-
term parking areas established by the City of Charlevoix, provided the vehicle
is in compliance with applicable permits or fees.
      (2)   Temporary exemptions may be granted by the City of Charlevoix
Police Department for special events, emergencies, or other extenuating
circumstances.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.07 WINTER PARKING.
   (A)   Time and manner of permitted parking. Unless otherwise marked, the
following standards apply from December 1 to the following April 1 between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sundays through Saturdays, annually, on-
street parking for vehicles (motorized and non-motorized), trailers, equipment,
etc., hereafter referred to as vehicles, shall only be permitted on all public
streets within the city only as follows, unless otherwise authorized by the
City Manager:
      (1)   Odd-numbered dates. On all odd-numbered dates, all vehicles shall
be parked on the odd-numbered side of the street. Odd-numbered dates shall mean
the first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth, 11th, 13th, 15th, 17th, 19th, 21st,
23rd, 25th, 27th, 29th and 31st days of each month.
      (2)   Even-numbered dates. On all even-numbered dates, all vehicles shall
be parked on the even-numbered side of the street. Even-numbered dates shall
mean the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, 18th, 20th,
22nd, 24th, 26th, 28th, and 30th days of each month.
      (3)   Odd-numbered side of street. The "odd-numbered side of the street"
shall mean the side of the public street that is adjacent to properties that
are designated by odd-numbered addresses. Odd-numbered addresses shall be those
that end with a digit that is a 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.
      (4)   Even-numbered side of street. The "even-numbered side of the
street" shall mean the side of the public street that is adjacent to properties
that are designated by even-numbered addresses. Even-numbered addresses shall
be those that end with a digit that is a 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8.
      (5)   Central Business District exception. The provisions in this section
shall not apply to public streets within the Central Business District zone.
Within the Central Business District zone, no vehicle shall be parked on any
public street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sundays through
Saturdays, annually, from December 1 to the following April 1.
      (6)   Overnight parking is not allowed on specific streets at any time.
Overnight parking is not allowed on the following streets between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sundays through Saturdays, annually, from December 1
to the following April 1: Belvedere Ave./Ferry Ave., Burns St. from Petoskey
Ave. (US-31) to Division St., W. Carpenter St., Division St., W. Garfield Ave.
from Bridge St. to Grant St., Grant St., W. Hurlbut Ave. between Bridge St. and
State St., May St. between E. Carpenter Ave. from Bridge St. to May St. and E.
Garfield Ave., Bridge St. to May St., Meech St., Michigan Ave. between Division
St. and Petoskey Ave. (US-31), and State St.
      (7)   Overnight parking in city lots. Overnight parking in designated
city lots is allowed by permit only. (December 1 – April 1).
         (a)   Permits issued. Residents who reside in the Central Business
District (north of Antrim Street and east of State Street to the Pine River
Channel and Round Lake) may receive permits for their vehicles.
         (b)   Maximum time for parking. The maximum time limit for parking in
city lots shall be 24 hours.
         (c)   Overnight parking lots. Residents with a parking permit may park
overnight in marked areas in the Acacia lot; Dewitt lot; the Central lot; and
the Kusina lot.
      (8)   Violations. Any person who violates any provision herein shall be
responsible for a civil infraction, the fine for which City Council may, from
time to time, set by resolution.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.08 SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   Adoption of Public Act 74. Act 74 of the Public Acts of the State of
Michigan, for 1968, as amended, is adopted by the City of Charlevoix, as part
of this chapter, and any amendments thereto shall become part of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional regulations. In addition to state law which pertains to
snowmobiles, the following provisions shall apply to snowmobiles operating
within the City of Charlevoix.
   (C)   Snowmobiles may only be operated within the city as shown in the map
denominated "Designated Snowmobile Routes within the City of Charlevoix". That
map shall depict two types of designated snowmobile routes which are Type A
routes and a Type B route and areas where snowmobiles may park. Type A routes
consist of the following streets:
      (1)   Division Street from Michigan Avenue to Mercer Boulevard.
      (2)   Sherman Street to Charlo Street to Carpenter Street, along the east
perimeter fence of the Charlevoix Airport to U.S. 31.
      (3)   The Garfield/May Street intersection south on May Street to Eaton
Avenue to Ferry Avenue to Stover Road.
   (D)   The Type B route consists of the following areas: Ferry Avenue from
the intersection of Eaton Avenue and Ferry Avenue and Belvedere Avenue from its
intersection with Ferry Avenue to the downtown snowmobile area. The downtown
snowmobile area is located south of the Clinton Street right- of-way, east of
the Bridge Street right-of-way, north of the Belvedere Avenue right-of-way and
west of Round Lake.
   (E)   No snowmobile may be operated on U.S. 31 within the city limits of
Charlevoix, except when crossing U.S. 31.
   (F)   When a snowmobile is normally stored at a location in the city which
is not on a designated snowmobile route, the snowmobile may be operated only on
the most direct route to or from a designated snowmobile route.
   (G)   No person may operate a snowmobile within the city at a rate of speed
greater than it is reasonable and proper giving due regard for conditions then
existing and in no event in excess of any posted vehicular speed limit.
   (H)   A snowmobile may be operated on a Type A route only for the purpose of
ingress to the city or egress from the city. A snowmobile may be operated on
the Type B route to access a residence, a business or municipal parking area
directly adjacent to the route or at the end of the route, or to return from a
residence, business or municipal parking area directly adjacent to the route or
at the end of the route.
   (I)   Snowmobiles shall not be driven on any sidewalks within the city.
   (J)   No person shall operate a snowmobile on a city street under the age of
16 years old unless said person is at least 12 but less than 16 years of age
and has a valid snowmobile safety certificate in his or her immediate
possession as issued pursuant to section 4B of Act 74 of the Public Acts of the
State of Michigan for 1968 and is accompanied and supervised by parent, legal
guardian, or person over 16 years of age with an automobile operator's license.
All operators of snowmobiles within the city shall carry valid proof of age on
their person while operating a snowmobile within the city.
   (K)   No person may operate a snowmobile on private property within the city
without consent of the property owner or his or her agent.
   (L)   No person may operate a snowmobile within the city limits with more
than two people on a snowmobile.
   (M)   Any person operating a snowmobile on a city street must:
      (1)   Travel as close to right edge of the plowed area of the street as
practical.
      (2)   Obey all traffic signals, signs, and devices.
      (3)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicular traffic and pedestrian
traffic.
   (N)   No snowmobile shall be operated across any street except at a street
intersection.
   (O)   No snowmobile shall be operated in the city unless it is equipped with
a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive
or unusual noise.
   (P)   No snowmobile shall be operated on the Charlevoix Municipal Golf
Course.
   (Q)   No snowmobile may be operated on any street, including any designated
snowmobile route, from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
   (R)   A snowmobile may be operated on a city street or an area within the
city open to the general public for a special event of limited duration
conducted according to a prearranged schedule submitted to the City Council and
after obtaining a permit from the City Council. The permit may designate which
streets and/or areas may be used for snowmobiles, set hours of operation, and
impose such other conditions as the Council determines are appropriate.
   (S)   From December 1 through March 31 of each year, snowmobiles may be
parked on snow covered ground in the downtown snowmobile area.
   (T)   Confiscation of snowmobiles. Any snowmobile or snow machine operated
contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
contrary to or in violation of any provisions of Public Act 74 of 1968 of the
Public Acts of the State of Michigan, as amended, may be confiscated at the
direction of the Police Department of the City of Charlevoix. In the event a
snowmobile is confiscated, the owner of the snowmobile must pay the cost of
transportation, stowing, and storage and prove ownership of the snowmobile
before it will be released to said person.
   (U)   Violation/misdemeanor. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.09 BICYCLE, SKATING, MICROMOBILITY DEVICES RESTRICTED, VIOLATION AS A
CIVIL INFRACTION.
   (A)   Definitions.
      BICYCLE. A device propelled solely by human power through a system of
pedals and gears, having two or more wheels in tandem, and designed to be
ridden by one or more persons.
      ELECTRIC BICYCLE (E-BIKE). A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electric motor of not more than 750 watts (one horsepower). E-bikes are
classified according to state law:
         (a)   Class I – Provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and ceases to assist at 20 mph.
         (b)   Class II – Can propel the bicycle without pedaling and ceases to
assist at 20 mph.
         (c)   Class III – Provides assistance only when pedaling and ceases to
assist at 28 mph.
      MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. A small personal transportation device for
individual use on roadways, bike paths, or sidewalks. Includes bicycles, e-
bikes, scooters, skating devices, and one-wheel powered devices.
      MOTORIZED BICYCLE. As defined by the Michigan Vehicle Code.
      ONE-WHEEL POWERED DEVICE. A single-wheeled personal transportation device
powered by an electric motor or similar propulsion system, designed for the
rider to stand or balance while in motion.
      SCOOTER. A two- or three-wheeled device with a handlebar and deck
designed to be stood upon, either:
         (a)   Human-powered (foot propulsion), or
         (b)   Electric-powered (commonly called an e-scooter).
            1.   Note: Scooters do not include mopeds.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of a public right-of-way designed or ordinarily
used for pedestrian travel.
      SKATING DEVICE. Any human-powered device consisting of a platform or shoe
mounted on wheels, including but not limited to skateboards, roller skates, and
in-line skates.
   (B)   Use restrictions.
      (1)   Prohibited areas. A person shall not operate a bicycle or
micromobility device:
         (a)   On Bridge Street right-of-way between the Pine River Channel
Drive and Hurlbut Avenue except on the travel portion intended for motor
vehicles.
         (b)   On public land or street right-of-way between the Bridge Street
right-of-way and Round Lake (including the Marina Promenade), and between
Belvedere Avenue and the Pine River Channel, and Hoffmann Park (between Park
Avenue and the Pine River Channel walkway).
         (c)   Exception: Devices may be used on the traveled portion of any
street, alley, or public parking lot intended for motor vehicles.
         (d)   Bicycles may be walked, and micromobility devices may be carried
through these areas.
      (2)   Sidewalk speed limit. No person shall operate a bicycle or
micromobility device on any sidewalk at a speed exceeding ten miles per hour,
outside the prohibited areas except where otherwise posted.
      (3)   Children. Children aged 12 or under may operate an e-bike or a
powered micromobility device in accordance with state law under adult
supervision. Children 17 and under must wear a properly fitted helmet at all
times while riding.
      (4)   Traffic rules. When operating on a roadway, riders must:
         (a)   Obey all rules of the road;
         (b)   Use designated crosswalks when crossing streets;
         (c)   Ride no more that two abreast; and
         (d)   Ride as close as practicable to the right-hand edge, except when
making a left turn or avoiding hazards.
      (5)   Parking and storage. No bicycle or micromobility device may be
secured to a sign post, streetlight, or tree using a chain, cable, or other
device. Devices must not be left unattended on sidewalks in a manner that
obstructs pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
         (a)   Bicycles and micromobility devices may be immediately removed by
police authority, and any cost of removal or store item will be at the owner's
expense.
      (6)   Rights and duties. Individuals using roller skates, roller blades,
coasters, scooters, or similar devices shall have all rights and
responsibilities applicable to pedestrians, except as provided in this chapter.
All such devices must be used in a manner that does not threaten public safety
or damage public or private property.
      (7)   No skating, micromobility devices apparatus may be secured to a
signpost, streetlight post or tree by a chain, cable or other such device, nor
shall the owner or operator of said device leave same unattended on a sidewalk
in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
      (8)   Wheelchair or mobility assistance device. This chapter shall not
prohibit the use of wheelchairs or similar mobility devices operated manually
or by electric motor by individuals with certified disabilities.
      (9)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 70.10 VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   Authority, establishment, and supervision. Pursuant to M.C.L.A. §
600.8395, as amended, and M.C.L.A. § 257.742, as amended, a Parking Violations
Bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city
is hereby established. The Parking Violations Bureau shall be under the
supervision and control of the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Location. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the approval of the
City Council, establish a convenient location for the Parking Violations
Bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the Bureau and adopt
rules and regulations for the operation thereof.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU. The Bureau established by this section for the
processing of all civil infractions involving the parking or standing of a
motor vehicle within the township.
      PARKING VIOLATIONS NOTICE. A notice, other than a citation, directing a
person to appear at the Parking Violations Bureau and to pay the fines and
cost, if any, prescribed by the code of the township for the parking or
standing of a motor vehicle in violation of the code.
   (D)   Service of parking violation notice. In a civil infraction or local
ordinance violation involving the parking or standing of a motor vehicle, a
copy of the parking violation notice need not be served personally upon the
defendant but may be served upon the registered owner of the motor vehicle by
attaching the copy to the vehicle. The parking violation notice may be issued
by either a police officer of the city or by any other city employee duly
authorized by the City Board to issue a notice.
   (E)   Form of the parking violation notice. The issuance of the parking
violation notice shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. The
parking violation notice shall set forth the nature of the offense and the
date, time and location of the offense. In addition, the parking violation
notice shall also indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the
same was issued must respond before the Parking Violations Bureau. It shall
also indicate the address of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is
open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the parking
violation notice was issued and advise that a civil infraction citation or
local ordinance violation will be sought if a person fails to respond within
the time limit.
   (F)   Settlement of violations. No violation not scheduled in §
70.10 shall be disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau. The scheduling of
a particular violation herein shall not entitle the violator to disposition of
the violation at the Bureau and in any event the person in charge of such
Bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation in which case any person having
knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court of proper
jurisdiction as provided by law.
   (G)   Procedure for all contested and/or unresolved violations. If a parking
violation notice is attached to a motor vehicle and if an admission of
responsibility is not made and the civil fines and cost, if any, for the
violation are not paid at the Parking Violations Bureau, a citation may be
filed with the court having competent jurisdiction thereof and a copy of the
citation may be served by first-class mail upon the registered owner of the
vehicle at the owner's last-known address. The citation shall consist of a
sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the parking violation
notice and shall fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the citation.
Thereafter, the citation for the parking or standing violation shall be
processed in the same manner as provided in M.C.L.A. § 257.741.
   (H)   Schedule of fines. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject
to the approval of the City Council by resolution, to determine penalties and
fines for violation of any of the provisions of this traffic code. The Traffic
Engineer shall maintain a traffic control order specifying a schedule of all
such fines.
(Ord. 867, passed 1-19-2026)
CHAPTER 71: MUNICIPAL LAUNCH AND PARKING
Section
City of Charlevoix Municipal Launch and Parking
   
71.01   Short title
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Parking
   
71.04   Permit required
   
71.05   Term of parking
   
71.06   Use of boat launching ramps
   
71.07   Boat rental prohibited
   
71.08   Exemptions
   
71.09   Written regulations
   
71.10   Fish cleaning station; commercial use prohibited
   
71.11   Mooring boats; terms
 
   
71.99   Penalty
CITY OF CHARLEVOIX MUNICIPAL LAUNCH AND PARKING
§ 71.01 SHORT TITLE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Charlevoix Municipal Launch and Parking Ordinance".
   (B)   The City of Charlevoix Municipal Launch and Parking as established by
the City of Charlevoix shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police as
directed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.81) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOAT. Any watercraft, including sea planes when not airborne, in or upon, or
docked or moored at any place in any waterway or upon trailers within the
boundaries of the city.
   COMMERCIAL USE ACTIVITIES. For the purposes of this subchapter, COMMERCIAL
USE ACTIVITIES include any operations conducted for profit or as part of a
business venture, whether by an individual, company, or organization. Such
activities may include, but are not limited to: Launching or retrieving
watercraft; performing watercraft test runs associated with repair,
maintenance, or service work; installing or removing piers, docks, boat hoists,
or similar structures.
   FERRY BEACH PARKING LOT. The contiguous or nearly contiguous area generally
located between the limits of Ferry Avenue, Stover Road, the waters of Lake
Charlevoix, and the south side of Ferry Beach Park.
   TRAILER or BOAT TRAILER. Any vehicle or devise so designed and constructed
in such a manner as to allow the transport of a boat.
(Prior Code, § 10.82) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 71.03 PARKING.
   Parking in the City of Charlevoix Municipal Launch parking lot, including,
but not limited to, the parking of vehicles and/or trailers, shall be regulated
by traffic-control orders issued by the city's traffic engineer. The term
TRAFFIC ENGINEER is as defined in the Uniform Traffic Code, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 10.83) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 71.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to enter or use the City of Charlevoix Municipal
Launch without first obtaining a permit from the City of Charlevoix and
displaying it in the vehicle. A permit is required for any person launching a
boat, retrieving watercraft, parking a vehicle (with or without an attached
trailer), or parking a trailer alone at the City of Charlevoix Municipal
Launch.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle (with or without an attached trailer)
or park a trailer alone in any designated City of Charlevoix Municipal Launch
parking area unless the vehicle and/or trailer was used to actively launch or
retrieve a watercraft on that same day. Proof of launch activity may be
required upon request by enforcement personnel.
   (C)   Charges for the permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council,
which may also revise or waive fees for special or public events. SPECIAL OR
PUBLIC EVENTS shall mean tournaments, festivals, or other events - whether open
to public participation or observation - that, in the judgment of the City
Council, provide an economic benefit to the city, serves a public purpose to
the city and its residents, or generate positive publicity for the city.
   (D)   All launch permits issued by the city shall be affixed to the vehicle
for which the permit was purchased. The permit must be permanently and visibly
displayed on the driver's side of the front windshield or in another location
designated by the city. Permits are non-transferable and valid only for the
specific vehicle identified at the time of purchase.
(Prior Code, § 10.84) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 TERM OF PARKING.
   There shall be no parking at Ferry Beach or Charlevoix Municipal Boat Launch
parking lots of any vehicles or trailers between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:
00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 10.85) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 USE OF BOAT LAUNCHING RAMPS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to moor or tie up at the City of
Charlevoix Municipal launching docks unless the moorage is associated with the
launching of a boat and in no case shall said moorage exceed 15 minutes in
length. The City Police Chief or his or her designee, or a member of the city's
Police Department (hereafter referred to as "city agents") shall have the
authority to board any boat moored in violation of any provision of this
chapter. These city agents may move the boat which is in violation of this
subchapter themselves or may cause it to be moved by an independent contractor.
These city agents may hold or cause the boat to be held until all costs
incurred in the removal and/or storage have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 10.86) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 BOAT RENTAL PROHIBITED.
   No person shall conduct any boat rental business on or at the Ferry Beach
Park or the City of Charlevoix Municipal launch except with an approved
concession agreement from the City of Charlevoix.
(Prior Code, § 10.87) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   Persons parking in the Ferry Beach parking lot for use of the Ferry Beach
public beach shall not require a parking permit for their vehicle under §
71.04 of this subchapter. This exemption for parking permit contained in this
section shall not apply to persons launching a boat from the City of Charlevoix
Municipal Boat Launch. The requirement for parking permits to be obtained for
the parking of vehicles within the City of Charlevoix Municipal Launch parking
lot shall not apply to single attended vehicles parked in such a manner to
allow the viewing of Lake Charlevoix. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary,
no permit shall be required for usage of the Ferry Beach parking lot or boat
launch for the time period of November 1 through May 1.
(Prior Code, § 10.88) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 71.09 WRITTEN REGULATIONS.
   The city’s Police Chief or his or her designee is authorized to establish
all written regulations and traffic-control devices, including the placement of
traffic-control devices, necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.89) (Ord. 490, passed 4-18-1988)
§ 71.10 FISH CLEANING STATION; COMMERCIAL USE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use the fish cleaning station at the City of Charlevoix
Municipal Launch for the purpose of cleaning fish for commercial sale or
resale.
(Prior Code, § 10.90) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 MOORING BOATS; TERMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to moor or anchor a boat or other vessel capable
of travel on water within 250 feet from the shore of Ferry Beach. Police Chief,
his or her designee, or a member of the city's Police Department (hereafter
referred to as "city agents") shall have the authority to board any boat moored
in violation of any provision authority to board any boat moored in violation
of any provision of this subchapter. Prior to the removal of a boat which is
moored in violation of this subchapter, an agent of the city shall place a
violation notice on the boat specifying the date and time of the violation. The
violation notice shall state that the boat is in violation of a city ordinance
and is subject to removal after 48 hours.
   (B)   If the boat remains moored in violation of this subchapter for 48
hours after the placement of the violation notice, then the boat is subject to
removal and storage as described below. Upon expiration of the 48 hours, the
city agents may move the boat which is in violation of this subchapter
themselves or cause it to be moved by an independent contractor. These city
agents may hold or cause the boat to be held until all costs incurred in the
removal and/or storage have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 10.91) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating a traffic control order regarding the parking of
motor vehicles and/or trailers, as regulated by §§
71.01 through
71.10 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a civil infraction with the penalty
amount set pursuant to §
10.99 of the codes adopted in §
70.01 of this traffic code. Any person violating a provision of §§
71.01 through
71.10 unrelated to the parking of motor vehicles and/or trailers shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty prescribed by state law for
a misdemeanor. Every day that §§
71.06 or
71.11 is violated shall constitute a separate offense and be punished as a
separate offense. The term PERSON, as used in §§
71.01 through
71.10, includes corporations, partnerships, and associations as well as
individuals. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs, which may include all
direct or indirect expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
violation, with such costs not being less than $9 or more than $500. A violator
shall also be subject to any additional sanctions, remedies, and judicial
orders authorized under Michigan law. Each day a violation of this chapter
constitutes a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 10.92) (Ord. 861, passed 8-18-2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   CEMETERIES
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
      
96.   MASS GATHERINGS
      
97.   PROHIBITION OF RECREATIONAL MEDICAL MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
      
98.   SMOKE FREE AREAS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Removal of droppings
   
90.02   Animal control
   
90.03   Beaches
   
90.04   East Park area regulations
   
90.05   Dangerous animals
   
90.06   Feeding of wild animals and birds is prohibited except the feeding of
birds and squirrels by means of an elevated feeder
§ 90.01 REMOVAL OF DROPPINGS.
   (A)   No person owning, keeping, in possession of or in charge of any animal
shall allow the animal to defecate on any public property, public sidewalk,
public right-of-way or upon any other type of public property, or upon any
private property without the permission of the owner of the property unless:
the person who owns, keeps, is in possession of or is in charge of the animal
shall immediately remove all droppings deposited by the animal by a sanitary
method and dispose of the droppings in sanitary method which may include
placing the droppings in a public refuse receptacle if the droppings are in an
air-tight container or air-tight bag.
(Prior Code, § 9.121)
   (B)   No person owning, keeping or in charge of an animal shall permit the
animal to be on any public property, public sidewalk, public right-of-way or
upon any other type of public property whatsoever, or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of the property, unless the animal is
accompanied by a person who has in the person’s possession a container or bag
of sufficient size to collect and remove the droppings of the animal. The
person accompanying the animal shall show the container to any city police
officer or authorized city personnel, if requested.
(Prior Code, § 9.124)
(Ord. 651, passed 4-5-1999; Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 665, passed 2-19-
2001; Ord. 702, passed 5-16-2005; Ord. 735, passed 11-17-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02 ANIMAL CONTROL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANIMAL. Except for §
90.01(A) of this chapter, a dog or a cat. In §
90.01(A) of this chapter, the term ANIMAL shall not be limited to a dog or cat,
but shall mean any warm-blooded organism other than a human.
      CONTROL. The management of the location and/or direction of travel of the
animal.
      OWNER OF AN ANIMAL. A person who has a right of proprietorship in such
animal, as well as a person who has possession or care of an animal even if
such person has no right of property in such animal.
      OWNER’S PROPERTY. Land which is owned by the animal owner or which the
animal owner rents as well as land on which the animal owner has permission to
be with his or her animal.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   While not on the animal owner’s property, have or permit his or her
animal to be outside of a structure or vehicle unless the animal is on a leash
and under control;
      (2)   Permit his or her animal or an animal under his or her possession
to defecate at a location which is not the owner’s property; provided, however,
it shall not be a violation of this section if the feces is immediately cleaned
up and placed in a trash receptacle or taken to a location where the owner has
permission to dispose of the feces; and/or
      (3)   Have or permit an animal required to be licensed, required to be
immunized against rabies, or both to be outside the owner’s property unless
licensed as required by law and unless wearing its license tag and evidence of
rabies immunization if required by law.
(Prior Code, § 9.122) (Ord. 651, passed 4-5-1999; Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000;
Ord. 702, passed 5-16-2005; Ord. 735, passed 11-17-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 BEACHES.
   From Memorial Day to Labor Day, no person owning, keeping or in charge of a
dog shall permit the dog to enter the sand beach area directly adjacent to the
lake water at those city parks identified as: Michigan Beach; Depot Beach; and
Ferry Beach.
(Prior Code, § 9.123) (Ord. 651, passed 4-5-1999; Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000;
Ord. 665, passed 2-19-2001; Ord. 702, passed 5-16-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 EAST PARK AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   From Memorial Day to Labor Day, no person, who owns, keeps or
possesses a dog, shall permit the dog to enter on or within the regulated
portion of East Park unless the dog is on a leash and is under control of the
person holding the leash. However, during a city-approved event in East Park,
no person, who owns, keeps or possesses a dog, shall permit the dog to enter
the regulated portion of East Park even if the dog is on a leash and under the
control of the person holding the leash. This prohibition of dogs in the
regulated portion of East Park during city-approved events shall not apply to
dogs that are performing in the city-approved event.
   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, the REGULATED PORTION OF EAST PARK
shall mean that portion of East Park that is bounded by: on the north, the
sidewalk to the south of East Clinton Street continuing to the north side of
the Harbor Master Building ending at the sidewalk adjacent to Round Lake; on
the south, the south wall of the Performance Pavilion continuing in a straight
line to the sidewalk adjacent to Round Lake; on the east, the sidewalk which
runs along Round Lake between the aforementioned northern and southern
boundaries; and on the west, the sidewalk adjacent to the east side of Bridge
Street between the aforementioned northern and southern boundaries.
      (2)   In addition, for purposes of this section, a CITY-APPROVED EVENT
shall mean an event, festival or activity which has been approved or authorized
by the city pursuant to this code, the City Charter or by virtue of the city’s
ownership of the land being used for the event, festival or activity.
(Prior Code, § 9.125) (Ord. 730, passed 7-7-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. Downtown district boundaries of the Downtown
Development Authority as described in §
32.075 of this code of ordinances.
      DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
         (a)   Any animal which because of its size, vicious propensity or
other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life, property or
domestic animals if not restrained or kept in a cage; or
         (b)   An ape, a monkey of any species, alligator, crocodile or snake.
      SPECIAL EVENT. A festival recognized by the city or other public
gathering for which approval has been given by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.135)
   (B)   Prohibition in public place. No person shall possess a dangerous
animal in any city park or in or on any sidewalk, public road or other public
place within the Central Business District. This prohibition shall not apply to
a dangerous animal which is being transported in a vehicle or container which
is capable of preventing injury to a person by the dangerous animal.
(Prior Code, § 9.136)
   (C)   Exception. Division (B) above shall not apply to a person or entity
which obtains permission from the City Manager to possess a dangerous animal in
a prohibited area. The City Manager shall grant permission when the applicant
presents information to the City Manager that the dangerous animal will be used
in conjunction with a special event and the animal, although technically
meeting the definition of a dangerous animal, is not a danger to persons or
domestic animals because of its training, behavioral history or other
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 9.137)
(Ord. 697, passed 1-15-2004; Ord. 702, passed 5-16-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS AND BIRDS IS PROHIBITED EXCEPT THE FEEDING OF
BIRDS AND SQUIRRELS BY MEANS OF AN ELEVATED FEEDER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any wild animal in any
area in the city. Wild animals shall include all raccoons, skunks, rodents,
rabbits, crows, wild birds, including without limitation, pigeons, doves, and
seagulls, feral cats, mice, fowl, waterfowl, gophers, groundhogs, moles,
opossums, squirrels, and every other wild animal.
   (B)   All ground feeding is prohibited. The scattering of food or food
scraps on the ground by an individual shall be prima facie evidence that the
individual intended to provide the food or food scraps for ground feeding.
Feeding fish in the city's trout pond with food obtained from an approved
feeder shall not be a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   This prohibition shall not apply to the feeding of wild birds or
squirrels provided that such feeding is done only from containers and supports
which prohibit access by other rodents and/or wild animals and are elevated at
least 48 inches above ground level.
(Ord. 862, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Nuisance Provisions
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Declaration of nuisances
   
91.04   Inspections
   
91.05   Prohibitions
   
91.06   Industrial usage
   
91.07   Separate court action; nuisance per se
   
91.08   Dangerous buildings; hearing; order
   
91.09   Dangerous signs
   
91.10   Enforcement hearings
   
91.11   Implementation and enforcement
Noise Control
   
91.25   Excessive noise declared nuisance
   
91.26   Specific offenses
   
91.27   Exceptions
Litter
   
91.40   Definitions
   
91.41   Litter in public places
   
91.42   Use of waste receptacles
   
91.43   Sweeping litter into gutters
   
91.44   Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks clean
   
91.45   Litter on occupied private property
   
91.46   Persons to maintain premises free of litter
   
91.47   Enforcement; nuisance per se
Weed Control; Leaves and Brush
   
91.60   Weed growth prohibited
   
91.61   Duty of occupant or owner
   
91.62   When city to do work
   
91.63   Alternative publication
   
91.64   Leaf and brush pickup
Property Maintenance Code
   
91.70   Purpose
   
91.71   Title
   
91.72   Adoption
   
91.73   Definitions
   
91.74   Revisions
   
91.75   File copies
   
91.76   Severability
   
91.77   Inconsistent ordinances
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL NUISANCE PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby found and declared that the purposes of this subchapter are: to
eliminate public nuisances within all areas of the city for the protection of
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of its residents; to preserve
existing values of other properties within or adjacent to such areas and all
other areas of the city; and to preserve the taxable value of the property
within such areas and all other areas of the city. The purposes include:
regulating the maintenance and safety of certain buildings and structures for
the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare; to establish
administrative requirements and prescribe procedures for the maintenance or
demolition of certain buildings and structures; to establish remedies, provide
for enforcement and fix penalties for the violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.1) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOAT. Every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a
means of transportation on water, including personal watercraft and non-
motorized boats such as canoes, rowboats and sailboats. BOAT, however, does not
include an air mattress, paddleboard, paddleboat, boogie board or similar
device used by one or two persons for floating or paddling.
   BUILDING MATERIALS. Lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing or
heating materials, electrical wiring or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete
or cement, nails, screws, windows and window frames, molding, insulation, tyvec
or any other materials used in construction of any structure.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING ENFORCING AGENCY. The city, through the Zoning
Administrator and/or such other official(s) or agency as may be designated by
the City Council to enforce this subchapter. Such persons are authorized to
seek advice from a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but
not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, Building Inspector
or member of a community housing organization.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING HEARING OFFICER or HEARING OFFICER. A person appointed by
and serving at the pleasure of the city’s Mayor. The DANGEROUS BUILDING HEARING
OFFICER shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but
not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector
or member of a community housing organization. An employee of the Dangerous
Building Enforcing Agency, or a person whose advice is sought by the Enforcing
Agency, shall not be appointed as HEARING OFFICER.
   DANGEROUS SIGN OR ADVERTISING DEVICE. A sign or advertising device that is
in such a state of disrepair or has such a design and/or construction flaw that
it poses an imminent threat of total or partial collapse such that following
the procedures of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances would result in substantial likelihood
of injury to persons or property.
   DISMANTLED. The state of having a part or parts removed or missing that are
integral to the operation of or required by any law or regulation to be present
on a motor vehicle, boat or other item to which it is normally attached.
   DOCK. A pier, platform or other structure which, if fully operational, is
designed to be extended from the shore over water.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit
or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that relate to the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetables.
   HOIST. A mechanical device attached permanently or temporarily to the
bottomland of a lake or river and used to raise or lift a boat out of the water
for the purpose of preventing or restricting the motion of the boat.
   INOPERABLE. Incapable of being used for the purpose or purposes for which an
item is designed or normally used, either physically or by operation of law,
due to dismantling, disrepair or the lack of a currently valid Michigan license
or registration. In addition, the following items shall be deemed INOPERABLE:
any motor vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle or snowmobile which lacks
functioning tires or treads that permit motion or movement. In addition, a boat
shall be deemed INOPERABLE if there are one or more holes in its hull, it lacks
any parts necessary for normal use or the engine does not start when provided
fuel.
   JUNK. Items or objects that are old, discarded or not currently being used
for the purpose or purposes for which they are designed or normally used,
including, but not limited to, used or salvaged metals and their compounds or
combination; used or salvaged rope; rubber; rotting wood; scrap iron; tires and
snowmobile treads; parts for motor vehicles, boats, all terrain vehicles,
recreational vehicles, snowmobiles and/or trailers; inoperable or dismantled
refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers, dryers, washing machines and furniture; and
inoperable or dismantled lawn mowers, weed trimmers, snow blowers, snow plows,
tractors and any other machinery used for excavation, maintenance or snow
removal.
   LIQUID INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid brine, by-product, industrial
wastewater, leachate, off-specification commercial product, sludge, grease-trap
clean-out residue, used oil or other liquid waste produced by, incident to or
resulting from industrial or commercial activity, except any liquid brine
normally used in oil or gas extraction on a site permitted by the state’s
Supervisor of Wells.
   MARINE EQUIPMENT. Any item used or intended for use in conjunction with
boats or water related activities, including, but not limited to, swimming
rafts, docks, hoists, dock supports, buoys, outboard motors, ores, boat
trailers, sails, rope, masts, anchors and any other stationary or movable
structure intended to support a boat.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled or intended to be
self-propelled regardless of whether the vehicle is designed for off-road use
or use on public streets. A MOTOR VEHICLE includes, but is not limited to,
cars, trucks, all terrain vehicles, mopeds, motorcycles, scooters, dune buggies
and golf carts.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, limited
liability company or other legal entity.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or trailer capable of being self-
propelled or towed that is equipped with living space, sleeping quarters and
associated amenities, including, but not limited to, motor homes, fifth-wheel
trailers, pop-up campers, caravans, camper vans, travel trailers and truck
campers.
   RUBBISH. Hazardous or non-hazardous, non-putrescible solid wastes,
including, but not limited to, combustible waste such as paper, cardboard,
brush, bags, rags and litter of any kind and non-combustible waste such as
metal containers, glass, bedding, crockery and demolished items, objects or
materials of any kind.
   SEALED CONTAINER. A covered, closable container which is fly-proof and
water-tight such as garbage cans with properly fitting tops or plastic garbage
bags which have been closed or twisted shut.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow
or ice of a type that utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an endless belt
tread, or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the
surface upon which it is operated, but is not a vehicle that must be registered
under the state’s Vehicle Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.1 through 257.923.
   TOTALLY CLOSED STRUCTURE. A building capable of being sealed on all sides
such as a house, garage or storage shed with a roof, floor and walls or
closable doors around its perimeter.
   TRAILER. Any wheeled vehicle designed and normally towed behind a motor
vehicle which is required to have a currently valid Michigan registration to be
lawfully operated on a public highway.
   VERMIN. A noxious or objectionable animal, including, but not limited to, a
mouse, rat, chipmunk, squirrel, skunk, raccoon or porcupine.
(Prior Code, § 6.2) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 790, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 91.03 DECLARATION OF NUISANCES.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances:
   (A)   The keeping or storage of building materials outside on private
property unless there is in force a valid building permit from the county’s
Building Department for construction on that property and the building
materials are for use in such construction;
   (B)   The keeping or storage of ashes, junk, garbage or rubbish outside of a
totally enclosed structure on private property, except in a sealed container
designed for the purpose of holding such ashes, junk, garbage or rubbish;
   (C)   The placing of ashes, junk, garbage or rubbish on private property
without the owner’s permission or on public property. This provision applies
regardless of whether the ashes, junk, garbage or rubbish is in a sealed
container;
   (D)   The keeping or storage of ashes, junk, garbage or rubbish on private
property, including inside a building, in such a manner that the items,
regardless of the method of containment, have become a breeding ground, food
source or habitation of insects or vermin;
   (E)   Intentional depositing of liquid petroleum crude oil, liquid petroleum
crude oil by-products and derivatives or liquid industrial wastes on the
ground;
   (F)   A “dangerous building”, as defined in M.C.L.A. § 125.539, as amended,
or otherwise defined herein, which includes any building or structure,
residential or otherwise, that has one or more of the following defects or is
in one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not
conform to the applicable Fire or Building Code;
      (2)   A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind,
flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the
building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe
and does not meet the minimum requirements of the Housing Law of the state,
Public Act 167 of 1917, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq., or the
applicable Building Code for a new building or structure, purpose or location;
      (3)   A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become
detached or dislodged, or collapse, and injure persons or damage property;
      (4)   A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an
extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure
have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new
construction by the Housing Law of the state, Public Act 167 of 1917, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq., or the applicable Building Code;
      (5)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction or the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or
for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some
portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is
likely to fall or give way; and
      (6)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure,
is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used, or otherwise
determined by the Enforcement Agency to be unsafe due to any of the following
defects or because it is in any of the following conditions:
         (a)   A structure, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
construction or otherwise which is unsanitary or unfit for human use;
         (b)   A structure or portion of a structure with significant decay or
dilapidation due to neglect or deterioration that renders it unfit for its
intended use, including damage to the roof or ceilings, walls or windows or
entrances;
         (c)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or
structure, has light, air or sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, safety or general welfare of those who live or may live
within;
         (d)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or
structure, is hazardous to the safety, health or general welfare of the people
of the city by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment;
         (e)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or
structure, has been damaged by fire, wind, flood or by any other cause to such
an extent as to be dangerous to the life, safety, health or general welfare of
the people living in the city;
         (f)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or
structure, has become damaged to such an extent that the cost of repair to
place it in a safe, sound and sanitary condition exceeds the state equalized
value of the building or structure of the structure, at the time when repairs
are to be made;
         (g)   The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood, or
is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children
who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a
harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort
to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or
immoral act;
         (h)   A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or
unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer of the
city or county determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely
to injure the health, safety or general welfare of people living in the
dwelling;
         (i)   A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers; and
         (j)   A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale,
lease or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Art. 25 of the
Occupational Code, Public Act 299 of 1980, being M.C.L.A. §§ 339.2501 et seq.,
or is not publicly offered for sale by the owner. This division (F)(6)(j) does
not apply to either of the following:
            1.   A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does
both of the following:
               a.   Notifies the city’s Police Department that the building or
structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The
notice shall be given by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the
building or structure becomes unoccupied or the effective date of this
subchapter provision, whichever is latest in time; and
               b.   Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and
adjoining grounds in accordance with this subchapter and the Housing Law of the
state, Public Act 167 of 1917, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq.,
or the Building Code.
            2.   A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied
for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the Police
Department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the notice
prescribed by this division (F)(6)(j) shall notify the Police Department not
more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As
used in this division (F)(6)(j)2., SECONDARY DWELLING means a dwelling such as
a vacation home, hunting cabin or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or
a member of the owner’s family during part of year.
   (G)   Dangerous signs;
   (H)   Except as required by law, the distributing, placing, posting or
affixing of posters, notices or handbills on private property without consent
of the owner or occupant or in a public right-of-way;
   (I)   The existence of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant
water which serves as a breeding ground for insects;
   (J)   The emission of fumes or gas in such quantities as to cause discomfort
to a person of normal sensory acuity at an adjoining property or public place;
   (K)   Any vehicle used for an illegal purpose;
   (L)   Any use of public streets or public sidewalks, or both, which causes a
crowd to gather and obstructs the free, lawful movement of people and vehicles
along said streets and sidewalks;
   (M)   Spitting on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any public
carrier, or on the floor, wall, seat or equipment of any public place;
   (N)   Keeping, housing or feeding any wild or domestic animals or wild or
domestic fowl within the city other than dogs, cats, birds or animals commonly
classified as pets. For the purposes of this division (N), the term DOG shall
include the male and female of the dog family or genus canis, and FEEDING WILD
ANIMALS shall be as defined in § 90.06;
   (O)   The keeping of any inoperable or dismantled icebox, refrigerator or
similar air-tight container having a door or access with a magnetic seal, snap
latch or other locking device, in a place accessible by children without first
removing the magnetic seal, snap latch or locking device or doors, or securely
locking same;
   (P)   Except as provided in divisions (P)(1) and (P)(2) below, the keeping
or storage of inoperable or dismantled motor vehicles, boats, all terrain
vehicles, recreational vehicles, snowmobiles and/or trailers outside of a
totally enclosed structure on private property.
      (1)   An inoperable or dismantled motor vehicle, boat, all terrain
vehicle, recreational vehicle, snowmobile and/or trailer may be kept outside of
a totally enclosed structure on private property for no more than 15 days for
the purpose of being repaired or awaiting repairs. This division (P)(1) shall
apply to individuals making the repairs and to gas and service stations engaged
in the business of making repairs.
      (2)   An inoperable or dismantled motor vehicle, boat, all terrain
vehicle, recreational vehicle, snowmobile and/or trailer may be kept outside of
a totally enclosed structure on private property for no more than 15 days for
the purpose of being marketed for sale.
      (3)   For purposes of divisions (P)(1) and (P)(2) above, a motor vehicle,
boat, all terrain vehicle, recreational vehicle, snowmobile and/or trailer that
is possessed by a business which sells or repairs any of those items shall not
be considered inoperable or dismantled solely because the item is unlicensed.
   (Q)   The keeping or storage of inoperable or dismantled marine equipment
outside of a totally enclosed structure on private property; and
   (R)   Except as provided herein, the existence of tanks, pumps, lifts,
jacks, air compressors or similar equipment outside of a totally enclosed
structure. Service stations, repair shops, gas stations, construction companies
or similar businesses shall be allowed to store or keep tanks, pumps lifts,
jacks, air compressors or similar equipment outside of a totally enclosed
structure; provided that, any such item is in operable condition and is
actively used for its intended purpose as part of the business.
(Prior Code, § 6.3) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 790, passed 3-19-2018;
Ord. 862, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 91.04 INSPECTIONS.
   City representatives shall have the duty and the right to inspect property
or buildings to determine violations of or compliance with this subchapter.
City representatives may exercise this right of inspection by consent of the
person having the possession of the property or building or by an
administrative search warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6.4) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.05 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance. No person shall
knowingly permit the existence of a nuisance on the property owned or possessed
by such person. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or
maintain any building or part thereof which is a dangerous building, as defined
in §
91.03(F) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.5) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 INDUSTRIAL USAGE.
   The storage or keeping of salvageable metal or wood shall not be prohibited
on property on which is located a factory engaged in manufacturing, assembling
or machining as long as the salvageable metal or wood is for resale or reuse by
the occupant of the property.
(Prior Code, § 6.6) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 SEPARATE COURT ACTION; NUISANCE PER SE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city or any interested party
from seeking such other relief as may be permitted in law or in equity
regarding the existence of a nuisance. A violation of this subchapter is deemed
to be a nuisance per se.
(Prior Code, § 6.7) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.08 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; HEARING; ORDER.
   (A)   The provisions of this section are intended to be consistent with the
Housing Law of the state, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.521 et seq., and shall be
interpreted accordingly.
      (1)   Notice requirement. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subchapter, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building as
defined in §
91.03(F) of this chapter, the Dangerous Building Enforcing Agency may issue a
notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. The notice shall
state the grounds for the Enforcing Agency’s determination that the building or
structure is a dangerous building.
      (2)   Parties entitled to notice. The notice shall be served on each
owner of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the
property appears on the last local tax assessment records of the city.
      (3)   Contents of notice. The notice shall specify the time and place of
a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building and
state that the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity
at the hearing to show cause why the Hearing Officer should not order the
building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly
maintained.
      (4)   Service of notice. The notice shall be in writing and shall be
served upon the person to whom the notice is directed either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in
interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served upon a
person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a
conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon
the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing
included in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 6.8)
   (B)   (1)   Filing dangerous building notice with Hearing Officer. The
Dangerous Building Enforcing Agency shall file a copy of the notice of the
dangerous condition of any building with the Hearing Officer.
      (2)   Hearing testimony and decision. At the hearing, the Hearing Officer
shall take testimony of the Dangerous Building Enforcing Agency, the owner of
the property and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion
of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall render a decision either closing the
proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made
safe or properly maintained and, where applicable, shall fix a time for the
owner, agent or lessee to comply with the order. The Hearing Officer shall make
factual findings supporting its conclusions.
      (3)   Non-compliance with Hearing Officer order/request to enforce order.
If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply
with the Hearing Officer order, the Hearing Officer shall file a report of the
findings and a copy of the order with the City Council not more than five days
after non-compliance by the owner and request that necessary action be taken to
enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the Hearing Officer
shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in
division (A)(4) above.
(Prior Code, § 6.9)
(Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.09 DANGEROUS SIGNS.
   (A)   To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the city, the Hearing Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to order
city officials to enter onto private property to remove, repair or otherwise
make safe any dangerous sign or advertising device without notice to the owner
of the sign or advertising device or the owner of the property on which the
sign or advertising device is located.
   (B)   If the Hearing Officer exercises the authority granted in §
91.10 of this chapter, he or she shall serve written notice of such action on
the entity who benefits from the sign or advertising device and on the owner of
the property on which the sign or advertising device is located as soon as
possible after the action is taken. Service of the notice required by this
division (B) shall be by personal service or by first class mail. Service shall
be deemed completed when the notice is mailed.
   (C)   The costs incurred by the city in removing, repairing or otherwise
making safe a dangerous sign or advertising device under this section,
including reasonable attorney fees, may be collected in a lawsuit against the
owner of the dangerous sign or advertising device or the owner of the property
on which the dangerous sign or advertising device is located.
(Ord. 790, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 91.10 ENFORCEMENT HEARINGS.
   The City Council shall fix a date not less than 30 days after it receives
the request for action and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in
the manner prescribed in §
91.08(A)(4) of this chapter of the time and place of the hearing. At the
hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show
cause why the order should not be enforced. The City Council shall either
approve, disapprove or modify the order. If the City Council approves or
modifies the order, the City Council shall take all necessary action to enforce
the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent or lessee
shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under
this section. In the case of an order of demolition, if the City Council
determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by
fire, wind, flood or other natural disaster and the cost of repair of the
building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the
building or structure, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order
of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this section.
(Ord. 790, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 91.11 IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Implementation of order by city. In the event of the failure or
refusal of the owner or party in interest to comply with the decision of the
City Council as applicable, the City Council may, in its discretion, contract
for the demolition, making safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or
structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure.
   (B)   Reimbursement of costs. The costs of the demolition, of making the
building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or
grounds adjoining the building or structure, incurred by the city to bring the
property into conformance with this subchapter shall be reimbursed to the city
by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. The cost
of demolition includes, but is not limited to, fees paid to Hearing Officers,
costs of title searches or commitments used to determine the parties in
interest, recording fees for notices and liens filed with the county’s Register
of Deeds, demolition and dumping charges, court reporter attendance fees and
costs of the collection of the charges authorized under M.C.L.A. § 125.541.
   (C)   Notice of costs. The owner or party in interest in whose name the
property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified
by the City Assessor of the amount of the costs of the demolition, of making
the building safe or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure
or grounds adjoining the building or structure, by first class mail at the
address shown on the city records.
   (D)   Lien for unpaid costs. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay
the costs within 30 days after mailing by the Assessor of the notice of the
amount of the cost, in the case of a dwelling, the city shall have a lien for
the costs incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this
subchapter. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been
filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this division (D)
does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and
encumbrances. The lien for the costs shall be collected and treated in the same
manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act,
Public Act 206 of 1893, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 et seq.).
   (E)   Court judgment for unpaid costs. In addition to other remedies under
this subchapter, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building
or structure for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe,
or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds
adjoining the building or structure. A judgment in an action brought pursuant
to this subchapter may be enforced against assets of the owner other than the
building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the
amount of a judgment obtained under this division (E). The lien provided for in
this division (E) shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or
recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed
or recorded liens and encumbrances.
(Ord. 790, passed 3-19-2018)
NOISE CONTROL
§ 91.25 EXCESSIVE NOISE DECLARED NUISANCE.
   All loud or unusual noises or sounds and annoying vibrations which offend
the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities are hereby declared to
be public nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 6.20)
§ 91.26 SPECIFIC OFFENSES.
   Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and prohibited, but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   (A)   Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose
of any person;
   (B)   Construction noises. The erection (including excavating therefor),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, landscaping or parking area
and the excavation of streets and highways, on Sundays, holidays, and other
days, except between the hours of 7:00am and 6:00pm; exceptions to these
limitations may be made upon obtaining a permit from the City Manager and
paying for same based on the fee City Council may set from time to time;
   (C)   Sound amplifiers. Use of any loud speaker, amplifier or other
instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any
purpose, except one which is non-commercial in character and when so used shall
be subject to the following restrictions.
      (1)   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
      (2)   Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays
and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four
hours of operation shall be as designated by the Chief of Police.
      (3)   Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be
operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is
operated at a speed of at least ten mph, except when said truck is stopped or
impeded by traffic.
      (4)   Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools or
churches.
      (5)   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound amplifying
equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring,
disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
   (D)   Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive
noises therefrom;
   (E)   Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in
connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction
of bales, boxes, crates and containers;
   (F)   Blowers. The discharge into the open air of noise from a compressor,
blower or power fan unless the noise from such compressor, blower or fan is
muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise;
   (G)   Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and
boisterous manner;
   (H)   Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as
a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control,
or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a
danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the
vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
   (I)   Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television
set, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume,
particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making
of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any school, place of worship or office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;
   (J)   Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time
so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
school, place of worship or office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence, or of any person in the vicinity; and
   (K)   Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger.
(Prior Code, § 6.21) (Ord. 811, passed 11-18-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.27 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the terms or prohibitions of §
91.26 of this chapter shall apply to or be enforced against:
   (A)   Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while
engaged upon emergency business; and/or
   (B)   Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of
bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city or the state during
the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it
impossible to perform such work during the day.
(Prior Code, § 6.22)
LITTER
§ 91.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Decaying animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by any person
whether or not improved with any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building or other
structure erected thereon.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   REFUSE. All decaying and non-decaying solid wastes including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, junk and
solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Non-decaying solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-
combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
(Prior Code, § 6.41) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.41 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps.
(Prior Code, § 6.42) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.42 USE OF WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
(Prior Code, § 6.43) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.43 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 6.44) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.44 MERCHANTS’ DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN.
   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot. Persons owning or occupying
places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 6.45) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.45 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the
city whether owned by such person or not; except that, the owner or person in
control of occupied private premises may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property.
(Prior Code, § 6.46) (Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.46 PERSONS TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner, occupant or person in control of any private premises shall at
all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that, this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
(Prior Code, § 6.47) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.47 ENFORCEMENT; NUISANCE PER SE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is hereby charged with the
enforcement of this subchapter. No person being the owner, occupant or person
in control of any private premises shall accumulate or permit the accumulation
of any litter on the private premises owned, controlled or occupied by such
person in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.48)
   (B)   A violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to constitute a
nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the
court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and
enjoined. Relief sought pursuant to this section shall not operate to preclude
the enforcement of this subchapter pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6.49)
(Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
WEED CONTROL; LEAVES AND BRUSH
§ 91.60 WEED GROWTH PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person owning and/or occupying any premises in the city shall
permit or maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds; nor any
growth of grass or any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a greater
height than 12 inches on the average; nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass
or brush.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NOXIOUS WEEDS. Include Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any
species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard,
species of Brassica or Sinapis), Wild Carrot (Daucus Carota), bindweed
(Convolutus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum
(Berteroa incana), ragweed (Ambrosia elatior 1), poison ivy (Rhus
toxicondendron) and poison sumac (Toxicondendron vernix).
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or any other legal entity.
(Prior Code, § 6.71) (Ord. 630, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.61 DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant as well as the owner of every premises
within the city to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such noxious
weeds and grass, as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of
§
91.60 of this chapter; provided that, the cutting, removing or destroying of
such weeds and grass at least once in every three weeks between June 1 and
September 15 of each year shall be deemed to be compliance with this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 630, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.62 WHEN CITY TO DO WORK.
   If there is not compliance with the provisions of §§
91.60 and
91.61 of this chapter, the City Manager shall notify the occupant or owner of
such premises to comply with the provisions of said sections within ten days
after service of such notice. Notice shall be given in accordance with§
10.11 of this code. If there is no compliance with such notice within the
specified time, the City Manager shall cause such weeds, grass and other
vegetation to be removed or destroyed and the actual cost of such cutting,
removal or destruction including supervision and overhead costs shall be a lien
against the premises and collected in the manner prescribed in Public Act 359
of 1941, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.61 to 247.72, as amended. The City Manager shall
be Commissioner of Noxious Weeds of the city and shall serve as such without
additional compensation.
(Prior Code, § 6.73) (Ord. 630, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.63 ALTERNATIVE PUBLICATION.
   (A)   In lieu of the notice required by §
91.62 of this chapter, the City Manager may publish a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city during the month of March.
   (B)   The notice shall state that vegetation not cut by June 1 of that year
will be cut by the city. It shall also state the continuing obligation of a
person to comply with this subchapter and that the owner of the property may be
charged with the cost of compliance pursuant to §
91.62 of this chapter. The notice shall also contain such other information as
is required by Public Act 359 of 1941, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.61 to 247.72, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 6.74) (Ord. 630, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 91.64 LEAF AND BRUSH PICKUP.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCEPTABLE VEGETATIVE MATERIALS. Leaves, branches of vegetative material
not exceeding 12 inches in diameter or not exceeding six feet in length which
are untreated by any chemical, perennial cuttings, grass clippings and any of
the foregoing items that are chipped into pieces up to, but not exceeding 12
inches in either diameter or length;
      PROHIBITED MATERIALS. Any material or object, organic or human-made that
is not an acceptable vegetative material. This includes, but is not limited to,
the following specific materials: concrete; bricks; asphalt; dirt; soil; sod
piles; root balls; stumps; treated lumber; railroad ties; rocks; stones; any
building or remodeling materials from interior or exterior construction or
demolition projects; and vegetative material of any type that is over 12 inches
in diameter or over six feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 6.100)
   (B)   If any material can be classified as an acceptable vegetative material
as well as a prohibited material and the material is specifically listed as a
prohibited material, then the material shall be deemed to be a prohibited
material.
(Prior Code, § 6.101)
   (C)   No person shall place on private property or the public right-of-way
prohibited materials for pick up or disposal by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.102)
Penalty, see §
91.99
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 91.70. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to adopt a property maintenance code to
regulate and govern the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures, to provide uniform standards for occupation and use to ensure
that they are safe, sanitary and fit.
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.71 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as “The City of Charlevoix Property
Maintenance Code.”
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.72 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to M.C.L.A. 117.3(k), that certain document marked and designated
as The International Property Maintenance Code, most recently adopted edition,
as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the
Housing/Property Maintenance Code of the city, and each and all of the
provisions of such code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter, save and except such provisions as
hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.73 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the term BUILDING OFFICIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY or CODE
OFFICIAL appears in the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in
§ 91.72, it shall be deemed to mean the Authorized City Official (as defined in
the City Code of Ordinances, as amended) and also includes the City Planner and
City Zoning Administrator, or his or her duly authorized agent.
   (B)   Wherever the term MUNICIPALITY, CITY or LOCAL JURISDICTION appears in
such Code, it shall be deemed to mean the City of Charlevoix.
   (C)   Wherever the term BOARD OF APPEALS appears in such Code, it shall be
deemed to mean the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Charlevoix.
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.74 REVISIONS.
   The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, as
adopted in §
91.72 above, are also hereby revised:
   101.1 Insert: City of Charlevoix
   103.5 Insert: Fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted
by resolution of the city council from time to time.
   106.3 Insert: Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be
deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in the City of Charlevoix Code. If the notice of violation is
not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding
at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require
the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such
premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   106.4. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in the City of Charlevoix Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   111.2.4. Secretary: The secretary of the appeals board will be the city
clerk.
   112.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set
forth in the City of Charlevoix Code.
   302.4 Insert: Ten (10) inches
   304.14 Insert: Insect screens are required from April 1 through November 1
   602.3 Insert: Heat shall be supplied from January 1 through December 31
   602.4 Insert: Heat shall be supplied from January 1 through December 31
   602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces. Insert: January 1 through December 31
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.75 FILE COPIES.
   Printed copies of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in
§
91.72, shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, available for review and
inspection by the public at all times.
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.76 SEVERABILITY.
   No other portion, paragraph or phase of the Code of the City of Charlevoix,
Michigan shall be affected by this subchapter except as to the above sections,
and in the event any portion, section or subsection of this subchapter shall be
held invalid for any reason, such invalidation shall not be construed to affect
the validity of any other part or portion of this subchapter or of the Code of
the City of Charlevoix, Michigan.
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.77 INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
   Where a provision of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted
in this subchapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
housing, fire, safety, or health law of the city, the county or the state, the
provision which establishes the higher standard or assumes the higher
jurisdiction for the promotion and protection of the health, safety and welfare
of the city shall prevail.
(Ord. 828, passed 1-17-2022)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §
91.26(I) or (J) of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. A violation of any
other provision of §§
91.01 through
91.11,
91.25 through
91.27 and
91.40 through
91.47 of this chapter, including failing or refusing to comply with an order
approved or modified by the city under §§
91.01 through
91.11 of this chapter, shall be a municipal civil infraction subject to a civil
fine of not more than $500, plus costs, which may include all direct or
indirect expenses to which the city has spent in connection with the violation.
Each day a violation of §§
91.01 through
91.11,
91.25 through
91.27 and
91.40 through
91.47 of this chapter continues to exist constitutes a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 6.30)
   (C)   A violation of §
91.64(C) of this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 6.103)
(Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 765, passed 6-2-2014)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
92.01   NFPA Life Safety Code adopted by reference
   
92.02   References in code
   
92.03   Explosives and blasting agents
   
92.04   Fireworks
   
92.05   Flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks
   
92.06   Liquified petroleum gas
   
92.07   Modifications
   
92.08   Appeals
   
92.09   Fires on pavement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 NFPA LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city adopts the current edition of the NFPA Life Safety Code by
reference by the city for the purpose of safeguarding life and property from
the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the use of occupancy of buildings or premises. Complete
printed copies of the NFPA Life Safety Code of the American Insurance
Association, herein adopted, are available for public use and inspection at the
office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9.181)
§ 92.02 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   (A)   Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the Fire Prevention Code,
it shall be held to mean the City of Charlevoix.
   (B)   Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the Fire Prevention
Code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Charlevoix.
   (C)   Wherever the term “Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention” is used in
the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the Chief of the Charlevoix
Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 9.182)
§ 92.03 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   The limits referred to in § 12.5b of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established
as follows: all areas of the city, except the I Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 9.183)
§ 92.04 FIREWORKS.
   The limits referred to in § 13.3a of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
manufacture and storage of fireworks is prohibited, are all areas of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.184)
§ 92.05 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND TANKS.
   The limits referred to in § 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code in which
storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited and the
limits referred to in § 16.61 of the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby
established as follows: all areas of the city, except the I Industrial
District.
(Prior Code, § 9.185)
§ 92.06 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   The limits referred to in § 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as
follows: all areas of the city, except the I Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 9.186)
§ 92.07 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided
that, the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done.
   (B)   The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the
Chief of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 9.187)
§ 92.08 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decisions of the Chief of the Fire Department to the City Council within 30
days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 9.188)
§ 92.09 FIRES ON PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or occupier of any lot or
premises, occupied or vacant, within the city limits, or any person, firm or
corporation having charge of such lot or premises to cause or permit the
burning of leaves, trash or any other combustible materials in or upon the
paved portion of any public roadway.
(Prior Code, § 9.189) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the city
code in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Any building, structure or premises erected, used, occupied or
maintained in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per
se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may
order the nuisance abated and/or the violation, or threatened violation,
restrained and enjoined.
(Prior Code, § 9.190)
   (B)   Any person violating §
92.09 of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine of
not less than $25.
(Prior Code, § 9.189)
CHAPTER 93: CEMETERIES
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   City cemeteries
   
93.03   Rules and regulations
   
93.04   Sale of plots
   
93.05   Plot owner’s burial rights
   
93.06   Records
   
93.07   Perpetual care
   
93.08   Fees
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURIAL SPACE or BURIAL PLOT. A plot or portion of a plot in any cemetery
designated and maintained for the burial of a human body or bodies and for no
other purposes.
   CEMETERY. Any public cemetery owned, managed or controlled by the city.
   OWNER. Any person or persons owning or possessing the privilege, license or
right of burial in any burial space.
   RESIDENT. Any person who pays real or personal property taxes to the city or
a person who is a qualified elector in the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.51) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.02 CITY CEMETERIES.
   All city cemeteries shall be under the management, supervision and care of
the City Manager. The City Manager shall, if necessary, cause such cemeteries
to be laid out in plots, lots, blocks, drives and walks; the plots and lots to
be numbered, blocks lettered, drives and walks therein to be named and plats
thereof to be made. City cemeteries may be established inside or outside of the
city limits.
(Prior Code, § 3.52) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council shall from time to time make, amend or delete rules and
regulations for the burial of the dead, care, improvement and protection of the
grounds, mausoleums, monuments and appurtenances of the cemeteries and the
orderly conduct of persons visiting the same as the City Council shall deem
necessary. The City Manager shall see that this chapter and all rules and
regulations enacted by the City Council are enforced.
(Prior Code, § 3.53) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.04 SALE OF PLOTS.
   (A)   All deeds for burial plots shall be executed on behalf of the city by
the City Clerk. Residents of the city shall be entitled to purchase a burial
plot in any city cemetery according to the fee schedule applicable to
residents. Non-residents of the city shall also be entitled to purchase a
burial plot in any city cemetery according to the fee schedule applicable to
non-residents. Prior to purchasing a burial plot, a person seeking such
purchase or an authorized agent of the purchaser shall complete a
questionnaire/application provided by the city concerning the applicant’s
residency and shall submit the completed application to the City Clerk, Sexton
or their designated representative. The same may investigate the accuracy or
completeness of the application. If the City Clerk concludes that the applicant
is not a resident, then the City Clerk shall provide the applicant with written
reasons upon which the decision was based. An incomplete application may be a
basis for denial of residency. If the applicant is dissatisfied with the
decision rendered by the City Clerk, the applicant shall ten days from the date
the written notice was mailed or personally delivered to the applicant to file
a written request with the City Manager requesting a review of the City Clerk’s
decision. The applicant shall include in the request for review all facts upon
which the applicant relies to establish residency. The City Manager shall
investigate the application and render a written decision and shall mail a
decision to the applicant at an address provided by the applicant or may
personally deliver the decision to the applicant. The decision of the City
Manager shall be final. An applicant’s failure to comply with the foregoing
time limitations shall constitute a waiver of any right to a review of the City
Clerk’s decision.
   (B)   Upon the purchase of any burial plot, the City Clerk shall prepare and
deliver to the purchaser a duly executed deed for said burial plot. Such deed
shall convey to the purchaser the right of burial only, and shall be subject to
the provisions of this code, and such ordinances, rules and regulations as may
hereafter be adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.54) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.05 PLOT OWNER’S BURIAL RIGHTS.
   (A)   The owner of any burial space in any city cemetery shall have right to
burial of the dead only and shall allow no burials for remuneration. No rights
to ownership of land are conveyed by a cemetery deed. In order for a burial to
take place, a cemetery deed showing the current owner of the plot or an
assignment of the cemetery deed showing the current owner of the plot must be
recorded with the City Clerk. The owner of a cemetery deed may be buried at the
city cemetery pursuant to the cemetery deed or the owner of the cemetery deed
may allow another person to be buried in the plot pursuant to the cemetery
deed.
   (B)   If a plot is owned by more than one person, then a co-owner or a
representative of the co-owner shall obtain the written consent of other co-
owners before the burial of a co-owner or any other person takes place.
(Prior Code, § 3.55) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.06 RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Manager shall cause to be kept a register of all burials made
in any city cemetery in which shall appear the name of the deceased, the date
and place of burial and such other information as the City Manager may deem
appropriate. The City Manager shall also cause to be kept proper records in
which the deeds or assignments of deeds to all burial plots shall be recorded.
These records shall also show if a resident fee or non-resident fee has been
paid for the deed. If an assignment of an existing deed is made from a resident
owner to a non-resident owner, then, at the time of the recording of the
assignment, an additional fee shall be paid to the city in an amount equal to
the difference between resident rates and non-resident rates for the type of
plot in question. The rate differential shall be based upon rates which are in
effect at the time that the assignment is recorded with the City Clerk. There
shall be no refund if a non-resident plot owner transfers ownership to a
resident.
   (B)   Changes in ownership must be recorded with the City Clerk before
burial will be permitted. The City Council may establish, by resolution,
transfer fees.
(Prior Code, § 3.56) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.07 PERPETUAL CARE.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution the
amount to be paid for cemetery burial plots. This amount shall include a
sufficient sum to provide for perpetual care of the plots so sold. The city may
accept sums donated by any testator, trustee or other person for the care of
the cemetery or any plots therein. The city shall be obligated to maintain and
care for all plots in the cemetery for which perpetual care has been paid,
except as otherwise provided by the statutes of the state. Any interest money
available in any perpetual care fund or other cemetery fund belonging to the
city shall be used for such cemetery purposes as the City Council shall
determine. If there is a transfer of a deed for which a perpetual care charge
has not been paid, then before recording the transfer of any such deed, the
city shall collect a new charge for perpetual care.
(Prior Code, § 3.57) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 93.08 FEES.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution or as
part of its annual budget the rates for cemetery services and other related
cemetery fees, including fees for cemetery related services performed by the
City Clerk. There may be differing rates or fees for residents of the city and
non-residents. In the case of request for indigent burial, the City Manager
shall have the authority to waive applicable charges. If the owner of a
cemetery deed is a non-resident at the time of his or her burial pursuant to
the cemetery deed, then a non-resident burial fee will be charged.
(Prior Code, § 3.58) (Ord. 647, passed 11-16-1998)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Charlevoix Harbor
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Unlawful conduct
   
94.03   Observance of signs
   
94.04   Harbor Master; powers and duties
   
94.05   City police
   
94.06   Rules and regulations
   
94.07   Licenses
   
94.08   Freight loading rates
   
94.09   No-wake speed in certain parts of Round Lake
Parks and Public Grounds
   
94.20   Definitions
   
94.21   Fires
   
94.22   Fireworks
   
94.23   Litter
   
94.24   Assemblies
   
94.25   Sleeping at night
   
94.26   Hours
   
94.27   Handbills and posters
   
94.28   Business activities
   
94.29   Motor vehicles and motorized vehicles
   
94.30   Alcoholic beverages
 
   
94.99   Penalty
CHARLEVOIX HARBOR
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BATHING PIER. Any pier or wharf owned by the city and used for purposes
connected with a public beach or waters.
   CHARLEVOIX HARBOR. Round Lake, the upper channel of Pine River between Round
Lake and a line parallel to and 300 feet east of the Pere Marquette Railroad
Bridge; and Pine River between Round Lake and the outer end of the Government
Piers.
   CITY DOCK REGULATIONS. The rules and regulations from time to time
established by the City Council to regulate the use of the municipal piers,
wharfs and docks.
   MUNICIPAL DOCK. The space between two adjacent piers and the space alongside
any single pier.
   MUNICIPAL PIER. A pier or wharf owned by the city or leased by it.
   PERSONS. An individual, partnership, corporation or association and includes
the master, owner, pilot or other person in charge or in control of a vessel.
   VESSEL. Any watercraft, including sailing vessels and watercraft propelled
by any kind of motive power, row boats, canoes, scows, pile-drivers and
dredges.
(Prior Code, § 3.81)
§ 94.02 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful:
   (A)   For any person to navigate or operate, or cause to be navigated or
operated, in Charlevoix Harbor, any vessel at a greater speed than six mph, nor
at a greater rate of speed than is safe and reasonable under the then existing
conditions and circumstances;
   (B)   For any person to deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or
discharged, in the waters of Charlevoix Harbor, or in any waters within the
corporate limits of the city, any rubbish, garbage, refuse, offal, sewerage,
oil or any other foreign material or substance, or to place, deposit or leave,
or cause to be placed, deposited or left, any such foreign material or
substance upon any municipal pier or bathing pier therein, except as the same
is deposited or left in a receptacle therefor provided by the city or its
Harbor Master;
   (C)   For any person to use any municipal pier, dock or wharf for the
purpose of loading or unloading freight, machinery or other cargo, or for
refueling any vessel, except such docks, piers or wharfs as are specially
designated for such use and purposes; provided that, the required permit
therefor is first obtained from the proper officials of the city and the city
dock regulations and the orders of the Harbor Master and other authorized
officers of the city are complied with; provided further that, this provision
shall not apply to vessel supplies or provisions other than fuel;
   (D)   For any person to use or occupy any municipal dock or pier or any
bathing pier for docking or mooring any vessel engaged in commercial business
or other business for gain or profit, or for the storage of any such vessel or
cargo or other material other than as may be permitted by city dock
regulations, except those docks, piers or wharfs which are specially designated
for such use and purposes; provided that, the permit therefor is first obtained
from the officials of the city and the city dock regulations and the orders of
the Harbor Master and other authorized city officials are complied with;
   (E)   For any person to use any municipal dock, pier or wharf for mooring,
docking, anchoring or storing any vessel for a longer period than is prescribed
therefor, or in any other manner contrary to the city dock regulations adopted
and published by the Council of said city, or without a license or permit
therefor, issued under the provisions of this subchapter or said city dock
regulations;
   (F)   For any person to destroy, mutilate, molest, remove, change the
location of or in any manner interfere with any official sign, poster or other
notice or regulatory device placed upon or adjacent to any municipal dock or
pier, bathing pier or revetment;
   (G)   For any person to land or dock any vessel at any bathing pier, except
at the place thereon specially designated therefor, or to anchor any vessel
within 100 feet of such pier, or to dock or anchor any vessel at or adjacent to
any bathing pier for a longer period than one hour in any period of five hours;
and/or
   (H)   For any person to navigate or operate any vessel in the waters
adjacent to any bathing pier in such a manner or at a rate of speed so as to
endanger the lives or safety of persons using such bathing pier or adjacent
waters for bathing purposes, or in such a manner as to interfere with the free
and proper uses of the bathing pier and waters.
(Prior Code, § 3.82) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 OBSERVANCE OF SIGNS.
   Every person shall observe, heed and obey all signs, posters and notices
placed by lawful authority upon or adjacent to any municipal pier, bathing pier
or revetment for the regulation and control of navigation and for the
regulation and control of said municipal docks and piers and bathing piers.
(Prior Code, § 3.83) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 HARBOR MASTER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Harbor Master shall have full supervision and control over the movements
and anchorage of all vessels within the corporate limits and jurisdiction of
the city, subject to the laws of the United States in relation thereto. He or
she shall have power, whenever the needs of navigation and the rights and
safety of persons and property require, to order the moving or change of
anchorage or docking of any vessel within said waters, and any person who shall
refuse, fail or neglect to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this subchapter. He or she shall have supervision and control of
all municipal docks and piers, subject to the provisions of this subchapter and
the city dock regulations adopted by the City Council. He or she shall have
power to, and it shall be his or her duty to, seize and remove any vessel
moored at any municipal pier, wharf or dock contrary to any order of the Harbor
Master or other authorized officials of the city; he or she shall cause said
vessel to be placed in storage under his or her control and the vessel shall
not be released until the expense and charges for moving, docking and/or
storage are paid to the Harbor Master by the owner or person lawfully in charge
of said vessel. It shall be his or her duty to make prompt complaint to the
proper court for any violation of the provisions of this subchapter and aid in
the prosecution thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3.84)
§ 94.05 CITY POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to aid and assist
the Harbor Master in the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter. Such
police officers shall, during the absence or inability of the Harbor Master, or
when so instructed by proper authority enforce the provisions of this
subchapter with like powers and authority as are herein conferred upon the
Harbor Master.
(Prior Code, § 3.85)
§ 94.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt suitable rules and regulations
for the control, management and operation of all municipal docks and piers, and
bathing piers, including the fixing of rates and charges for the use thereof,
the purposes for which the same be used and the duration of such use and the
kind of location of all signs, posters or notices to be placed thereon, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter and the laws of the state
and of the United States.
(Prior Code, § 3.86)
§ 94.07 LICENSES.
   All licenses under the provisions of this subchapter shall be issued in
accordance with
Chapter 71 of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 3.87)
§ 94.08 FREIGHT LOADING RATES.
   (A)   Commercial freight loading and unloading rates shall be $25 for the
first hour and $15 per hour thereafter for loading and unloading at the
commercial dock. The monitoring of the loading and unloading to be supervised
by the Beaver Island Boat Company attendant.
   (B)   Commercial loading and unloading at the Clinton Street Dock to be
prohibited.
   (C)   Off-season rates from November 1 through April 30 shall be $100 for
vessels up to 50 feet, and $150 for vessels over 50 feet. In addition special
provisions for a meter shall be made if electric power is requested. Yacht
rates will apply to commercial dock, when available. Any damage done to yacht
docks by the winter tie-up will be the responsibility of the boat owner.
(Prior Code, § 3.88) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.09 NO-WAKE SPEED IN CERTAIN PARTS OF ROUND LAKE.
   (A)   Definitions. All phrases used in this section shall be construed and
have the same meaning as those words and phrases as defined in Public Act 303
of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 to 324.80199.
   (B)   Exceeding no-wake speed prohibited. From and after the date of this
section, on the waters of Round Lake, located entirely within the city limits,
from the railroad right-of-way on the easternmost end of the Pine River, to the
westernmost end of the Lake Michigan pierhead, it is unlawful to exceed a slow
no-wake speed.
(Prior Code, § 3.89) (Ord. 488, passed 3-21-1988) Penalty, see §
94.99
PARKS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS
§ 94.20 DEFINITIONS.
   The words PARKS and PUBLIC PLACES, unless specifically limited, shall be
deemed to include all parks, beaches, grass plots, playgrounds, recreational
areas, athletic fields and other areas which are now or may hereafter be
acquired by purchase, gift, devise, bequeath, loan or lease, or other public
playground, recreational area or athletic field located within the corporate
limits of the city. Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
(Prior Code, § 3.1)
§ 94.21 FIRES.
   No person or persons shall kindle or build a fire in any public park or
playground, except in receptacles provided therefor, or in designated areas
where such is permissible.
(Prior Code, § 3.2) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.22 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the ignition,
discharge, and use of consumer fireworks within the city boundaries in
accordance with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011,
as amended.
   (B)   Definitions and adoption by reference. As used in this section, the
following words and phrases have the meanings indicated:
      ACT. The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011,
M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 through 28.471, as amended, which is hereby adopted by
reference as a part of this section.
      ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC. As defined in the Act, means pyrotechnic devices
for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
composition and construction.
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. As defined in the Act, means firework devices that
are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to
comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission and that
are in compliance with the construction, chemical composition, labeling and
other requirements in the Act. Novelties and low-impact fireworks as defined in
the Act are not CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
      DISPLAY FIREWORKS. As defined in the Act, means large firework devices
that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks, displays and
designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation.
      FIREWORKS. As defined in the Act, means any composition or device, except
for a starting pistol, a flare fun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, and consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles
pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects.
      LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. As defined in the Act, means ground and handheld
sparkling devices.
      MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
      NOVELTIES. As defined in the Act, means all of the following:
         (a)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips,
roll, or individual caps containing no more than .25 of a grain of explosive
content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content
per cap.
         (b)   Toy pistols, toy canons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and
toy guns in which toy caps as described in division (a) above are used, that
are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in
place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be
separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.
         (c)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in
diameter.
         (d)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's
name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy
smoke devices.
      SPECIAL EFFECTS. As defined in the Act, means a combination of chemical
elements or chemical compounds capable of burning, independently of the oxygen
of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual,
mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio,
television, theatrical, or opera production or live entertainment.
   (C)   Prohibited ignition, discharge, and use. Consumer fireworks shall not
be ignited, discharged or used in the city except in the following situations:
      (1)   Consumer fireworks may be ignited, discharged or used on the
following dates and times:
         (a)   December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1.
         (b)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until
11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
         (c)   June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
         (d)   July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.
         (e)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until
11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
      (2)   The penalty for a violation under division (1) shall be a civil
fine of $1,000 for each violation of the division. A minimum of $500 of the
fine collected under division (1) shall be remitted to the City of Charlevoix.
      (3)   Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used on
public, school, church, or private property of another person without the
express written permission from the person or entity legally in possession and
control of that property.
   (D)   Minors. A minor shall not possess, use, discharge, or ignite any
consumer fireworks at any time unless supervised by a parent or legal guardian.
   (E)   Under the influence. An individual shall not discharge, ignite, or use
consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor
and controlled substance.
   (F)   Unmanned free-floating devices. Any unmanned free-floating device (sky
lanterns) which requires fire underneath to propel it and is not moored to the
ground while aloft, have an uncontrolled and unpredictable flight path and
descent area so as to pose a potential fire risk and are therefore prohibited.
   (G)   Novelties; inapplicability of section. This section does not apply to
novelties. Nothing in this section regulates the sale, storage, display for
sale, transportation, use, or distribution of novelties.
   (H)   Zoning ordinances. Any person selling, distributing or transporting
fireworks shall otherwise comply with the Act, and is required to comply with
the zoning ordinances of the city, including obtaining necessary approvals
hereunder. Failure to obtain necessary zoning approvals is subject to penalty
as provided in the zoning ordinances of the city.
   (I)   Imminent dangers. Notwithstanding the Act, no person shall use,
discharge, or ignite fireworks thereby creating or causing an imminent danger
or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, and such fireworks being
used, ignited or discharged may be immediately seized.
   (J)   Seizure. All fireworks possessed, used, discharged, and/or ignited in
violation of the Act and/or this section are subject to seizure. Any costs
incurred by the city to seize and store the fireworks shall be paid by the
responsible party.
   (K)   The sanction/penalty for a violation of this section is deemed a
municipal civil infraction, punishable by a civil fine of not more than $1,000
for division (C)(1), and $500 for all other divisions in this section, plus
costs, damages, and expenses and any other relief allowed under law.
(Prior Code, § 3.3) (Ord. 772, passed 6-4-2015; Ord. 819, passed 6-1-2020)
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.23 LITTER.
   No person in any municipal park or recreation area shall bring in or dump or
deposit bottles, glass, ashes, paper, garbage or other refuse or trash, and no
garbage or trash shall be placed in receptacles in the park, except that in the
park use. Where receptacles are not so provided, all rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(Prior Code, § 3.5) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.24 ASSEMBLIES.
   No parades, drills, expeditions, political meetings, religious meetings,
concerts, speeches, lectures or assemblages of person shall be held in any
park, except upon written permission of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 3.6) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.25 SLEEPING AT NIGHT.
   No person shall sleep, whether in a vehicle, trailer, tent, hammock, or
other manner, in the park, public way or other public place during the night
time.
(Prior Code, § 3.8) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.26 HOURS.
   The City Council shall establish, by resolution, such hours as the parks or
other public places shall be open to the public and no person or persons shall
loiter or remain therein, except during such hours as shall be so established.
(Prior Code, § 3.9) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.27 HANDBILLS AND POSTERS.
   No person shall advertise any placard or advertisement of any kind in the
park; nor shall any person distribute any matter, or place any handbill,
pamphlet, circular and the like, nor post, stencil or otherwise affix any
notice, bill, advertisement or other papers upon any structure or thing in or
about the park unless it be with the written consent of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 3.10) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.28 BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall carry on any trade or business or sell or display any goods,
wares or merchandise in the park, unless it be with the written consent of the
City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 3.11) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.29 MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   All motor vehicles are prohibited from all park areas, excepting the
parking lot of said parks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle
on any city-owned property, except on roadways and driveways located on said
properties.
(Prior Code, § 3.13) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.30 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Consumption prohibited at all times. Alcoholic beverages may not be
consumed or possessed in Veterans Park or cemeteries of the city.
   (B)   Hours of consumption limited. Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed
in public places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
   (C)   Exemption for boats. Restrictions on alcohol shall not extend to
privately owned vessels moored in the waters of the city or docked in the
Charlevoix Marina.
(Ord. 826, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violations of §
94.09 of this chapter are deemed a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500, together with costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the
county jail or such other places of detention as the court may prescribe for a
period not to exceed 90 days or said fine, cost of prosecution and imprisonment
at the discretion of the court.
      (2)   Pursuant to § 17 of Public Act 303 of 1967, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 to 324.80199, the County Sheriff or his or her authorized
Deputies shall enforce §
94.09 of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of said Act.
(Prior Code, § 3.89) (Ord. 488, passed 3-21-1988)
CHAPTER 95: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Existing contracts
   
95.03   Licenses non-exclusive
   
95.04   Agreement with U.S. Government
   
95.05   Non-discrimination
   
95.06   Federal and state regulations
   
95.07   Airport Manager’s authority
   
95.08   Suspension or revocation of licenses; alternate remedy
   
95.09   Hearing
   
95.10   Fees; permits
   
95.11   Insurance
   
95.12   Inspections
Use Regulations
   
95.25   Vehicle operation and parking
   
95.26   Buildings and property
   
95.27   Commercial uses
   
95.28   On-airport residences
   
95.29   Aircraft operations
   
95.30   Fire regulations
   
95.31   Personal conduct
Self-Fueling Operations
   
95.45   Storage
   
95.46   Dispensing license
   
95.47   License requirements
   
95.48   Non-city fuel sales; fueling third-party aircraft prohibited
   
95.49   Fees
   
95.50   License; term
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AERONAUTICAL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any operation of an aircraft for
compensation or hire, or any services performed incidental to the operation of
any aircraft for which a fee is charged or compensation received while basing
aircraft, advertising or performing such services at the Charlevoix Municipal
Airport. This includes, but is not limited to, the servicing, fueling,
maintaining and repairing of third-party aircraft, the rental or charter of
aircraft under an Federal Aviation Regulations (F.A.R.) part 135 certificate
(scheduled or unscheduled), the operation of flight schools, the operation of
aircraft for the application of chemicals or other substances, aerial
photography or aerial surveys. An AERONAUTICAL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY is one type
of commercial activity.
   AIRPORT. Charlevoix Municipal Airport.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The individual tasked with oversight and management of all
activities at Charlevoix Municipal Airport, and includes designees of the
Airport Manager. The AIRPORT MANAGER shall be appointed by the City Manager.
   BASED AIRCRAFT. An aircraft stationed at the airport on a long-term or
permanent basis, through an arrangement for the storage of the aircraft in
either a hangar or an outdoor tie-down area.
   CITY. The City of Charlevoix.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or a designee of the City
Manager.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. The sale or rental of any commodities, supplies or
services and includes, but is not limited to, an aeronautical commercial
activity.
   CONTRACT. Any contract, lease, covenants or other written agreement.
   FUEL. Any liquid which is used to power an airplane. FUEL includes, but is
not limited to, 100LL and JetA.
   LICENSE.
      (1)   A written document issued by the city, pursuant to this chapter,
that grants permission to engage in a specified commercial activity at the
airport.
      (2)   A LICENSE may also be called a PERMIT.
   MINIMUM STANDARDS. The minimum requirements for the conducting of any
commercial activity at the airport as adopted by the City Council by resolution
and as amended from time to time.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or
association, including any trustee or receiver.
   SCHEDULE OF INSURANCES. The list of types of insurance, limits of coverage
and other insurance-related requirements for the conducting of an aeronautical
commercial activity or any other type of activity as adopted by the City
Council by resolution and as amended from time to time.
   SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES. The fees or charges for the conducting of an
aeronautical commercial activity or any other type of activity at the airport
as adopted by the City Council by resolution and as amended from time to time.
   THIRD-PARTY AIRCRAFT. Aircraft that are not owned or leased by a self-
fueling operator.
   TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. An aircraft that is not a based aircraft.
   THROUGH THE FENCE. An agreement whereby a landowner whose property abuts the
airport is given permission to taxi aircraft between the privately-owned land
and the publicly owned airport.
(Prior Code, § 2.181) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.02 EXISTING CONTRACTS.
   It is not intended for this chapter to interfere with existing contracts.
However, where this chapter or compliance with federal grant assurance imposes
a greater duty on a person than does an existing contract and where this
chapter does not directly and irreconcilably conflict with that contract, then
the greater duty imposed by this chapter shall apply. All future contracts
shall be made consistent with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.182) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.03 LICENSES NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   All licenses for a commercial activity at the airport shall be granted on a
non-exclusive basis, conforming to all federal statutes, orders, guidelines and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2.183) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.04 AGREEMENT WITH U.S. GOVERNMENT.
   During time of war or national emergency, the city shall have the right to
enter into an agreement with the U.S. Government for military use of part or
all of the airport and/or its facilities. Any contracts to persons other than
the U.S. Government shall be subject to and subordinate to any such agreement
with the U.S. Government.
(Prior Code, § 2.184) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.05 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   No person shall, in the use of the airport or any of the facilities located
thereon, discriminate or permit discrimination against any other person or
group of persons on the grounds of race, color, creed, national origin, sex or
age, or in any other manner prohibited by federal statutes, federal regulations
or city anti-discrimination policies. In addition, there shall be no
discrimination in the pricing of services offered by airport licensees.
(Prior Code, § 2.185) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS.
   All rules and regulations enacted by the state’s Aeronautics Commission and/
or the Federal Aviation Administration relative to pilots, aircraft, air
traffic and airports now in effect, or any amendments adopted in the future are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of these regulations as fully as if
the same and each of all of them were completely set forth herein. In addition,
all contracts, leases and licenses shall be subordinate to the city’s
commitment to comply with federal grant assurances and other obligations to the
federal government.
(Prior Code, § 2.186) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.07 AIRPORT MANAGER’S AUTHORITY.
   The Airport Manager shall have authority to do the following: enforce all
laws, ordinances, standards, resolutions, rules, and regulations governing
pilots, aircraft, air traffic and the general public using the airport; suspend
flying operations when, in the Airport Manager’s judgment, the condition of the
airport or weather is such as to make flying operations unsafe; issue notices
to airmen (NOTAMS) as are appropriate for conditions at the airport; and take
such lawful action as may be necessary for the proper handling, conduct and
management of the public in attendance at the airport. The Airport Manager may
delegate responsibilities which are assigned to the Airport Manager under this
chapter to such persons as have been designated by the City Manager to assist
the Airport Manager. The City Manager may delegate to the Airport Manager any
duty or authority of the City Manager contained in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.187) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.08 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES; ALTERNATE REMEDY.
   (A)   A violations of this chapter by agents or employees of a licensee
shall be deemed to be a violation by the licensee. As used in this chapter, a
violation of this chapter includes not only a violation of this chapter of the
city code, but also a violation of any provision of the applicable license.
   (B)   The city may suspend or revoke any license that has been issued
pursuant to this chapter for a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   If the City Manager has reason to believe that a licensee has violated
or is violating this chapter, the City Manager may, but is not required to,
prepare or cause to be prepared a written notice specifying the factual basis
for the alleged violations of this chapter. The notice shall also state the
date, time and place of a hearing before the City Council concerning whether
the license or permit should be suspended or revoked. The written notice shall
be served on the licensee either personally or by certified mail, restricted
delivery and return receipt requested, no less than 21 days before the hearing.
   (D)   As an alternate remedy to license suspension or revocation by the
city, the city may commence legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction
to force compliance with the license as well as any applicable minimum
standards and/or written plan related to a license and for such other relief as
the court shall deem equitable.
(Prior Code, § 2.188) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.09 HEARING.
   If a hearing is held before the City Council, the licensee shall be given an
opportunity to confront adverse witnesses and present evidence and legal
arguments to the City Council, and may be represented by an attorney. Following
the hearing, the City Council shall decide whether any portion of this chapter
has been or is being violated. If the City Council finds that any portion of
this chapter or any other provision of the city code has been or is being
violated, then the City Council shall decide whether the license should be
suspended or revoked by evaluating the severity of the violation, whether more
than one violation has been established, whether the licensee ignored warnings
that a violation was occurring, the time period that the violation or
violations were in existence and whether there have been prior violations. The
City Council’s decision shall be based on substantial, material and competent
evidence. The decision shall be in writing and shall specify the factual
evidence upon which the decision is based. A copy of the City Council’s written
decision shall be given to the licensee once it is approved by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.189) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.10 FEES; PERMITS.
   The City Council may set fees for usage of the airport and airport property.
These fees shall be listed on a schedule of rates and charges.
(Prior Code, § 2.190) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.11 INSURANCE.
   Each person seeking a license for a commercial activity at the airport
shall, prior to the issuance of the license, furnish the city with copies of
certificates of insurance providing insurance coverage against loss occasioned
by bodily injury or property damage pursuant to the airport’s schedule of
insurances and shall execute an indemnification agreement with the city against
any loss occasioned by bodily injury or property damage associated with the
proposed licensee’s use of the airport. The indemnification agreement shall be
in such form as shall be prescribed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.191) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.12 INSPECTIONS.
   City personnel, including, but not limited to, the City Manager, Airport
Manager, city fire personnel and/or city police officers, shall have the
authority and the duty to make such inspections of a person’s use of the
airport, as well as buildings and facilities at the airport used by any person,
to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.192) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
USE REGULATIONS
§ 95.25 VEHICLE OPERATION AND PARKING.
   (A)   A person who operates a motor vehicle within the boundaries of the
airport shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   A person shall only operate a motor vehicle in locations designated
by the Airport Manager and such operation of a motor vehicle shall not
interfere with aircraft movement and shall not create hazardous conditions to
persons, property or airport operations.
      (2)   A person shall not operate a snowmobile and/or a recreational or
off-road vehicle within the airport boundaries without the written approval of
the Airport Manager.
   (B)   A person who parks a motor vehicle within the boundaries of the
airport shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The motor vehicle shall only be parked in locations designated by
the Airport Manager.
      (2)   A parking permit for that motor vehicle shall be issued under
division (B)(4) below and shall not be transferred to any other motor vehicle,
except as authorized in division (B)(5) below.
      (3)   An annual parking permit shall be affixed to the motor vehicle to
which it was issued in the bottom right-hand corner of the front windshield of
that motor vehicle. A six-month, monthly, weekly, overnight and daily (non-
overnight) parking permit shall be hung from the rearview mirror of the motor
vehicle in such a manner that the permit information is visible from the
outside of the motor vehicle; provided, however, any parking permit issued for
a motor vehicle prior to the effective date hereof may remain displayed or
affixed to that motor vehicle in the location designated at the time the permit
was issued. Any subsequent parking permit shall comply with the display and
location requirements of this division (B).
      (4)   The motor vehicle shall only be parked in the parking area
authorized by the parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Parking in
any other area shall be a violation of this chapter.
      (5)   A motor vehicle shall not be parked in the parking area authorized
by the parking permit beyond the time period authorized by such parking permit.
      (6)   A motor vehicle shall not be parked in the designated loading/
unloading zone located adjacent to the south side of the terminal building;
provided, however, a motor vehicle may be temporarily stopped for no more than
ten minutes in the loading/unloading zone for the purpose of picking up or
dropping off passengers or for the purpose of loading or unloading passenger
luggage, if the driver of the motor vehicle remains at all times with the motor
vehicle.
   (C)   A person who desires to park a motor vehicle within the boundaries of
the airport shall apply for and obtain a parking permit for the motor vehicle
prior to the motor vehicle being parked within the boundaries of the airport
and shall pay the fee established pursuant to the schedule of rates and
charges. The application shall be on a form provided by the Airport Manager and
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the registered owner of the motor vehicle and
contact phone number of the registered owner when applying for an annual permit
or a six-month permit. The name and address of the registered owner of the
motor vehicle shall not be required when applying for a monthly, weekly,
overnight or daily (non-overnight) parking permit;
      (2)   Make, model, model year, color and license plate number of the
motor vehicle;
      (3)   Parking area desired, which shall be one of the following:
         (a)   Premium parking area;
         (b)   Daily parking area;
         (c)   Multi-day/overnight/annual permit parking area;
         (d)   Employee parking area; and
         (e)   Overflow/oversized vehicle parking area.
      (4)   The type of parking permit desired, which shall be one of the
following:
         (a)   An annual permit, which shall be valid from April 1 to March 31
of the succeeding year;
         (b)   A six-month permit, which shall be valid for a period of six
months from the date of issuance;
         (c)   A monthly permit, which shall be valid for a period of 30 days
from the date of issuance;
         (d)   A weekly permit, which shall be valid for a period of seven days
from the date of issuance;
         (e)   An overnight permit, which shall be valid until 11:59 p.m. of
the day following the date of issuance; and
         (f)   A daily (non-overnight) permit, which shall be valid until 11:59
p.m. of the day of issuance.
   (D)   After receiving an administratively complete application, the Airport
Manager or Airport Manager’s designee shall issue the requested parking permit
if he or she determines that the applicable fee has been paid and that there is
a parking space available within the parking area desired by the applicant. No
parking permit shall be issued until all information required under division
(C) above is provided.
   (E)   An annual parking permit may be transferred to another motor vehicle
only if all of the following requirements are met.
      (1)   The parking permit that was previously issued shall be surrendered
to the Airport Manager, or his or her designee, prior to a new parking permit
being issued under this division (E).
      (2)   The motor vehicle to which the parking permit will be transferred
shall be registered to a parent, spouse or sibling of the person to whom the
original parking permit was issued, or to a legal dependent of the person to
whom the original parking permit was issued who has a valid driver’s license
and who is claimed as a dependent on the federal income tax return filed by the
person to whom the original parking permit was issued. The person requesting
the transfer shall establish the required relationship of this division (E).
      (3)   The parking permit being transferred shall not have been
transferred more than three previous times.
      (4)   The transferred parking permit shall be affixed to the windshield
of the motor vehicle to which it was transferred as required by division (E)(3)
above.
   (F)   Any parking permit used in violation of this section or obtained
through any fraud or misrepresentation, in addition to the penalty provisions
of §
95.99 of this chapter, shall be subject to revocation by the Airport Manager,
with no refund of any parking permit fee paid. Any such revocation may be
appealed to the City Manager, who shall review the matter anew.
(Prior Code, § 2.193) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.26 BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   Building size and building amenities for a commercial activity, which
is allowed on airport property, are stipulated in the minimum standards. The
city shall own all buildings or structures constructed or placed on airport
property. A person may construct a building or structure on airport property
with permission of the city and as provided in this chapter; provided, however,
the city shall own the building or structure upon the completion of its
construction.
   (B)   In addition, the following shall apply to all buildings or structures
on airport property.
      (1)   The use of all buildings and property on the airport shall be
subject to a lease between the user of the building or building amenities and
the city. The lease shall stipulate the allowable uses, require compliance with
the airport’s minimum standards and contain such other terms and conditions as
the parties shall agree. The lease shall be approved by the City Manager and
approved as to form by the City Attorney.
      (2)   Except as provided herein, the use of private hangars on the
airport shall be limited to storage of aircraft and/or aircraft parts, or other
aeronautical purposes as approved by the City Manager. Storage of other
personal property may be approved by the written consent of the Airport Manager
or City Manager. In its sole discretion, the city may require the lessee to
provide additional taxiways and/or ramp space in front of or adjacent to a
private hangar.
   (C)   Authorization to construct a building on the airport may be issued
after:
      (1)   Detailed building plans and a written plan outlining the intended
use of any associated structure or building have been approved by the Airport
Manager and all such plans shall comply with the Minimum Standards and
generally accepted design and construction practices;
      (2)   Execution of a written lease agreement between the proposed lessee
and the city;
      (3)   Compliance with the city’s schedule of insurances;
      (4)   Payment of appropriate fees pursuant to the schedule of rates and
charges; and
      (5)   Issuance of building permits when so required by the county.
   (D)   The construction of any building or structure shall:
      (1)   Comply with all applicable ordinances of the city if such
ordinances are intended to apply to the airport property;
      (2)   Be located according to the airport’s development plan and approved
by the City Manager;
      (3)   Comply with rules for the construction of buildings or structures
at the Airport which have been prepared by the City Manager; and
      (4)   Be inspected and approved by the county’s Building Inspector and
Airport Manager with respect to applicable building codes and to ensure that
the building complies with the airport’s rules and plans for the building which
were approved by the city.
   (E)   Alterations or additions to existing structures, whether internal or
external, will be considered the same as new construction and, in addition,
shall be owned by the city.
   (F)   All improvements to the property, such as utilities, approaches,
paving, drain tiling and fill dirt will be provided at the lessee’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 2.194) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.27 COMMERCIAL USES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in a commercial activity at the airport without
first obtaining a license from the City Clerk pursuant to the requirements of
this section; provided, however, a person may continue a commercial activity
previously authorized by a written contract with the city until such contract
expires or is terminated pursuant to its terms. Thereafter, the person shall be
required to obtain a license pursuant to the requirements of this section. The
City Council shall establish applicable fees through the airport’s schedule of
rates and charges and such fees shall be imposed on an annual basis, on or
about April 1 of each year.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the right to adopt and amend minimum
standards for any commercial activity. A commercial activity shall comply with
all applicable minimum standards during the time that the license is in effect.
Minimum standards may be adopted or amended by resolution or motion of the City
Council.
   (C)   When this chapter requires that a written plan be submitted to the
city as part of an application for a license for a commercial activity and a
license is issued pursuant to that application, the commercial activity shall
comply with the written plan during the time that the license is in effect.
   (D)   A person seeking a license under this section shall submit a complete
application to the Airport Manager on a form provided by the Airport Manager
and pay the required fee. The application shall include all of the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the individual or entity that will be
conducting the commercial activity;
      (2)   The proposed location on the airport where the commercial activity
will be conducted;
      (3)   The proposed route for motor vehicle traffic within the airport for
accessing the commercial activity, including information that the proposed
route will not interfere with the airport’s gate security and safety;
      (4)   Information that establishes that the nature and location of the
proposed commercial activity will not interfere with airport operations;
      (5)   Information that establishes compliance with the minimum standards
applicable to the proposed commercial activity and all other requirements of
this chapter applicable to the proposed commercial activity; and
      (6)   If the proposed commercial activity involves the operation of a
scheduled or unscheduled commercial airline and ticket-purchasing passengers, a
written plan documenting how the applicant will comply with the following
reporting requirements:
         (a)   Filing on a timely, annual basis Form 1800-31 with the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA);
         (b)   Filing on a timely basis any other form or document with the FAA
regarding the enplanement of passengers, take-offs and landings, or any other
aspect of the applicant’s proposed commercial activity which is conducted in
whole or in part at the airport and which is required by the FAA to be filed;
         (c)   Filing on a timely basis any other form or document with the FAA
regarding the enplanement of passengers, take-offs and landings, or any other
aspect of the applicant’s proposed commercial activity which is conducted in
whole or in part at the airport and which is not required by the FAA to be
filed, but which the city requests in writing to be filed with the FAA; and
         (d)   Filing on a timely basis any forms, reports or documents with
the Transportation Security Administration, the Department of Homeland
Security, the FAA and any other local, state or federal agency having
jurisdiction over the applicant or over the applicant’s proposed commercial
activity.
   (E)   After receiving an administratively complete application, the Airport
Manager shall review the application and determine whether the applicable fee
has been paid and whether all of the following applicable licensing
requirements are met for the proposed commercial activity:
      (1)   The commercial activity complies with all of the minimum standards
applicable to that commercial activity and complies with all other requirements
of this chapter applicable to the proposed commercial activity;
      (2)   The nature and location of the commercial activity will not
interfere with airport operations;
      (3)   The route for motor vehicle traffic within the airport for
accessing the commercial activity will not interfere with the airport’s gate
security and safety;
      (4)   If the application is a license renewal, that there are no current
violations of this chapter related to the proposed license; and
      (5)   If this chapter requires the submission of a written plan for any
aspect of the commercial activity, the applicant has reasonably established in
the written plan that there will be compliance with the applicable requirements
of this chapter.
   (F)   If the Airport Manager determines that the applicable fee has been
paid and that all of the applicable licensing requirements contained in this
chapter have been met for the proposed commercial activity, then the Airport
Manager shall forward the application to the City Clerk, who shall issue the
license for the commercial activity sought within a reasonable time after
receiving the application from the Airport Manager. The City Clerk shall either
mail the issued license to the applicant, the applicant may pick up the issued
license from the City Clerk’s office, or the City Clerk shall forward the
issued license to the Airport Manager, who shall then personally deliver the
issued license to the applicant. Following the issuance of any license under
this section, the City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the issued license as
part of the city’s records.
   (G)   Any license issued prior to March 31 in a calendar year shall remain
in effect until March 31 of that same calendar year. Thereafter, any license
issued shall remain in effect until March 31 of the year following the date of
issuance. A license may be renewed by submitting a renewal application on a
form supplied by the Airport Manager and, if renewal is approved, the payment
of the applicable renewal fee established through the airport’s schedule of
rates and charges. A renewal license shall meet all standards and requirements
that are applicable to the initial issuance of a similar license.
   (H)   A person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter
shall display that license to the Airport Manager upon request of the Airport
Manager. However, the issued license shall not be required to be displayed at
the site of the commercial activity.
   (I)   A licensee shall at all times conduct the commercial activity
authorized by the license in full compliance with all of the requirements of
this chapter and shall not violate any provision of this chapter. Failure of
the licensee to comply with this division (I) shall subject the licensee to
suspension or revocation of the license.
   (J)   A copy of any form, report or document filed by the licensee with the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Transportation Security Administration,
the Department of Homeland Security and any other local, state or federal
agency having jurisdiction over the licensee or over the licensee’s commercial
activity shall be provided to the Airport Manager within seven days after it
has been filed with the applicable agency. The failure of the licensee to
comply with this division (J) shall be a violation of license requirements for
which the license may be suspended or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 2.195) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.28 ON-AIRPORT RESIDENCES.
   Residential dwellings are prohibited on airport property, and through-the-
fence access agreements shall not be granted to adjacent property owners of
residential dwellings. An existing through-the-fence access agreement shall be
allowed to remain until title to the property which benefits from the access
agreement is conveyed to a new owner.
(Prior Code, § 2.196) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.29 AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   All based aircraft shall be registered with the Airport Manager.
   (B)   Transient aircraft using the terminal parking area may park only in
designated areas. The terminal parking area directly in front of the terminal
building is closed to overnight parking, except by prior arrangement with the
Airport Manager.
   (C)   A person who places an aircraft on the ramp at the airport outside of
a private hanger shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The person shall locate the aircraft only on the airport ramp and
only in locations designated by the Airport Manager.
      (2)   The person shall chock and/or tie down the aircraft when the
aircraft is located on the ramp and shall maintain such chocking and/or tie
down of the aircraft at all times when the aircraft is located on the ramp.
      (3)   If an aircraft is placed on the ramp at the airport outside of a
private hanger, the person shall obtain a ramp permit for the aircraft, which
shall be one of the following:
         (a)   An annual permit, which shall be valid from April 1 to March 31
of the succeeding year;
         (b)   A monthly permit, which shall be valid for a period of 30 days
from the date of issuance;
         (c)   A weekly permit, which shall be valid for a period of seven days
from the date of issuance; or
         (d)   An overnight permit, which shall be valid until 11:59 p.m. of
the day following the date of issuance.
      (4)   The person shall not keep the aircraft on the ramp beyond the time
period authorized by the ramp permit obtained pursuant to division (C)(3)
above.
      (5)   The person shall pay to the city the applicable ramp permit fees as
specified by the terms and conditions in the airport’s schedule of rates and
charges.
   (D)   Except as may be otherwise provided in a hanger lease or contract with
the city, a person who lands an aircraft at the airport shall pay a landing fee
for each landing at the airport as specified by the terms and conditions in the
airport’s schedule of rates and charges; provided, however, if a person lands
the same aircraft only once in a 24-hour period and obtains a daily ramp
permit, then the landing fee and daily ramp permit fee shall be combined into
one fee as specified by the terms and conditions in the airport’s schedule of
rates and charges; provided further that, if the person obtains and pays the
applicable fee for an annual ramp permit, all landing fees shall be deemed paid
for the year in which the annual ramp permit remains valid.
(Prior Code, § 2.197) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.30 FIRE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All persons shall comply with “No Smoking”, “Fire Lane” and other
regulatory signs.
   (B)   No airplane shall be fueled or drained of fuel while the engine is
running or while in a hangar or other enclosed space.
   (C)   The cleaning of engines or other parts of an airplane within an
enclosure shall be with non-flammable liquids. If volatile, flammable liquids
are employed, cleaning operations shall be carried on in the open air.
   (D)   Floors shall be kept free and clean from oil at all times. The use of
volatile or flammable substances for the cleaning of floors is prohibited.
   (E)   Owners and tenants of hangars or other structures shall be responsible
for prompt removal of oily waste, rags and other rubbish, such as empty oil,
paint and varnish cans, bottles and the like, which shall not be allowed to
accumulate.
   (F)   No rubbish, paper or debris of any kind shall be permitted to be
stored in or about the hangars or other structures.
   (G)   The storage of gasoline, kerosene or other flammable liquids including
those used in connection with the process of doping shall be in compliance with
the regulations of the National Fire Prevention Association and all future
amendments of those regulations for containers for flammable liquids and the
storage of such containers.
   (H)   Any person responsible for the spillage or dripping of fuels or
flammable liquids which may be unsightly or detrimental to the pavement or to
the environment shall ensure the immediate removal of the material. The
responsibility for removal shall be assumed by the operator of the equipment
causing the spillage or by the tenant or licensee responsible for the spillage.
Any spillage or dripping of fuels, flammable liquids, acids or the like shall
be reported to the Airport Manager’s office immediately.
   (I)   No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be disposed of
or dumped in drains, on the ramp areas, catch basins or ditches, or elsewhere
on the airport.
   (J)   No person shall start an aircraft engine or run an aircraft engine in
any hangar or building at the airport without the permission of the Airport
Manager. This includes, but is not limited to, the running of an aircraft
engine to enter or exit a hangar.
(Prior Code, § 2.198) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.31 PERSONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall impede the operation of aircraft or any authorized
operation or activity at the airport.
   (B)   No person shall cause objects to be placed on any runway or taxiway
that could cause aircraft engine damage or take any other action that is a
danger to aircraft or aircraft engines.
   (C)   A person shall obey all posted signs, fences and barricades
prohibiting entry upon restricted areas or governing his or her activities and
demeanor while at the airport.
   (D)   No person shall use a closed or secure gate without closing or
securing the gate after that person’s use.
   (E)   No person shall enter within the airport boundaries without good
cause. GOOD CAUSE shall include, but is not limited to: being a passenger of a
plane located on the airport; a pilot of a plane located on the airport; a
visitor of an aircraft owner, tenant, business or operator of an aircraft; a
visitor or invitee of airport and/or city administration; an owner, operator or
employee of a business at the airport; the customer or business invitee of a
business at the airport; a person having a contractual relationship with the
city involving airport property and the person’s presence is in the performance
of that contract; or a person otherwise authorized by laws or regulations of
the city, state or federal government.
   (F)   No person shall hunt or discharge a firearm on airport property
without written permission from the airport Manager, except for law enforcement
personnel in the performance of their duties.
   (G)   No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse or other forms of
trash on the premises of the airport, except in receptacles provided for such
purposes, nor use a restroom other than in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (H)   No person shall operate or release any model aircraft, rocket, kite,
balloon or other similar contrivance at or upon the airport without the prior
approval of the Airport Manager. Approval shall be granted only if the proposed
activity will not create a risk of harm to persons or property at the airport
or will disrupt airport operations. Upon approval of the Airport Manager, a
notice to airmen shall be issued prior to commencement of the approved
activity.
   (I)   No person shall enter the terminal building or field area of the
airport with a pet or other animal unless the animal is caged or on a leash and
under an authorized person’s control.
   (J)   No person may smoke on any airport apron or ramp, in any hangar or in
any aircraft on airport property, on any observation deck, or in any other
place on airport property where smoking is prohibited by means of posted signs
indicating such prohibition.
   (K)   No person shall travel upon the premises of the airport other than on
roads or walkways, except when authorized by the Airport Manager for a purpose
related to the operation, maintenance or use of the airport.
   (L)   No person shall solicit money or anything of value on the airport for
any non-aeronautical commercial activity, unless otherwise approved by the
Airport Manager, City Manager or City Council.
   (M)   Except as provided in this division (M), air camping and camping
within the airport is prohibited. The Airport Manager may authorize air camping
at certain times within specific areas and under rules established by the
Airport Manager. A fee for air camping may be charged pursuant to the airport’s
schedule of rates and charges. The Airport Manager is authorized to revoke
permission for a person to air camp for a violation of this chapter, the
failure to pay a required fee or for a violation of air camping rules. Sections
95.08 and 95.09 of this chapter shall not apply to the revocation of permission
for air camping.
   (N)   No person shall parachute at or upon the airport without prior notice
to the Airport Manager.
   (O)   No person shall parachute at a time which creates an unreasonable risk
of harm to persons or property. A notice to airmen shall be issued prior to the
commencement of the parachuting.
   (P)   No person shall obtain fuel for his, her or its aircraft from any
person or entity other than the city, except when the fuel is dispensed by a
self-fueling operator in full compliance with all regulations of this chapter
applicable to that self-fueling operator.
   (Q)   A pilot shall escort all passengers to and from the pilot’s aircraft.
This requirement shall not apply to a licensee who has a written plan that has
been approved by the city and which provides for a different method of
implementing passenger safety.
(Prior Code, § 2.199) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
SELF-FUELING OPERATIONS
§ 95.45 STORAGE.
   The city requires that all aviation fuels at the Municipal Airport be stored
within a common fuel farm for environmental, safety and quality control
reasons. Self-fueling operators shall store all aviation fuels in the city’s
fuel storage system, and pay applicable fees under the schedule of rates and
charges.
(Prior Code, § 2.300) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.46 DISPENSING LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall dispense fuel at the airport without first obtaining a
self-fueling license from the City Manager.
   (B)   Dispensing of aviation fuel under a fuel dispensing license shall be
consistent with the minimum standards for the Municipal Airport.
   (C)   No person shall dispense fuel at the airport unless and until
financial assurances have been provided as contained in the airport’s minimum
standards.
(Prior Code, § 2.301) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.47 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Manager, or a designee of the City Manager, shall issue the self-
fueling license after the City Manager has determined that there will be
compliance with the applicable minimum standards and that the financial
assurances as described in the minimum standards have been met.
(Prior Code, § 2.302) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.48 NON-CITY FUEL SALES; FUELING THIRD-PARTY AIRCRAFT PROHIBITED.
   The city is the exclusive and proprietary provider of retail aviation fuels
at the airport. The sale of retail fuel by any person, including, but not
limited to, a self-fueling operator, is prohibited. The fueling of third-party
aircraft by any person, including, but not limited to, a self-fueling operator,
is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 2.303) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.49 FEES.
   The fee for the self-fueling license shall be contained in the schedule of
rates and charges. The fee shall be of an amount sufficient to reimburse the
city for all administrative costs associated with the issuance of the license.
Administrative costs include, but are not limited to, legal fees and consultant
fees relating to the review of documents and the issuance of the license.
Licensee shall also pay fuel flowage fees and fuel system use fees contained in
the schedule of rates and charges and must be current on the payment of all
fees to maintain a self-fueling license.
(Prior Code, § 2.304) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.50 LICENSE; TERM.
   The self-fueling license shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance.
(Prior Code, § 2.305) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (E), (F) and (G) below, any person who
violates any provision of this chapter, including a person who engages in a
commercial activity without a license for the commercial activity from the
city, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined in
Public Act 126 of 1994, amending Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§
600.101 through 600.9939, and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.
In addition to the fine, the city may, in a municipal civil infraction
proceeding, seek from the court an order imposing costs of prosecution, not to
exceed $500, and an enforcement order revoking the license and expelling the
commercial activity from the airport. Each day this chapter is violated shall
be considered as a separate violation.
   (B)   Officers of the city’s Police Department are hereby designated as the
authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations
directing alleged violators of this chapter to appear in court.
   (C)   A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
or a nuisance per se and is declared to be detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (D)   In addition to enforcing this chapter through the use of a municipal
civil infraction proceeding, the city may initiate proceedings in the circuit
court to abate or eliminate the nuisance per se or any other violation of this
chapter, or may suspend or revoke a commercial activity license as provided in
this chapter.
   (E)   Any person who violates §
95.25 of this chapter shall be responsible for a civil infraction, shall be
issued notice of violation pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, and shall be subject to all procedures,
including the evidentiary presumption, related to parking violations contained
in the state’s Motor Vehicle Code, adopted by reference in §
70.01(B) of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Any person who violates §
95.31(E) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 and/or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days.
   (G)   A person who has a commercial activity license and who fails to comply
with a written plan that was submitted as part of the license application
process or the applicable minimum standards shall not be subject to a municipal
civil infraction or misdemeanor penalty pursuant to this section for a
violation of the written plan or the applicable minimum standards, but shall be
subject to any other remedy provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.200) (Ord. 755, passed 2-20-2012)
CHAPTER 96: MASS GATHERINGS
Section
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   License
   
96.03   Nuisance per se
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Charlevoix.
   CITY MANAGER. The person appointed by the city pursuant of Art. III, § 3.3,
of the City Charter, or his or her designee.
   LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter.
   MASS GATHERING. An organized outdoor event of 2,000 people or more held at a
single location on either public or private land within the city.
   SPONSOR. Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to be
organized, promoted or conducted a mass gathering.
(Prior Code, § 6.91) (Ord. 598, passed 5-4-1992; Ord. 599, passed 8-17-1992;
Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 96.02 LICENSE.
   (A)   A person shall not sponsor, maintain, conduct, promote or permit a
mass gathering in the city without first obtaining a license from the city for
each mass gathering
   (B)   No later than 20 days before the proposed mass gathering, the sponsor
(s) of the mass gathering shall submit in writing an application for a mass
gathering license to the City Manager on such forms and in such manner as the
City Manager prescribes. The application shall contain:
      (1)   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the proposed
mass gathering sponsor(s);
      (2)   The date(s) and estimated hours of the proposed mass gathering;
      (3)   A description of the kind, character and type of mass gathering
proposed;
      (4)   The address of location of the site at which the proposed mass
gathering will be held, including a written statement from the property owner
consenting to the use of his or her property for the proposed mass gathering;
and
      (5)   An estimate of the maximum number of people expected to attend the
proposed mass gathering.
   (C)   Each application for a mass gathering license shall be accompanied by
a non-refundable fee in an amount established, from time to time, by the City
Council by resolution.
   (D)   After receiving an application for a mass gathering license and the
appropriate fee, the City Manager shall consider the information contained in
the application and shall, if necessary, investigate or cause to be
investigated the circumstances surrounding the proposed mass gathering, the
number of people anticipated to attend, whether there is a conflict with other
uses of the site, the increased demands on the city’s Police and Fire
Department resources and the sponsor’s plans to provide adequate food and water
facilities, bathroom facilities, disposal of solid waste and garbage and
vehicle parking and access to the site. Within 15 days after receiving an
application for a mass gathering license, the City Manager shall approve the
application and issue the mass gathering license, unless after considering the
above factors, he or she finds by a preponderance of the evidence that holding
the mass gathering as proposed in the application would be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare of the city. If the City Manager denies a
mass gathering license, he or she shall send written notice of the denial,
including the reasons for the denial, to the sponsor(s) by certified mail
within five days of the denial decision.
(Prior Code, § 6.92) (Ord. 598, passed 5-4-1992; Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.03 NUISANCE PER SE.
   A violation of §
96.03(A) of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and any
action and violation thereof may be immediately enjoined in the county’s
Circuit Court. Enforcement of this section shall not preclude enforcement for
violation of this chapter pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6.93) (Ord. 598, passed 5-4-1992; Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000;
Ord. 767, passed 9-15-2014)
CHAPTER 97: PROHIBITION OF RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
97.01   Title
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   No marihuana establishments
   
97.04   Violations and penalties
§ 97.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Charlevoix
Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments Ordinance.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated
Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. § 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 97.03 NO MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The City of Charlevoix hereby prohibits all marihuana establishments within
the boundaries of the city pursuant to Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §
333.27951, et seq., as may be amended.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 97.04 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who disobeys neglects or refuses to comply with any
provision of this chapter or who causes allows or consents to any of the same
shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this chapter. A
violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for which
the fines shall not be less than $100 nor more than $500, in the discretion of
the court. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to the rights of the
city to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate and proper remedies.
Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses,
direct and indirect, which the city incurs in connection with the municipal
civil infraction.
   (C)   Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (D)   In addition, the city may seek injunctive relief against persons
alleged to be in violation of this chapter, and such other relief as may be
provided by law.
   (E)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer of the city or by such other person(s) as designated by the
City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
CHAPTER 98: SMOKE FREE AREAS
Section
   
98.01   Purpose
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Smoking prohibited as provided in state law
   
98.04   Outside smoking
   
98.05   Smoking prohibited in public parks or city property
   
98.06   Violations and penalties
§ 98.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and welfare by
regulating smoking in work sites, public places and certain other areas.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in PA 188 of
2009, M.C.L.A. § 333.12601 et seq., as may be amended, except that the
following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   E-CIGARETTE. An electronic, noncombustible device that employs a heating
element, power source, electronic circuit, battery, or other electronic,
chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form, or marihuana/TCH in
any form, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. This term shall
include any device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an
e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vaporizer, or under any other such product name
or descriptor.
   SMOKING or SMOKE. The burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any
other matter or substance that contains a tobacco product or a marihuana
product, and also includes the use of an e-cigarette to produce vapor from
nicotine in a solution or other form, or marihuana/TCH in any form.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 98.03 SMOKING PROHIBITED AS PROVIDED IN STATE LAW.
   Smoking is prohibited in any workplace and any food service establishment in
the City of Charlevoix as provided in the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-Free Air Law, PA
188 of 2009, M.C.L.A. § 333.12601 et seq., as may be amended. A workplace is a
site employing at least one person. A food service establishment is any place
with a license to serve food or beverages. This law covers public places,
including, but not limited to, restaurants, bars, shopping malls, bowling
alleys, concert halls, arenas, museums, mechanic shops, health facilities,
nursing homes, education facilities, and child care centers. The terms and
conditions of the Smoke-Free Air Law are adopted herein by reference except
that, to the extent that this chapter is more restrictive than the Smoke-Free
Air Law, the terms of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 98.04 OUTSIDE SMOKING.
   Smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of entrances, open windows and
ventilation systems of all places where smoking is otherwise prohibited by this
chapter. This prohibition shall not apply to persons who pass by such an
entrance, open window, or ventilation system while traveling on a public street
or sidewalk.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 98.05 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS OR CITY PROPERTY.
   A person shall not smoke in any park, designated beach area, or property
owned or operated by the City. All parks, City property, and designated beach
areas owned or operated by the City shall be so posted. This prohibition shall
not apply to persons while traveling on a public street or sidewalk.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
§ 98.06 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A person who violates or fails to comply with this section shall be subject
to any one or more of the following:
   (A)   Being asked to stop smoking or using tobacco products;
   (B)   Being asked to leave the premises;
   (C)   Responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in this Code.
(Ord. 796, passed 1-7-2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSING; FEES AND BONDS
      
111.   SOLICITORS AND TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
      
112.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
114.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING; FEES AND BONDS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Multiple businesses
   
110.03   State-licensed businesses
   
110.04   License application
   
110.05   License year
   
110.06   Conditions for issuance
   
110.07   Where certification required
   
110.08   Health Officer’s certificate
   
110.09   Fire Chief’s certificate
   
110.10   Police Chief’s certificate
   
110.11   Building Inspector’s certificate
   
110.12   Bonds
   
110.13   Renewing license; late renewals
   
110.14   Right to issuance
   
110.15   Fees; when paid
   
110.16   Exempt persons
   
110.17   Suspension or revocation; transferability; misuse
   
110.18   “Cause” defined
   
110.19   Exhibition of license
Fees and Bonds
   
110.30   Schedules established
   
110.31   Fees for licenses
   
110.32   Schedule A
   
110.33   Schedule B
   
110.34   Schedule C
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying
on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license is
required by any provision of this business title without first obtaining a
license from the city in the manner provided for in this chapter. Any person
duly licensed on the effective date of this business title shall be deemed
licensed hereunder for the balance of the current license year.
(Prior Code, § 7.1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.
   The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or
carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within
itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which
are required by this business title to be licensed, shall not relieve the
person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing
individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or
privilege, except as specifically provided elsewhere in this business title.
(Prior Code, § 7.2)
§ 110.03 STATE-LICENSED BUSINESSES.
   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the
state to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade,
profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the
necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or
permit is required by this business title.
(Prior Code, § 7.3)
§ 110.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this business title, every person
required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct
or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make
application for said license to the City Clerk upon forms provided by the City
Clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts, as may be required
for, or applicable to, the granting of such license.
   (B)   No person shall make any false statement or representation in
connection with any application for a license under this business title.
(Prior Code, § 7.4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.05 LICENSE YEAR.
   Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain licenses, the license year
shall begin June 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on May 31 of
the following year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the
license year at the full license fee; except that, after December 1, the fee
for any license shall be one-half the full amount, if the full fee is $10 or
more. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses
issued for a period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all
cases where the provisions of this business title permit the issuance of
licenses for periods of less than one year, the effective date of such licenses
shall commence with the date of issuance thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7.5)
§ 110.06 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   No license or permit required by this business title shall be issued
to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state, until
such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof
that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid.
   (B)   No license shall be granted to any applicant therefor until such
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this business title
applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which
application for license is made, nor unless that applicant agrees in writing to
permit inspection of the licensed premises at reasonable hours by authorized
officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.6)
§ 110.07 WHERE CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the
city is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification is
made.
(Prior Code, § 7.7)
§ 110.08 HEALTH OFFICER’S CERTIFICATE.
   In all cases where the certification of the Health Officer is required prior
to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such certification shall be
based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making
application and the premises in which he or she proposes to conduct or is
conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the
sanitary requirements of the state and of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.8)
§ 110.09 FIRE CHIEF’S CERTIFICATE.
   In all cases where the certification of the Fire Chief is required prior to
the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such certification shall be
based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the
person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting
the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire
regulations of the state and of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.9)
§ 110.10 POLICE CHIEF’S CERTIFICATE.
   In all cases where the certification of the Chief of Police is required
prior to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such certification
shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such
license is of good moral character.
(Prior Code, § 7.10)
§ 110.11 BUILDING INSPECTOR’S CERTIFICATE.
   In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or
privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall
not be issued until the Building Inspector shall certify that the proposed use
is not prohibited by
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances or other zoning regulations of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.11)
§ 110.12 BONDS.
   (A)   Where the provisions of this business title require that the applicant
for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an
amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer or, where the amount thereof
is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in §
110.31 of this chapter, in the amount so required; the form of such bond shall
be acceptable to the City Attorney.
   (B)   In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish
one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same
protection as called for in any such bond; any such policies of insurance shall
be approved as to substance by the city official issuing said license or permit
and as to form by the City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 7.12)
§ 110.13 RENEWING LICENSE; LATE RENEWALS.
   (A)   All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time
said fees shall be due, shall be paid as “late fees” with an additional 25% of
the license fee required for such licenses under the provisions of §
110.31 of this chapter for the first 15 days that such license fee remains
unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such
licenses under §
110.31 of this chapter, plus 50% of such fee.
(Prior Code, § 7.13)
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in this business title, an application for
renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original
application.
(Prior Code, § 7.19)
§ 110.14 RIGHT TO ISSUANCE.
   If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the
city, as provided in this business title, said license shall be granted and
shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license.
(Prior Code, § 7.14)
§ 110.15 FEES; WHEN PAID.
   The fee required by this business title for any license or permit shall be
paid at the office of the issuing authority prescribed in this business title
upon or before the granting of said license or permit.
(Prior Code, § 7.15)
§ 110.16 EXEMPT PERSONS.
   (A)   No license shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by
state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of
this business title.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons
licenses which are clearly marked as to said exemption and the reason therefor.
(Prior Code, § 7.16)
§ 110.17 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; TRANSFERABILITY; MISUSE.
   (A)   (1)   Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the City
Manager for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or
revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right
to a hearing before the Council on any such action of the City Manager;
provided, a written request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within five
days after receipt of said notice of such suspension. The Council may confirm
such suspension or revoke or reinstate such license. The action taken by the
Council shall be final.
      (2)   Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee
therefor shall not be refunded.
(Prior Code, § 7.17)
   (B)   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this business
title shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of
this business title. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically
authorized by the provisions of this business title, transfer or attempt to
transfer his or her license or permit to another, nor shall he or she make any
improper use of the same.
(Prior Code, § 7.23)
   (C)   In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof,
any attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his or her license or permit
to another, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this business
title, or to use the same improperly shall be void and result in the automatic
revocation of such license or permit.
(Prior Code, § 7.24)
§ 110.18 “CAUSE” DEFINED.
   The term CAUSE, as used in this subchapter, shall include the doing or
omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with
any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is
granted under the provisions of this business title, or upon any premises or
facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is:
   (A)   Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public;
   (B)   Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature;
   (C)   Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; or
   (D)   Forbidden by the provisions of this business title or any duly
established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession,
business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted.
(Prior Code, § 7.18)
§ 110.19 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter upon his or her person at all times when
engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession,
business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that, where
such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried
on at a fixed place or establishment, said license shall be exhibited at all
times in some conspicuous place in his or her place of business. Every licensee
shall produce his or her license for examination when applying for a renewal
thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person
representing the issuing authority.
(Prior Code, § 7.20)
   (B)   No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or
mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this business title
such tags or stickers as are furnished by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7.21)
   (C)   No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a
duplicate has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 7.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
FEES AND BONDS
§ 110.30 SCHEDULES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The fee required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be
posted, or insurance required to be carried, to obtain any license to engage in
the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or
privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this business
title shall be as hereinafter provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she first
pays to the City Clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence of insurance
coverage in the amount required for the type of license desired.
(Prior Code, § 7.31)
§ 110.31 FEES FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Fees for licenses shall be as prescribed in the following sections of
this subchapter under the business, trade, occupation or privilege to be
licensed.
   (B)   Bonds or insurance coverage, where required, shall be in the amounts
listed beneath the license fee prescribed for such business.
(Prior Code, § 7.32)
§ 110.32 SCHEDULE A.
   (A)   (1)   Saddle-horse stables, leasing or letting saddle horses and their
accoutrements, for hire or reward, for each such saddle-horse: $5 per year, or
any part thereof, but not exceeding $50 per stable per year.
      (2)   Restaurant, tea-room, eating house, boarding house, where the same
is conducted for a period of six months, or less, during a license year: $50
per year, or any part thereof.
      (3)   Fruit stand or store, vegetable stand or store, or both fruit and
vegetable stand or store combined, the buying and selling of fruit, vegetables
or other farm products, per year, or any part thereof: the sum of $50.
      (4)   Theater, moving picture house, show-house or other place of
amusement operated for gain or reward: $0.30 per year, or any part thereof, for
each seat in such place to the extent of the full seating capacity of the house
or theater; provided that, this provision shall not apply to a circus,
menagerie or other places of amusement mentioned in Schedule B in §
110.33 of this chapter.
      (5)   Any transient, itinerant or traveling photographer, or other person
or persons, who shall solicit for the making of any kind of post cards, or
other photographs, or solicit for the enlargement of photographs or pictures,
either with or without frames, whether the same is done from house to house, or
from an established place of business, within the city: the sum of $10 per day.
      (6)   Transient traders, defined as any person engaged in any temporary
or transient business, at wholesale or retail, or both wholesale and retail, in
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, not otherwise specifically mentioned
and designated in this subchapter, and who for the purpose of such business,
uses or occupies any store, building, automobile, car, boat, stand or room
(including rooms in hotels or other buildings), for the exhibition or keeping
of such goods, wares and merchandise for sale shall pay to the city as follows,
to wit: where the value of such stock does not exceed $3,000 in value, the sum
of $100 per year or any part thereof; and, where the value of such stock shall
exceed $3,000 in value, the sum of $100, plus the sum of $25 for each
additional $1,000 of value thereof, or any part thereof, in excess of said
$3,000 of value, per year, or any part thereof.
   (B)   Any person engaged in business as a transient trader who has conducted
such business in said city during any part of the next preceding calendar and
has caused the personal property used in the conduct of such business to be
assessed for taxation upon the tax roll of said city for the current calendar
year, under a separate description from other taxable personal property owned
by him or her, shall not be required to pay any fee or obtain any license for
the said business for said year.
(Prior Code, § 7.33)
§ 110.33 SCHEDULE B.
   (A)   Any person acting as an auctioneer for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise in the city, not otherwise designated and provided for in this
subchapter shall pay the sum of $10 per day, for each and every day or portion
of a day he or she may act as an auctioneer.
   (B)   (1)   Any person selling, disposing of or offering for sale in the
city at public auction or to cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered
for sale in said city at public auction any linen, laces, embroideries or
cotton material sold by the yard or made up in any form, whether the same shall
be their own property, or whether they sell, dispose of or offer the same at
public auction or cause, or permit the same to be done as agents or employees
of others, shall secure a license and shall pay to the city the sum of $10 per
day or any portion of a day: provided, however, that, this shall not apply to
judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators, or to sales by and on
behalf of licensed pawn brokers of unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by
law, nor to the sale at public auction of the stock on hand of any person that
shall, for the period of one year last preceding such sale, have been
continuously in business in the city as a retail or wholesale merchant or
linen, laces, embroideries, cotton material or linen and cotton material;
provided further that, such sale at public auction of the stock on hand of such
merchant or merchants shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal
holidays excepted and shall not continue more than 30 days in all within the
period of one year.
      (2)   The applicant for a license shall not be allowed to hold an auction
as in such license provided on any day or at any place other than that set
forth in said application and license. Should the applicant desire to hold two
or more auctions as herein provided at different places on the same day, the
license fee for each place will be the same as herein set forth for one
auction.
   (C)   The occupation, trade or business of a hawker or peddler within the
corporate limits of the city shall secure a license and pay to the city the sum
of $10 per day or any part of a day and for each successive day the sum of $7
per day or any part thereof. A hawker and peddler for the purposes of this
subchapter is defined as follows, to wit: any person who sells or offers for
sale on any of the streets, alleys, wharves or other public places within the
corporate limits of the city, any goods, wares or merchandise, or who travels
from place to place therein, for the purpose of selling or offering for sale
any goods, wares and merchandise by sample or otherwise shall be deemed a
hawker and peddler within the meaning of this subchapter. Nothing contained in
this subchapter shall be construed to prevent any manufacturer, farmer,
mechanic, nursery man or peddler of meat and fish, from selling or offering for
sale his or her own work, catch or production, by sample or otherwise, nor
shall any wholesale merchant be prevented by anything herein contained, from
selling to dealers by sample without license, but no wholesale merchant shall
be allowed to peddle or employ others to peddle goods not of his or her own
manufacture, except as above specified. Any person delivering goods, wares or
merchandise which has been sold by another by sample or otherwise for future
delivery shall be deemed a hawker and peddler within the meaning of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Traveling or other circus, menagerie or circus and menagerie combined,
outdoor exhibition or show, theatrical performance and street carnival, so-
called, to which paid admission is charged, which may operate only upon special
permission from the City Council subject to immediate revocation by said body,
shall pay to the city the sum of money as follows, to wit: if the admission
charge is $0.50 or more per person, the sum of $50 per day; if the admission
charge is $0.35 or less than $0.50, the sum of $35 per day; if the admission
charge is less than $0.35 per person, the sum of $25 per day: provided,
however, that such fee shall be for the first day’s performance, including
matinee, if any. The license fee for any successive day, including a matinee,
if any, shall be one-half of that for the first day’s performance. A DAY shall
mean a full day or part of a day of 24 hours.
   (E)   A bowling alley, box-ball alley, mechanical baseball or ball-throwing
device, music box, juke box, phonograph, pin ball machine, indoor shuffleboard
or any other coin-operated amusement device, shall pay for each bed or device
the sum of $10 per year, or any part thereof.
   (F)   Dealers in buying and/or selling junk, old rubber, hides, old iron or
other metals, antiques and other second hand articles shall pay the sum of $50
per year, or any part thereof.
   (G)   Operators of any beauty parlor or manicuring establishment that is
operated less than six months in any calendar year and is not a part of the
business of duly licensed barber shop shall pay the sum of $25 per year, or any
part thereof.
   (H)   Any person who shall engage in the business of selling popcorn in any
form, peanuts, either fresh or roasted or salted, candy, ice cream or other
articles of confectionery, either from a stall, booth, cart or wagon, or other
vehicle, where the same is conducted and operated for a period of six months or
less during a license year, except for charitable purposes by permission of the
City Council, shall pay the sum of $50 per year, or $10 per day.
   (I)   Public dance hall or pavilion, or public dances held under a tent or
in the open, skating rink or other place of amusement, for hire or gain, and
not otherwise described in the chapter, which may be operated by permission of
the City Council, shall pay the sum of $5 per day.
   (J)   Billiard and pool parlor, or room, or either, operated and conducted
for gain or reward shall pay the sum of $5 for each table, per year or any part
thereof.
   (K)   Any person hauling or bringing into the city, either directly or
indirectly, any goods, wares, merchandise, bread or other baked goods,
provisions, fruit, food products or other personal property with intention of
selling or disposing of the same from any room, store, warehouse, building,
lot, railroad car, vehicle, or in any other manner whatsoever, either at
wholesale or retail, by soliciting orders therefor from house to house or from
store to store or taking orders for the future delivery thereof or otherwise
without a bona fide intention of engaging in the business of selling or
disposing of such goods, wares, merchandise, bread or other baked goods,
provisions, fruit, food products or other personal property in a regularly
established place of business within the city shall pay to the city a sum of
money as follows, to wit:
      (1)   For each day or part of a day less than one week: the sum of $5;
      (2)   For each week under one month: the sum of $15;
      (3)   For each month less than one year, the sum of $25; and
      (4)   For each year the sum of $50: provided, however, that, the
provision of the division (K)(4) shall not apply to any person having a
regularly established place of business within the city and whose stock of
goods, wares, or merchandise has been assessed for taxation and the tax shall
have been paid thereon during the current year, nor to any person selling wood,
fuel or farm products produced by such person, operating or conducting any
business, trade or occupation which has been otherwise designed and defined in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.34)
§ 110.34 SCHEDULE C.
Alarm Systems (
Chapter 112)
   Initial fee       $2.50 x months left in calendar year
   Renewal fee (annua$30
Refuse Collectors (
Chapter 51)
   Annual fee        $10
   Bond              $5,000
Solicitors (
Chapter 111)
                       Fees (established by City Council resolution)
 
(Prior Code, § 7.35) (Ord. 411, passed 8-16-1982)
CHAPTER 111: SOLICITORS AND TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License required
   
111.04   Application for license
   
111.05   Fees required
   
111.06   Exemptions
   
111.07   Investigation and issuance; notice of denial
   
111.08   License expiration
   
111.09   License revocation; appeal
   
111.10   Display of license
   
111.11   Hours of business
   
111.12   Location; sales from vehicle
   
111.13   Solicitors, roadside stands, auctioneers and temporary businesses
   
111.14   Enforcement
   
111.15   Relationship with other chapters
   
111.16   Nuisance per se
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating solicitors, transient
merchants, door-to-door salespersons, roadside stands, street vendors,
auctioneers and other temporary businesses.
(Prior Code, § 7.51)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUCTIONEER. Any person selling, or offering for sale, any goods, wares,
merchandise or services at public auction.
   ROADSIDE STAND or TEMPORARY BUSINESS. Any place at which goods, wares,
merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale, other than from a
permanent structure duly approved for such use.
   SOLICITOR or DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESPERSON. Any person who sells or offers for
sale any goods, wares, merchandise or services by traveling about the city and,
in the course of his or her business, enters upon privately-owned property.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person who sells or offers for sale any goods,
wares, merchandise or services from a permanent structure duly approved for
such use for a period of less than six months, and whose current business was
not listed on the city’s personal or real property tax roll on the preceding
December 31.
(Prior Code, § 7.52)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Solicitors, transient merchants, door-to-door salespersons, roadside
stands, temporary businesses and auctioneers shall not operate within the city
without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Persons selling newspapers, commercial travelers or selling agents
calling upon commercial establishments in the usual course of business, and any
business operating under the auspices of a civic event sanctioned by the city,
shall not be required to obtain a license.
(Prior Code, § 7.53) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Persons required to obtain a license shall apply for it at the office of the
City Clerk. One application shall be made to authorize one or more persons to
solicit within the city; provided that, all such persons identified by such
license application are employed by the same person, firm or corporation. The
content of the application form shall be prescribed by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7.54)
§ 111.05 FEES REQUIRED.
   A license fee, set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid in full
prior to issuance of the license.
(Prior Code, § 7.55)
§ 111.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following persons shall not be required to obtain licenses as
specified herein and shall not be required to pay the fees prescribed herein:
duly authorized solicitors on behalf of any religious organization and any
locally recognized or affiliated non-profit educational, charitable, civic or
religious organization; and any other persons otherwise exempted by law.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall make the final determination regarding
exemptions.
   (C)   Exempt persons or organizations shall be required to register with the
City Clerk for identification purposes when engaging in any activity regulated
by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.56)
§ 111.07 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; NOTICE OF DENIAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a solicitor’s, auctioneer’s or
temporary business license, the City Clerk and the Chief of Police may cause
such investigation of such person’s or persons’ business responsibility or
moral character to be made as they deem necessary for the protection of the
public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character
and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application
shall be denied. If, as a result of the investigation, the character and
business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the City Clerk shall proceed to
issue a license.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep a full record in his or her office of all
licenses issued and shall submit a copy of such record to the Chief of Police.
Within three working days of receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall
either issue to the applicant the requested license or issue a written notice
of denial and the reason therefor. The person whose license has been denied
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within seven days of such
denial.
(Prior Code, § 7.57)
§ 111.08 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire as of
the date listed on the face thereof, such period not to exceed six months from
issuance.
(Prior Code, § 7.58)
§ 111.09 LICENSE REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   (A)   The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any time
by the City Clerk or the Chief of Police, or their duly authorized
representatives, for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or services:
      (3)   Any violation of a city ordinance, including
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances;
      (4)   Conviction of the applicant or other persons acting under the
authority of the applicant’s license or any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
      (5)   Conducting the business permitted under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Within three working days of the revocation of a license, the City
Clerk shall send to the person whose license has been revoked, notice setting
forth specifically the grounds of the revocation. Such notice shall be mailed
to the person to whom the license was issued at the address shown on the
license application.
   (C)   The person whose license has been revoked shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council within seven days of such revocation.
(Prior Code, § 7.59)
§ 111.10 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any person or business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
have the license issued to him or her in his or her immediate possession and
shall display the same upon demand of any duly authorized representative of the
city. Solicitors shall produce their license upon demand by any person.
(Prior Code, § 7.60) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.11 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   No person shall engage in any auction, soliciting or operate any roadside
stand or other temporary business at any place in the city during the period
from 9:00 p.m. until 9:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 7.61) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.12 LOCATION; SALES FROM VEHICLE.
   (A)   Roadside stands and temporary businesses shall comply with the
following locational requirements.
      (1)   Private property. When located upon private property, such stands
or businesses must be located within the Central Business District or a
commercial use district as provided in
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Public rights-of-way. When located within a public right-of-way,
such stands or businesses must, if not continually moving:
         (a)   Be located within or adjacent to the Central Business District
or a commercial use district as provided in
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances;
         (b)   Be at least ten feet from the traveled portion of any drive,
roadway or alley; and
         (c)   Provide at least six feet clearance on all public walks or
pedestrian ways.
      (3)   Public property. When located on public property other than the
public rights-of-way, such stands or businesses shall be permitted at the
discretion of the City Manager under the policy guidance of the City Council.
The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish such additional
programs or requirements it deems fit for the operation or franchising on
public property of any business regulated by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.62)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling about the city doing
business from any vehicle which is self-propelled, propelled by human power or
propelled by any other means to:
      (1)   Operate a vehicle when under the age of 18 years;
      (2)   Double park in any manner;
      (3)   Operate the vehicle backwards in making or attempting to make a
sale;
      (4)   Permit any person to hang on the vehicle;
      (5)   Refuse to remove the vehicle from any street, sidewalk or public
place in the city upon the request of a police officer when, in the opinion of
the police officer, said vehicle is causing traffic congestion;
      (6)   Cry his or her wares in a loud voice or use any noise-producing
device other than a soft chime, and the limit of audibility of his or her voice
or chime shall not be more than 200 feet from the source of such sound; or
      (7)   Make or attempt to make a sale from a side of a vehicle not closest
to the nearest curb or berm.
(Prior Code, § 7.63)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.13 SOLICITORS, ROADSIDE STANDS, AUCTIONEERS AND TEMPORARY BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The City Manager, City Clerk or Chief of Police may place such
reasonable restrictions upon the location, hours, provisions for parking,
ingress or egress or methods of operation of any solicitor, roadside stand,
auctioneer or temporary business licensed under this chapter, as deemed
necessary to protect the general public health, safety or welfare. Such
restrictions may be imposed, modified or withdrawn at the time of licensure or
any point thereafter.
   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish general policies and
guidelines in addition to the provisions of this chapter governing the
location, hours or methods of operation of solicitors, roadside stands,
auctioneers or temporary businesses in general, or any class thereof. Any such
resolution shall not have the effect of invalidating any license already
issued.
(Prior Code, § 7.64)
§ 111.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police and the City Clerk and their duly authorized
representatives shall have the authority to examine all places of business and
persons within the city subject to the provisions of this chapter, to determine
if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this
chapter against any person found to be violating same.
(Prior Code, § 7.65)
§ 111.15 RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER CHAPTERS.
   The terms of this chapter shall in no manner alter the interpretation or
requirements of any other chapter of the city code with the exception that, in
any conflict between this chapter and
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, this chapter shall prevail. Persons
regulated under this chapter shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
city zoning and sign codes. The City Clerk may require evidence of compliance
with such codes prior to issuing a license.
(Prior Code, § 7.66)
§ 111.16 NUISANCE PER SE.
   A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and
any action and violation thereof may be immediately enjoined in the county’s
Circuit Court. Enforcement of this section shall not preclude enforcement for
violation of this chapter pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7.67) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000)
CHAPTER 112: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
112.01   Permit required
   
112.02   Calls to city telephones
   
112.03   Permit fees
   
112.04   Report of systems in use
   
112.05   Change in city number
§ 112.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate, use or maintain any
automatic telephone dialing alarm system without having first applied for a
permit, and being granted same for such system by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 7.101) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02 CALLS TO CITY TELEPHONES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any such telephone
system to call or connect to any city, listed or unlisted, telephone numbers
other than those telephone numbers duly authorized, and designated by the City
Manager and shown on the permit.
(Prior Code, § 7.102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 PERMIT FEES.
   Application for a permit shall be accompanied by the payment of an initial
permit fee of $2.50 for each unexpired month of the calendar year. Annual
renewal fees shall be paid January 1 of each year thereafter in the amount of
$30.
(Prior Code, § 7.103)
§ 112.04 REPORT OF SYSTEMS IN USE.
   Any and all sellers and installers of such automatic dialing telephone alarm
systems shall, each January 1, submit to the city a complete and accurate
report setting forth to the best of knowledge and belief all systems presently
being used within the city, designating the name and address of the owner,
operator or user of said equipment.
(Prior Code, § 7.104)
§ 112.05 CHANGE IN CITY NUMBER.
   At the discretion of the City Manager, authorized and designated telephone
numbers of the city servicing such automatic dialing telephone alarm systems
may be changed from time to time as circumstances warrant, and upon due notice
to persons holding permits such newly authorized and designated telephone
number or numbers shall be the only such municipal or city number, or numbers,
called by such automatic dialing telephone alarm systems.
(Prior Code, § 7.105)
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Legislative intent
   
113.03   License application; new and transfer requiring local approval
   
113.04   Objections to renewal and request for revocation
Redevelopment Liquor License Program
   
113.15   Definitions
   
113.16   License application
   
113.17   Actions of City Clerk, DDA and City Council
   
113.18   Standards for non-preferential approval
   
113.19   Standards for preferential approval
   
113.20   Application fee
   
113.21   Zoning compliance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSE. A liquor license issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership or any other business entity.
   PUBLIC NUDITY. Knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or
for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to,
payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or
anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. PUBLIC NUDITY
does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A woman's breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or
areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding;
      (2)   Material as defined in § 2 of Public Act 343 of 1984, being
M.C.L.A. § 752.362; or
      (3)   Sexually explicit visual material as defined in § 3 of Public Act
33 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 722.673.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any real property or an appurtenance to the real property
which is owned by this state, any municipality of this state, a public agency,
or by a college or university in this state and may include a structure,
enclosure, facility, or complex, including a court, mall, park, or other area,
feature, or element; a PUBLIC PLACE shall also mean a business or an
educational, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, health, or transportation
facility, or institution of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended,
offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.
(Prior Code, § 7.301) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.02 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council acknowledges the difference which the law recognizes
between applications for new licenses and the transfer, renewal or revocation
of existing licenses. This chapter is designed to provide a framework in which
the City Council can decide whether to approve or deny an application for a new
license or an application to transfer an existing license. This framework, when
followed, will show a reviewing court that the City Council's discretion was
not exercised arbitrarily or capriciously. The City Council recognizes that the
issuance or denial of a license can be controversial and that litigation over
the City Council's decision can easily result.
   (B)   The regulation of licenses and their impact on the land use goals of
the city are legislative decisions. The voters and legislative process are the
methods which should be used to alter legislative decisions as long as the
legislative decisions are not made in an arbitrary and capricious manner. It is
hoped that a reviewing court will respect the function of the City Council as
well as the electoral process in evaluating the actions of the City Council.
   (C)   Sections of this chapter dealing with public nudity are intended to
address the city's recognition that public nudity in areas in which alcohol is
being consumed can create significant negative secondary effects. Such sections
are intended to regulate and minimize those negative secondary effects and to
effectuate the city's definition of public nudity, and are not intended to
specifically regulate or inhibit any activity protected by the First Amendment.
   (D)   The city acknowledges that existing licensees have property rights in
those licenses. Thus, for the transfer of existing licenses the city has
adopted with modification certain requirements recommended by the Michigan
Townships Association. For the renewal or revocation of existing licenses, the
city has adopted a system in this chapter to meet procedural due process
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 7.302) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.03 LICENSE APPLICATION; NEW AND TRANSFER REQUIRING LOCAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Application. Applications shall be required for a new license or for
transfers of existing licenses requiring local approval under the Michigan
Liquor Control Code. Applications shall be made to the City Council in writing,
signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent
thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and
shall contain the following statements and information:
      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; or, in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a
majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or
his/her nominee, the name and address of such person;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his/her place of birth, and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;
      (3)   The character of the business of the applicant including a
description of what services will be provided to patrons and how intoxicating
liquor will be offered in conjunction with those services. In the case of a
corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall also be provided;
      (4)   The length of time the applicant has been in business of that
character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its articles of
incorporation were approved by the state;
      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (6)   A statement whether the applicant has made an application for a
similar or other license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of that application;
      (7)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or the laws of the State of Michigan;
      (8)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the State of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the city in
the conduct of its business;
      (9)   A statement as to whether the applicant will offer entertainment at
the licensed premises, and a description of the kind(s) of entertainment to be
offered. The statement will address whether any entertainment will include
public nudity;
      (10)   The application shall be accompanied by building and site plans
showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific
areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate
off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where
appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control; and
      (11)   A copy of all financial information and documents provided to the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission investigator regarding financial
responsibility.
   (B)   Approval standard for new license or license transfer requiring local
approval. In determining whether a new license should be issued or an existing
license should be transferred, the City Council shall consider the following
factors:
      (1)   Whether the applicant, or if a partnership or corporation any
member of the partnership or corporation, has been denied a license in the past
seven years and the reasons for the denial;
      (2)   Whether the application is complete and contains all of the
information required by this chapter;
      (3)   Whether the application shows compliance with applicable city
ordinances regarding off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities
and landscaping/screening and, additionally, noise control;
      (4)   The impact of the proposed license and associated business on the
occupants and owners of adjoining properties;
      (5)   Whether the proposed license and associated business will adversely
affect traffic safety;
      (6)   Accessibility to the sight from abutting roads;
      (7)   The distance from public or private schools for minors; and
      (8)   Whether the business will cause noise which would so that public or
private land will be adversely affected.
   (C)   Requirements for license; new and transfers requiring local approval.
Regardless of the City Council's evaluation of the approval standards, no
license shall be issued to:
      (1)   A person whose license, under this chapter, has been revoked for
cause;
      (2)   A person who, at the time of the application or renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
      (3)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the
license is issued, or to a person, corporation or co-partnership that does not
have sufficient financial assets to carry on or maintain the business;
      (4)   A person on whose premises there exists a violation of the
applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable
zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations, or any other
applicable city ordinance;
      (5)   A person whose application proposes a use which would be in
violation of any city zoning or police power ordinance, or state or federal
law;
      (6)   A person in situations where there are delinquent unpaid real
estate taxes and/or personal property taxes relating to the real estate or
business which has been used, is used or will be used in conjunction with the
license;
      (7)   A person where it is determined by a majority of the City Council
that the premises for which the license has been requested do not or will not
within six months after commencement of operations, have adequate off-street
parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise, or nuisance
control or where a nuisance does or will exist; or
      (8)   A person whose licensing activity will expand or intensify a non-
conforming use under the city zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Term of license. Approval of a license shall continue for as long as
the Michigan Liquor Control Commission license continues subject to periodic
review by the City Council regarding continued compliance with the regulations
of this chapter and any conditions of approval. Approval of a license shall be
on the condition that any necessary remodeling or new construction for the use
of the license shall be commenced within six months of the action of the City
Council or the Michigan Liquor Control Commission approving such license,
whichever last occurs. Any delay in the completion of such remodeling or
construction may subject the license to revocation.
   (E)   Reservation of authority. No applicant for a license has the right to
the issuance of such a license to him, her or it, and the City Council reserves
the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall
be entitled to the issuance of such license. If an application is incomplete,
the license may be denied without a consideration of the merits of the
application.
   (F)   License hearing. The City Council may act on an application for a new
license or the transfer of an existing license at any regular or special
meeting. The City Council may hold a public hearing on any application when it
is determined to be in the public interest. Following action on an application,
the City Council shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its
findings and determination.
(Prior Code, § 7.303) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.04 OBJECTIONS TO RENEWAL AND REQUEST FOR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Before filing an objection to the renewal or a request for the
revocation of a license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the City
Council shall serve a notice of hearing on the license holder. This notice of
hearing shall be served by first class mail, not less than ten days prior to
the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain the following:
         (a)   Notice of proposed action;
         (b)   Reasons for the proposed action;
         (c)   Date, time and place of the hearing; and
         (d)   A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony
and question adverse witnesses.
      (2)   Following the hearing, the City Council shall submit to the license
holder and the Commission, a written statement of its findings and
determination. An objection to an application for renewal must be forwarded to
the Michigan Liquor Control Commission at least 30 days prior to the expiration
of the license.
   (B)   Criteria for non-renewal or revocation. The City Council shall
recommend non-renewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it
that based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing either
of the following exists:
      (1)   Violation of any of the requirements on licenses set forth in §
113.03(C), (1) through (8) above; or
      (2)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 7.304) (Ord. 661, passed 4-1-2000; Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013;
Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
REDEVELOPMENT LIQUOR LICENSE PROGRAM
§ 113.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA). The Authority created by and described
in §
32.070 et seq of the city code.
   REAL PROPERTY INTEREST. A legally recognized right in land and buildings on
that land and may be established by a deed, lease, land contract, contingent
sale, contingent lease, or similar documentation.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. Land and buildings located within the boundaries
of the DDA, which are described in §
32.075 of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.16 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Applications for city approval of a redevelopment liquor license, as
authorized by Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L.A. § 436.1521a(1)(b), as
amended, may be submitted to the City Clerk for real property located within
the redevelopment project area. The application fee shall be paid at the time
of the filing of the application. The application shall contain or be
accompanied by the following:
   (A)   If the applicant is not the owner, the applicant shall include written
approval by the owner for the submission of the application;
   (B)   The address of the real property at which the license will be used;
   (C)   Documentation whether the applicant has a real property interest in
the real property with which the license will be used;
   (D)   Documentation showing that at least $75,000 has been expended for the
rehabilitation or restoration of the building that will house the licensed
premises, or which makes a commitment for a capital investment of at least
$75,000 which will be expended prior to the issuance of the license;
   (E)   Documentation of attempts to purchase a readily available escrowed or
quota on-premise license within the City of Charlevoix, and why such license
was not reasonably available;
   (F)   Documentation regarding the type of business with which the license
will be used;
   (G)   The seating capacity of business with which the license will be used;
and
   (H)   Additional information or documentation that will show whether the
application complies with the standards contained in §
113.03(A) and §
113.17 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.17 ACTIONS OF CITY CLERK, DDA AND CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Clerk shall determine whether the application is complete. If the
application is complete and the application fee has been paid, the application
shall be forwarded to the executive director of the Downtown Development
Authority (DDA) for a written recommendation by the DDA Board regarding whether
the application meets the standards of the city code for the issuance of the
redevelopment liquor license and the reasons for DDA's recommendation. The DDA
shall have 30 days from the submission of the application to its executive
director to make its recommendation to the City Council or this requirement of
a recommendation from the DDA shall be waived. Upon the expiration of 30 days
from submission of the application to the executive director of the DDA or upon
receipt by the City Clerk of the DDA's recommendation, whichever occurs first,
the application and the DDA's recommendation, if any, shall be submitted to the
City Council for consideration and written notice of the time and date on which
the application will be considered by the City Council. An application that is
incomplete shall neither be forwarded to the DDA nor to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.18 STANDARDS FOR NON-PREFERENTIAL APPROVAL.
   When an application is submitted for city approval of a redevelopment liquor
license and the State Liquor Control Commission does not request or require
that the city approve one application "above all others" or otherwise
prioritize an application, the application may be approved, approved with
conditions or denied by the City Council. Any conditions shall relate to
compliance with the requirements or standards contained in the city code and
which are applicable to the application. In determining whether a license
should be approved, the City Council shall consider the following requirements
or factors (jointly, called the standards):
   (A)   If the applicant is not the owner, the owner of the real property with
which the license will be used must approve in writing the submission of the
application;
   (B)   The applicant must have a real property interest in the real property
with which the license will be used;
   (C)   The business with which the license will be used shall be engaged in
dining, entertainment or recreation;
   (D)   The business with which the license will be used shall have a seating
capacity of at least 25 people;
   (E)   At least $75,000 shall have been expended for the rehabilitation or
restoration of the building that will house the licensed premises, or which
makes a commitment for a capital investment of at least $75,000 or if a
commitment has been made to expend at least $75,000 prior to the issuance of
the license, the applicant must agree that the fulfillment of this commitment
shall be a condition of approval;
   (F)   The applicant shall have attempted to purchase a readily available
escrowed or quota on-premise license within the City of Charlevoix and shall
establish that a license was not reasonably available;
   (G)   The extent to which the business with which the license will be used
will contribute a new or unique choice to the mix of businesses in the DDA
District;
   (H)   The extent to which the business with which the license will be used
will promote economic growth in a manner consistent with adopted goals, plans
or policies applicable to the DDA District, including but not limited to the
DDA's Development Plan and all other master plans applicable to the DDA
District; and
   (I)   Those factors related to a request for issuance of a new liquor
license contained in §
113.03(B) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.19 STANDARDS FOR PREFERENTIAL APPROVAL.
   When an application is submitted for a redevelopment liquor license and the
State Liquor Control Commission requests or requires the city to approve one
application "above all others" or otherwise prioritize an application, the
following procedure shall apply:
   (A)   The application must be approved or approved with conditions pursuant
to §
113.18.
   (B)   The application shall be ranked or prioritized by the City Council in
comparison to other pending and approved applications in a manner consistent
with the request or requirements of the State Liquor Control Commission.
   (C)   In evaluating the ranking or prioritization of an application, the
Council shall consider the extent to which the application and supporting
information or documentation exceeds the standards contained in §
113.18 above and the detail and quality of the application and supporting
information or documentation. The more detailed and precise the application and
the supporting information or documentation and the greater the extent that the
standards contained in §
113.03(D) are exceeded, then the higher the priority that such an application
shall be given.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.20 APPLICATION FEE.
   The City Council shall adopt by resolution for an application fee for a
redevelopment liquor license and may modify such fee from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
§ 113.21 ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   The issuance of a redevelopment liquor license does not alter the
requirement that the proposed land use must comply with all applicable zoning
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 7.305) (Ord. 758, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 779, passed 1-16-2017)
CHAPTER 114: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Registration and licensing required
   
114.04   Registration process and procedure
   
114.05   Types of short-term rentals
   
114.06   Regulations
   
114.07   Revocations and appeals
   
114.08   Violations
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds the rental of dwelling units in the City of
Charlevoix provides value to our local economy but also brings with it negative
externalities affecting the year-round quality of neighborhoods, housing
supply, and health and safety. The City Council has enacted this regulatory
ordinance to strike a regulatory balance between the interests of community
residents, business owners, visitors, and property owners.
   (B)   The community has different expectations for noise, occupant loads,
and transient activity in its residential neighborhoods than it does in
commercial, and even mixed-used zones where hotels are currently permitted. The
renting of a home on a short-term basis is substantially more like a business
than traditional residential use.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building, which is more than 50% below finished
grade. A BASEMENT shall not be counted as a story.
   BEDROOM. A room intended for sleeping or placement of a bed separated from
other spaces in the dwelling unit by one or more functional doors. The
following spaces, which must be included in every dwelling unit, do not qualify
as BEDROOMS: kitchens; dining areas; gathering spaces such as living rooms,
dens, family rooms, and attics or basements without egress meeting standards in
applicable building, residential, and fire codes.
   BUSINESS UNIT. A residential dwelling unit that may be rented for more than
28 interrupted days in a calendar year, including multiple properties operating
as personal units under singular ownership. Month to month or yearly rentals
are not classified as a BUSINESS UNIT per this chapter.
   CALENDAR YEAR. January 1 to December 31.
   COMPENSATION. Money or other consideration given in return for occupancy,
possession, or use of a property.
   DWELLING UNIT. A self-contained unit within a building that is designed for
human occupancy and provides complete living facilities, including permanent
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. DWELLING UNIT does
not include bed and breakfasts, timeshare/fractional ownership, hotels and
motels, and boarding houses.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The person appointed by the city who shall carry out
various functions of this chapter or cause other officials, inspectors,
vendors, or relevant professionals to carry out various functions in order to
implement and enforce the terms of this chapter.
   GOOD VISITOR GUIDE. Materials prepared by the City’s Enforcement Officer for
display at all short-term rentals and adopted by City Council by resolution.
   LOCAL AGENT. An individual designated to oversee the short-term rental of a
dwelling unit in accordance with this article and to respond to calls and
complaints at any time or day from renters, citizens, and the city’s
representatives within 60 minutes of such calls.
   PERSONAL UNIT. A residential dwelling unit rented for periods of up to a
total of 28 days per calendar year when the owner is not present or for an
unlimited period of time when the property owner is present and living on the
premises. A person or entity may only have one designated PERSONAL UNIT.
   SALE. The General Property Tax Act, M.C.L.A. § 211.27a “transfer of
ownership” as defined in Section 6(a)—(k).
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL (“STR”). The rental of a dwelling unit for compensation
for a term of one to 29 interrupted or uninterrupted nights per year in the R-
1 and R-2 zoning districts.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020; Ord. 846, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 114.03 REGISTRATION AND LICENSING REQUIRED.
   (A)   All dwelling units shall be registered and licensed with the city as
stipulated in this chapter.
   (B)   The advertisement or rental of an unregistered dwelling unit is
prohibited.
   (C)   Registration and licenses shall be issued by calendar year.
   (D)   All short-term rental registrations and licenses shall expire at the
end of the calendar year and must be renewed each December.
   (E)   When a short-term rental property is sold, the registration(s) and
license(s) will expire at sale and are not transferable; licenses will revert
to the City after expiration due to the passage of time, sale, revocation, or
12 months of non-activity and will be redistributed according to this chapter.
   (F)   The Enforcement Officer shall develop a form(s) to properly carry out
this ordinance. The registration form shall collect not less than the following
information and other items as the Enforcement Officer may deem necessary for
implementation of this chapter:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner and/or
local agent for the dwelling unit;
      (2)   The street address of the dwelling unit, along with other
identification if more than one dwelling unit has the same street address;
      (3)   The number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit and in the dwelling as
a whole;
      (4)   The number of days the dwelling unit is available for short term
rental each calendar year;
      (5)   A statement certifying that the property owner or a local agent
will provide at least one copy of the city’s Good Visitor Guide materials to
the renters each time the dwelling unit is rented;
      (6)   A statement indicating how many days it was rented in the previous
calendar year; and
      (7).   A list of all websites and other media where unit is advertised.
   (G)   Upon determination that a STR applicant has met all registration and
regulation requirements, a license shall be issued by the Enforcement Officer.
   (H)   There shall be a fee for registration collected at the time of
registration. An additional fee shall be collected at time of licensing.
Council shall set a fee(s) from time to time by resolution; such fee(s) may
vary depending on the type of property, dwelling, or other distinction Council
may deem advisable.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020; Ord. 846, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 114.04 REGISTRATION PROCESS AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   New applications will be placed on a waiting list in the order of when
a complete application is received by the city.
      (1)   Applicants whose principle residence exemption is for a property
located in the City of Charlevoix will get preference and be moved to the top
of the list of new applicants.
      (2)   When a license becomes available, the first person on the waitlist
shall be given 30 days to accept a license, pay all necessary fees, and
schedule their inspection for a date within 90 days. Failure to act within this
time period shall move the person to the bottom of the relevant category of the
waitlist. Waitlist holders will be contacted using the information found on the
waitlist; failure to properly advise the city of updates and corrections to
waitlist information shall be deemed a failing on the part of the waitlisted
person.
   (B)   Waitlist forms and methods shall be provided by the city and must be
maintained after payment of a one-time, non-refundable waitlist fee.
      (1)   Annually on or before November 30, the city shall publish on their
website the list of licensed properties and the current waiting list separated
by categories. Persons wishing to remain on the waitlist shall, using a form
and method directed by the city, affirm the accuracy of their listing or
provide updated information no later than noon local time on December 31.
Failure to affirm and/or correct the waitlist information shall remove someone
from the list.
      (2)   Council shall, from time to time by resolution, set the fee.
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer is empowered to develop a method for
registration in accordance with this provision.
   (D)   Short-term rental shall follow applicable regulations found within
chapter 153 of the Charlevoix City Code.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020; Ord. 846, passed 3-4-2024; Ord. 860, passed 8-18-
2025)
§ 114.05 TYPES OF SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   Personal units.
      (1)   Personal units may be rented for periods of not less than seven
days up to a total of 28 days per calendar year when the owner is not present
or for an unlimited period of time when the property owner is present and
living on-site which shall not be capped in number across the city.
      (2)   An owner can register only one personal unit. Additional units
under one ownership must be registered as a business unit.
   (B)   Business units. Business units may be rented without restriction on
days rented per year.
      (1)    Council shall establish a cap on the number of business units of
primary residences to be allowed within the R-1 and R-2 zones through a
resolution adopted by Council. The initial cap shall be set at 80 business
units.
      (2)   The cap shall be reconsidered by Council as needed by the direction
of the City Council.
      (3)   Only one STR license shall be issued per parcel that contains both
a principle residence and an ADU. Upon notification of the Enforcement Officer,
a STR license that was issued for a primary dwelling may be used as a secondary
legal dwelling unit (ADU) that meets all applicable requirements of the zoning
ordinance. At no time shall more than one dwelling unit on a parcel be used as
a STR during the same time period.
   (C)   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). ADUs constructed after February 1,
2024, may be rented without restriction on days rented per year.
      (1)   STR ADUs will be separated by a minimum of 300 feet on each street
face per city block.
      (2)   STR ADUs will meet all other zoning ordinance standards of §
153.116, Accessory Buildings and Uses.
      (3)   STR ADUs shall not be capped in number across the city with the
exception of (C)(1) above.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020; Ord. 846, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 114.06 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Local agent required. All dwelling units used for short-term rentals
shall have a designated local agent.
   (B)   Contact information posted. A notice shall be posted in a prominent
location within any dwelling unit used for short-term rentals stating (in at
least 16-point type) the name of the local agent and, a 24-hour telephone
number at which the agent can be reached.
   (C)   Compliance with codes. The dwelling unit must meet all applicable
Residential Building, Health Department, Nuisance and Safety Codes as necessary
to protect the safety of occupants.
   (D)   Noise and nuisance. Noise during quiet hours must be limited to that
which does not disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities. Quiet hours shall be from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. The
city’s Noise Control Ordinance shall apply.
   (E)   Fireworks. Fireworks of any kind are not allowed on rental property,
except in accordance with the city’s fireworks ordinance, Title IX, Chapter 94,
§
94.22.
   (F)   Fire pits. Open burning is not allowed.
      (1)   Indoor and outdoor fireplaces with chimneys are permitted so long
as they are not determined to be a nuisance in keeping with the city’s nuisance
code.
      (2)   Natural gas fire pits are permitted.
   (G)   Maximum occupancy. Short-term rentals shall be permitted maximum
occupancy of two persons per bedroom plus two persons per finished and legal
floor for dwelling as described in the registration and as may be verified by
inspections from time to time. An individual present in a dwelling unit during
the term of a STR shall be presumed to be an occupant unless it is between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and circumstances clearly indicate the
individual will not stay overnight.
      (1)   Except as provided in (2) below, no rental shall be permitted for
more than ten persons.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1) above, those units in operation and
registered with the City prior to July 1, 2019 which have clearly indicated
occupancy up to 16 but not exceeding two per bedroom plus two persons per
finished and legal floor for dwelling may continue with said occupancy limit so
long as the unit continues to be registered under this chapter.
      (3)   No dwelling unit used as a short-term rental may be built or
modified hereafter to exceed to limitation of ten persons as described above.
   (H)   Parking restrictions. Based on lot and neighborhood characteristics,
the Enforcement Officer may place reasonable restrictions on the number and
manner of vehicle parking.
   (I)   Advertising. No person shall advertise a short-term rental, unless the
advertisement includes the license number and the maximum occupancy permitted
in the unit.
   (J)   Fee. Short-term rentals shall pay a fee as City Council may, from time
to time, establish by resolution, to account for costs related to the
enforcement, community impact, and other customary fees and costs associated
with short-term lodging which may already be allowed within the city.
   (K)   Inspections and conditions. Upon original application and/or upon
written complaint, the Enforcement Officer may make periodic inspections of a
short-term rental using the standards of the International Property Maintenance
Code as adopted by the city to ensure continuing compliance with the approval
standards specified in this chapter. In addition, the Enforcement Officer may
impose reasonable conditions on a registration issued under this chapter which
are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the approval standards
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020; Ord. 846, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 114.07 REVOCATIONS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Revocation procedure. The written notice of the charges and the notice
of the hearing shall be personally served on the owner or agent or served on
the owner by certified mail, restricted delivery, not less than 14 days before
the hearing before the Enforcement Officer.
      (1)   Upon a finding by the Enforcement Officer of a first or second
violation within any 12-month period, the short-term rental shall be subject to
a fine as provided in §
114.08.
      (2)   Upon a finding by the Enforcement Officer of a third violation
within any 12-month period, the short-term rental registration may be revoked
and the owner or local agent who had been issued the short-term rental
registration shall not again be issued a short-term rental license for a period
of 12 months and during said time the premises shall not be utilized for a
short-term rental.
      (3)   Upon a finding by the Enforcement Officer of a fourth violation
within any 24-month period, the short-term rental registration and license may
be revoked and the owner who had been issued the short-term rental registration
and license shall not again be issued a short-term rental registration or
license under that ownership name and the premises shall not be utilized for a
short-term rental.
   (B)   A minimum of a 14 day notice will be given to owners and agents for
any suspensions. Appeal from denial or suspension or revocation of a short-term
rental registration is allowed.
   (C)   Appeal procedure. Upon a determination by the Enforcement Officer that
the registration of a dwelling unit is subject to revocation pursuant to
division (A)(3) of this section, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice
to the owner, agent and all property owners within 100 feet of the registered
STR stating that the city intends to revoke the rental registration.
      (1)   The notice shall inform the owner and local agent of a right to a
hearing to show cause as to why the registration should not be revoked. If a
hearing is requested and the fee is paid within 14 days of the service of the
notice, the city shall schedule the hearing before the Short Term Rentals
Appeals Board established by Council and notify the owner and agent in writing
of a time and place for that hearing.
      (2)   At the hearing, the owner and agent may present evidence that the
requirements for revocation are not satisfied, or that the property owner and
agent should not be held responsible for one or more of the three requisite
violations due to extenuating circumstances. Extenuating circumstances may
include circumstances that the owner or the owner’s agent could not reasonably
anticipate and prevent, and could not reasonably control.
      (3)   The Short Term Rentals Appeals Board shall independently determine
whether there is competent, material and substantial evidence establishing a
violation of this division (C), and/or whether there is competent, material and
substantial evidence establishing that extenuating circumstances exist.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 114.08 VIOLATIONS.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction in the amount set by Resolution adopted by City
Council. Each day on which any violation of the chapter continues constitutes a
separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate
offense.
(Ord. 815, passed 2-17-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Diving or jumping from bridge
   
130.02   Pine River and Lake Michigan; swimming prohibitions
   
130.03   Disorderly conduct
   
130.04   Curfew
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DIVING OR JUMPING FROM BRIDGE.
   (A)   Diving or jumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to jump or dive
from any bridge within the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.221)
   (B)   Causing to fall. It shall be unlawful for any person to shove, push or
cause another person to fall from any bridge, wharf, dock or pier within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 9.222)
(Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PINE RIVER AND LAKE MICHIGAN; SWIMMING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PIER. Any pier, jetty or other structure located adjacent to the Pine
River and shall include the entire length of each pier, including the head or
end of the pier and sides of each pier.
      PINE RIVER. The water that constitutes the river and all its extensions
and, further, which is bounded: on the north by the cement walkway located on
the shore; on the east by the inlet of the river at the westerly end of Round
Lake; on the south by the cement walkway on the shore; and on the west by the
pier heads at the outlet of the river on Lake Michigan.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Swim or wade in Pine River; and/or
      (2)   Dive from a pier.
(Prior Code, § 9.230) (Ord. 787, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PUBLIC NUDITY.
         (a)   Knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for
payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to,
payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual’s genitals or
anus with less than a fully opaque covering or a female individual’s breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola.
         (b)   PUBLIC NUDITY does not include any of the following:
            1.   A woman’s breast-feeding of a baby whether or not the nipple
or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding;
            2.   Material as defined in § 2 of Public Act 343 of 1984, being
M.C.L.A. § 752.362; and
            3.   Sexually explicit visual material as defined in § 3 of Public
Act 33 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 722.673.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, public building, parking lot, body
of water, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public
and any other place to which the public has access.   
(Prior Code, § 9.1)
   (B)   Acts prohibited. No person shall:
      (1)   Discharge a pistol or other firearm in the city, except when
lawfully acting in the defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law
or at a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by the
City Council;
      (2)   The discharge of a bow and arrow on land owned by the city is
prohibited unless the City Council may, upon the advice and consent of the
appropriate agencies of this state, approve by resolution the removal and
control of wildlife under conditions it may from time to time determine;
      (3)   Discharge a “pneumatic gun” (as defined by state law) in any area
within the city that is so heavily populated as to make that conduct dangerous
to the inhabitants of that area. The discharge of pneumatic guns is allowed at
a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by the City
Council, on other property where firearms may be discharged as approved by the
City Council, or on or within private property with the permission of the owner
or possessor of that property if conducted with reasonable care to prevent a
projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. An individual below the
age of 16 who is in possession of a pneumatic gun must be under the supervision
of a parent, a guardian or an individual 18 years of age or older, except on or
within private property if the individual below the age of 16 is authorized by
a parent or guardian and the property owner or legal possessor to possess the
pneumatic gun;
      (4)   Point, wave about or display a pneumatic gun in a threatening
manner with the intent to induce fear in another individual;
      (5)   Engage in public nudity;
      (6)   Engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place;
      (7)   Obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk without the approval of
the City Manager; and/or
      (8)   Refuse to leave a public meeting after having been validly ordered
to leave the meeting pursuant to a rule or bylaw of the public body holding the
meeting.
(Prior Code, § 9.2)
   (C)   Acts prohibited (civil infraction). No person shall:
      (1)   Disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar
conduct; and/or
      (2)   Permit any place occupied or controlled by him or her to be a place
in which noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons are present.
(Prior Code, § 9.4)
   (D)   Possession or consumption of open intoxicants. No person shall possess
open intoxicants or consume intoxicants in a public place unless such
possession or consumption is allowed by state law or this code.
(Prior Code, § 9.5)
(Ord. 605, passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 665, passed 2-19-
2001; Ord. 773, passed 9-21-2015; Ord.  853, passed 11-18-2024 ) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 CURFEW.
   (A)   Minors under 12. No minor child under the age of 12 years shall
loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley, park or
other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the
child is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult person over the age
of 18 years delegated by a parent or guardian to accompany said child.
(Prior Code, § 9.91)
   (B)   Minors under 15. No minor child under the age of 15 years shall
loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley, park or
other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where
the child is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult person over the
age of 18 years delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor, or
where the minor child is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed
by his or her parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 9.92)
   (C)   Minors under 17.  No minor under the age of 17 years shall loiter,
idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley, park or other
public place between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where the
minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult person over the age
of 18 years, delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany said minor child,
or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by
his or her parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 9.93)
   (D)   Juvenile arrest procedure. Arrests and prosecution of minors under the
age of 17 years for violation of this section shall be in accordance with § 14
and the other provisions of Ch. XIIA of Public Act 288 of 1939.
(Prior Code, § 9.96)
   (E)   Definitions of words and phrases. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HARBOR. The tacit or express permission to said child by the owner,
proprietor, occupant or any of his, her or their agents, to remain on or about
the premises for a time longer than reasonably necessary for said child to
transact such business as he or she may there have.
      LOITER. Aimlessly driving or riding in or on any automobile, motorcycle,
motor-driven cycle or any other motor-driven vehicle, on the streets, alleys,
highways or public thoroughfares of the city without an immediate and
predetermined destination.
      OTHER PUBLIC PLACES. Privately-owned places of business, and the premises
thereof, serving the public or open to the public, such as restaurants,
laundromats, gas stations, theaters and other places of public amusement.
   (F)   Exemptions. It is an exemption to a violation under this section that
the person engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.   
(Ord. 674, passed 9-3-2002) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §
130.01 of this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction, pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9.223)
   (C)   A violation of §
130.02 of this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction, pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, and shall be subject to a fine of $500.
(Prior Code, § 9.231)
   (D)   Each person violating any provision of §
130.03(B) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A person convicted
of violating any provision of §
130.03(B) of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and
costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 9.3)
   (E)   (1)   Aiding underage children to violate law. Any person of the age
of 17 years or over who shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any
minor under the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of §
130.04(A), (B) or (C) of this chapter, or shall harbor any such child in any
other public place or on his or her premises, contrary to the provisions of §
130.04(A), (B) or (C) of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution, or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 9.94)
      (2)   Parents, guardians and the like. Any parent, guardian or other
person having the legal care or custody of any minor child under the age of 17
years who shall allow or permit such minor child while in his or her legal
custody to loiter, idle or congregate in or upon any public street, highway,
alley, park or other public place, contrary to §
130.04(A), (B) or (C) of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution, or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 9.95)
(Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 665, passed 2-19-2001; Ord. 787, passed 3-19-
2018)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
152.   TREES
      
153.   PLANNING AND ZONING
      
154.   PARCEL DIVISION
      
155.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Building Regulations; Construction
   
150.01   State construction code; enforcing agency
Zoning and Subdivision Review; Fee Schedule
   
150.15   Standard fee
   
150.16   Additional fee
   
150.17   Refunds
BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.01 STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE; ENFORCING AGENCY.
   (A)   This section is enacted pursuant to Public Act 110 of 2006, as
amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq.
   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of § 9 of Public Act 230 of 1972, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.1509, the Building Official of the city is hereby designated as
the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under Public
Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531. The city hereby
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout its corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 8.1) (Ord. 823, passed 1-4-2021)
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW; FEE SCHEDULE
§ 150.15 STANDARD FEE.
   The fees for processing planning and zoning requests within the city shall
be as specified by the City Council in the annual city budget ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 5.295) (Ord. 520, passed 11-6-1989; Ord. 687, passed 5-19-2003)
§ 150.16 ADDITIONAL FEE.
   (A)   When the city’s cost for processing any matter which requires a fee
exceeds the standard fee by 20% or more, then an additional fee shall be
charged as provided in this section.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued nor shall any approval become effective
until the additional fee has been paid.
   (C)   The additional fee shall be equal to the city’s cost in processing the
matter less the standard fee if the standard fee has already been paid. The
CITY’S COST shall mean the total value of staff time spent on processing the
matter, plus expenses. The value of staff time shall be the hourly compensation
of all city employees or independent contractors whose involvement is
reasonably required by the review process, including, but not limited to, the
planner, Zoning Administrator and clerical staff, multiplied by the number of
hours each individual has spent processing the matter in question. EXPENSES
mean photocopying and postage charges.
(Prior Code, § 5.296) (Ord. 687, passed 5-19-2003)
§ 150.17 REFUNDS.
   Sign permit application and zoning permit application fees shall be
refundable should a sign or zoning permit not be issued by the city. Fees for
subdivision review, Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and City
Council reviews and approvals shall not be refundable unless an application has
been withdrawn by the applicant prior to any processing of such application by
city officials.
(Prior Code, § 5.297)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Street and sidewalk obstructions, excavations
   
151.02   House moving
   
151.03   Encroachments and street closings
   
151.04   Newsracks, planters, tables and chairs
Streets Generally
   
151.20   Definitions
   
151.21   Damage and obstruction prohibited
   
151.22   Permits and bonds
   
151.23   Street openings
   
151.24   Emergency openings
   
151.25   Backfilling
   
151.26   Utility poles
   
151.27   Maintenance of installations
   
151.28   Curb cuts
   
151.29   Abandonment
Sidewalks Generally
   
151.40   Definitions
   
151.41   Specifications and permits
   
151.42   Construction requirements
   
151.43   Permit revocation
   
151.44   Ordering construction
   
151.45   Construction by city
   
151.46   Maintenance
   
151.47   Repair
   
151.48   Snow and ice clearance districts
Street Names and House Numbers
   
151.60   Street names
   
151.61   Vacating streets
   
151.62   Street numbers
   
151.63   Numbering buildings
   
151.64   Numbers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS, EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Sidewalk obstructions. No person shall occupy any street with any
materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of
any building adjacent to said street, or for any other purpose, without first
obtaining a permit from the manager. No permit shall be granted until the
applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as
required by §
151.22 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
   (B)   Pedestrian passage. At least six feet of sidewalk space shall be kept
clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building
operations are such that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary
plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter shall be provided
around such obstruction.
(Prior Code, § 4.41)
   (C)   Safeguards. All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be
properly and substantially barricaded and railed off and, at night, shall be
provided with approved warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow
of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart and parallel to the flow of
traffic not over 15 feet apart.
(Prior Code, § 4.42)
   (D)   Shoring excavations. All openings and excavations shall be properly
and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workers and to prevent
cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface
structure of the street.
(Prior Code, § 4.43)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.02 HOUSE MOVING.
   (A)   No person shall move, transport or convey any building or other
similar bulky or heavy object, including machinery, trucks and trailers, larger
in width than eight feet eight inches or higher than 13 feet six inches above
the surface of the roadway, into, across or along any street, alley or other
public place in the city without first obtaining a house moving permit from the
Manager. Such permit shall specify the route to be used in such movement and no
person shall engage in such movement along a route other than that specified in
the permit. No house moving permit shall be granted until the applicant shall
pay for a permit and comply with insurance and performance bond requirements
found in a cash deposit in §
151.22 of this chapter; additionally, all costs associated for city services
associated for with such action as contemplated in this section shall be
assigned to the owner and reimbursed to the city or paid as a deposit in
advance of the activity. Such costs shall include but not be limited to utility
moving or replacement, traffic control, and damage to infrastructure or
property. The Manager shall have the power to regulate the time and date of
house moving requests to account for traffic and special event demands of the
community.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as to limit the transportation of
wide or oversized loads on the state or federal highway which may be lawfully
permitted nor shall this section limit the transportation of boats or marine
vessels along routes of the city which the Police Chief shall from time to time
publish in consultation with other city staff.
(Prior Code, § 4.50) (Ord. 818, passed 6-1-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.03 ENCROACHMENTS AND STREET CLOSINGS.
   (A)   Removal of encroachment. Encroachments and obstructions in the street
may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or
refilling charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or
her or suffered to remain by him or her, otherwise than in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter. The procedure for collection of such
expenses shall be as prescribed in §
150.01 of this code of ordinances. The City Council may by resolution permit
the continuance of an existing encroachment. No such resolution shall vest any
permanent rights in the person owning or occupying the structure which
encroaches upon the street.
(Prior Code, § 4.55)
   (B)   Temporary street closings. The manager shall have authority to
temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he or she shall deem
such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He
or she shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on said street,
indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion
thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any
vehicle upon or over said street, except as the same may be necessary
incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area
closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or
barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the Manager.
(Prior Code, § 4.56)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04 NEWSRACKS, PLANTERS, TABLES AND CHAIRS.
   (A)   Findings and purposes. It is found and declared that:
      (1)   The primary purpose of the public streets and sidewalks is for use
by vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (2)   Reasonable regulation of streets and sidewalks is necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare;
      (3)   The uncontrolled placement of tables and chairs, merchandise and
goods, newsracks, planters and other articles and objects present an
inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such
rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and
buildings, and persons performing essential utility, and traffic control;
      (4)   Tables and chairs, goods and merchandise, newsracks, planters and
other articles and objects so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to
persons using public rights-of-way constitute public nuisances per se; and
      (5)   The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted
in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 4.1)
   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ARTICLES AND OBJECTS. Any thing or obstruction placed over or upon a
street or sidewalk.
      GOODS AND MERCHANDISE. Any items offered for sale to the general public.
      NEWSRACKS. Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers or other news periodicals.
      PLANTERS. Any device used or intended to be used for display of non-
artificial flowers.
      SIDEWALK. Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
      STREET. All that area dedicated to the public use for public street
purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, state trunk lines
and alleys.
      TABLES AND CHAIRS. Facilities provided to customers for food or beverages
upon a public sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 4.2)
   (C)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or
sidewalk or in any other public way or place, within the city limits, except in
the areas designated as the city’s Downtown Development Authority District, any
article, object or any other obstruction, except under the conditions and in
the manner presented in this section; provided, however, the City Manager or
his or her designee may grant, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, licenses
for the erection, placement, maintenance or operation of newsracks, tables,
chairs and planters on sidewalks within the area mapped as the Downtown
Development Authority (DDA) District.
(Prior Code, § 4.3)
   (D)   Application. Applications for such permit (license) shall be made in
writing to the City Manager upon such form as shall be provided by the city and
shall contain the name and address of the applicant; the proposed specific
location of the tables and chairs, newsracks or planters; and shall be signed
by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 4.4)
   (E)   Conditions.
      (1)   Indemnification, liability. As an express condition of the
acceptance of such license, the licensee thereby agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the city, its officers, directors and employees against any loss or
liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal
injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the
installation, use or maintenance of tables and chairs, newsracks, planters or
goods and merchandise within the city.
      (2)   Issuance. Licenses shall be issued for the installation of
newsracks, planters, tables and chairs with prior inspection of the location,
but such newsracks, planters, tables and chairs, and the installation, use or
maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon observance of the provisions of
this section and upon such reasonable rules and regulations as may be
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution. Licenses
shall be issued within two working days after the application has been filed.
      (3)   Validity; renewal. Such licenses shall be valid for one year and
shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for the original applications
referred to in division (D) above.
      (4)   Violations. No license shall be issued to an applicant or any
license may be revoked in the event the applicant or licensee is in violation
of any of the provisions of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 4.5)
   (F)   Standards for maintenance and installation. Any tables, chairs,
planters or newsracks which in whole or in part rest upon, in or over any
public sidewalk shall comply with the following standards: shall be maintained
in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically,
but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all tables, chairs,
planters and newsracks shall be serviced and maintained so that:
      (1)   They are reasonably free of dirt and grease; and
      (2)   They are reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visual painted areas thereof. The structural parts thereof are not
broken or unduly misshapen.
(Prior Code, § 4.6)
   (G)   Location and placement. Any newsracks, planters, tables and chairs
which rest in whole or in part upon, or in, or on any portion of a public
sidewalk or right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a
public sidewalk or right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
      (1)   No tables, chairs, planters or newsracks shall be used or
maintained which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway or public
street, or which rests wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the
roadway or any public street.
      (2)   No tables, chairs, planters or newsracks shall be permitted to rest
upon, in or over any public sidewalk, when such installation use, or
maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or
location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or
other governmental use, or when such use unreasonably interferes with or
impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally
marked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or the egress from any residence or
place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals,
hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location.
      (3)   No tables, chairs, planters or newsracks shall be chained, bolted
or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public right-of-way, except
to another newsrack, planter, table or chair.
      (4)   No tables, chairs, planters or newsracks shall be placed,
installed, used or maintained:
         (a)   Within three feet of any crosswalk;
         (b)   Within eight feet of the back of the street curb unless approved
under the city outdoor dining program;
         (c)   Within five feet of any driveway; or
         (d)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passage way of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
      (5)   The City Manager may establish, by regulation, the number and
location of areas within the city to be used for placement of newsracks.
(Prior Code, § 4.7)
   (H)   Placement of goods and merchandise; exception for special events.
      (1)   Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, the City
Manager may allow the placement of goods and merchandise for retail sales each
year for what is commonly referred to as “Sidewalk Days”.
      (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the City
Manager may allow the placement of goods for retail sales on a public sidewalk
or public street by a non-profit organization recognized by the Internal
Revenue Service as a charitable organization. The organization shall obtain a
permit from the City Manager which shall specify the location(s) and time
period covered by the permit. The permit shall be issued without charge and may
not exceed 72 hours. The City Manager may deny the permit, if there is a reason
to believe that the activity to be covered by the permit, its requested
location(s) or time interval would interfere with the rights of others to use
the public sidewalk or street, interfere with the ability of city employees to
carry out their jobs or the right of the public to unobstructed travel along a
public street or public sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 4.8)
   (I)   Violation. Upon determination by the City Manager that a newsrack,
planter, table or chair, goods or merchandise, or other article or object has
been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this
section, a notice to correct the offending condition will be issued to the
owner or operator of such newsrack, planter, table or chair, goods or
merchandise or other article or object. The notice shall describe the offending
condition, request the action necessary to correct the condition and specify
the time within which the offending condition must be corrected. If an
offending condition is not properly identified by the owner or operator of the
business premises located immediately adjacent to such section of the public
street or sidewalk, the offending condition shall be removed immediately and
processed as unclaimed property. An offending condition which is located on a
public street, sidewalk or other public property shall be deemed a hazardous
condition and an interference with the public’s right to use such public places
and shall be removed. The City Manager or his or her designee may institute
such legal proceedings as are necessary to enforce this section.
(Prior Code, § 4.9)
   (J)   Revocation of license. In addition to the enforcement procedures
provided in division (I) above. It shall be within the power and discretion of
the City Manager to suspend or revoke the license of continued or repeated
violations or infractions of any provisions of this section or any rule or
regulation of the city. Suspension or revocation shall be mandatory for the
third offense under division (I) above.
(Prior Code, § 4.10)
   (K)   City Manager’s designated representative. “City Manager”, as used in
this section, shall include his or her designated representative.
(Prior Code, § 4.11)
(Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989; Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 768, passed 12-15-
2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
STREETS GENERALLY
§ 151.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative.
   STREET. All of the land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and
sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet
constructed.
(Prior Code, § 4.20) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989)
§ 151.21 DAMAGE AND OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to, any street
in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
subchapter. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any
street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
subchapter, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary
obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and
things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles
within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.22 PERMITS AND BONDS.
   (A)   Where permits are required, they shall be obtained from the City
Manager or his or her designee and shall contain the information necessary for
consideration by the city in a manner as the Manager may require. Such permit
(s) shall be revocable by the Manager for failure to comply with this code,
rules and regulations adopted hereto, and the lawful orders of the Manager. The
permit(s) shall only be valid for the period the Manager may designate.
Application for a permit under this chapter shall be deemed an agreement by the
applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent
regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damages done to the
street surface, subsurface, and related structures, over or within such street,
including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or
actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to person
or property resulting from the work done under the permit(s) or in connection
therewith.
   (B)   Fees for such permits shall be set from time to time by resolution of
Council. Council may vary the fees depending on the season and the times which
are or are not preferable for the general benefit of the community to contend
with construction in the public streets and rights of way. Such limitations
shall not constrain public infrastructure projects which the city or the State
of Michigan may from time to time undertake.
   (C)   Where liability insurance or bonds are required, the City Treasurer
shall regularly obtain recommendations from the city's insurance carrier or
other valid sources and share the same with City Council in order that it may
adopt a resolution specifying minimum insurance coverages, standards, and bonds
for work associated with the permits contemplated in this chapter. Similarly,
Council may adopt the minimum for performance bonds and the City Manager or his
or her designee may set the actual amount required in the bond subject to the
minimum set by Council.
(Prior Code, § 4.22) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989; Ord. 818, passed 6-1-2020)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.23 STREET OPENINGS.
   No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Clerk. No permit shall
be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability
insurance policy as required by §
151.22 of this chapter, nor shall a permit be issued until the contractor’s
name, address and state license number is furnished on the permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.23) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.24 EMERGENCY OPENINGS.
   The Manager may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant
permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency; provided that, a
permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of
this subchapter shall be complied with.
(Prior Code, § 4.24) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989)
§ 151.25 BACKFILLING.
   All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special
permission, shall be backfilled with sand and compacted and at least six inches
shall be air-entrained concrete of 3,500 psi bearing capacity after 28 days.
(Prior Code, § 4.25) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.26 UTILITY POLES.
   Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the Manager shall prescribe
and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the Manager.
Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the Manager shall, from time to
time, direct.
(Prior Code, § 4.26) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.27 MAINTENANCE OF INSTALLATIONS.
   Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter
maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation, or
any post, pole, sign awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under,
over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his or her estate,
shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an
agreement on his or her part with the city to keep the same and the covers
thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and
condition at all times during his or her ownership or control thereof, and to
indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that
may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under,
over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective
during such ownership or control.
(Prior Code, § 4.27) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.28 CURB CUTS.
   (A)   No opening in or through any curb of any street shall be made without
first obtaining a written permit from the Manager. The Manager shall have the
authority, at his or her discretion, to have the cuts made by city personnel,
with the applicant charged therefor at current rates, or to allow the applicant
to make the cuts.
   (B)   Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private
property shall comply with the following.
      (1)   No single curb cut shall exceed 25 feet, nor be less than ten feet.
      (2)   The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk
shall be five feet.
      (3)   The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving
residential property, shall be 25 feet.
      (4)   The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossings
permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 45% of
the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of
street frontage, plus 20% of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of
200 feet.
      (5)   The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire
hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals or other public
improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city.
      (6)   All construction shall be in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Manager.
(Prior Code, § 4.35) (Ord. 515, passed 7-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.29 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “City of Charlevoix Street
Abandonment Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 4.58)
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CLERK. The City Clerk for the City of Charlevoix, a duly appointed deputy
or other person designated by the Clerk to perform the Clerk’s function under
this section.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Charlevoix.
      PERSON. An individual, association, corporation or partnership.
      STREET, ALLEY or PUBLIC WAY. The portion of land within the city
dedicated to the use of the public for the purposes of pedestrian or vehicular
travel.
(Prior Code, § 4.59)
   (C)   When the Council deems it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish
any street, alley or public way, or a portion thereof, it shall, by resolution,
declare such intention and in the same resolution shall schedule a public
hearing, not less than ten days thereafter, when it will meet to hear public
comment on such proposed action.
      (1)   Notice. The Clerk shall cause a copy of the public hearing notice
and a copy of the resolution to be published at least once in an official
newspaper prior to the scheduled public hearing. Prior to the scheduled public
hearing, the Clerk shall also send by first class mail a copy of the public
hearing notice and a copy of the resolution to all property owners and all
persons claiming under those owners located within 300 feet of the street,
alley or public way described in the resolution, based on the city’s current
tax assessment records.
      (2)   Public hearing. At a time scheduled for the public hearing, the
Council shall hear public comment on the proposed action to vacate, discontinue
or abolish any street, alley or public way, or a portion thereof. Comments
regarding such proposed action of the Council may be stated at the public
hearing or comments may be filed in writing with the Clerk at or prior to the
public hearing.
      (3)   Council action. After considering the comments at a public hearing
and any written comments filed with the Clerk, the Council, by resolution,
shall be empowered to vacate, discontinue or abolish any street, alley or
public way, or a portion thereof, but may not take action regarding any street,
alley or public way beyond that described in the original resolution of
proposed action.
      (4)   Public utility easements. When the Council determines that it is
necessary for the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the public to vacate,
discontinue or abolish any street, alley or public way, or a portion thereof,
the Council may reserve an easement in the street, alley or public way for
public utility purposes and/or other public purposes by including such
reservation in the final resolution vacating, discontinuing or abolishing the
street, alley or public way.
      (5)   Recording of resolution. Within 30 days after the Council adopts a
resolution vacating, discontinuing or abolishing a street, alley or public way,
or a portion thereof, the Clerk shall record a certified copy of such
resolution in the office of the county’s Register of Deeds. This resolution
shall not be effective until recorded.
      (6)   Extension of zoning districts. Whenever any street, alley or public
way, or a portion thereof, is vacated, discontinued or abolished under this
section, the zoning district(s) adjoining each side of the street, alley or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation. All
areas included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all
appropriate regulations of the extended districts(s).
      (7)   Fee.
         (a)   Before any action is taken as provided in this section, the
person proposing, recommending or petitioning for the vacation, discontinuance
or abolition of a street, alley or public way, or a portion thereof, shall pay
to the Clerk a fee as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Council.
         (b)   Under no condition shall such fee or any part thereof be
refunded for failure of such action to be approved by the Council.
      (8)   Exception. The Council may not vacate, discontinue or abolish that
portion of any street, alley or public way under its jurisdiction which is
within 25 meters of the lake or the general course of a stream and which is
also located within a platted subdivision as long as such action is prohibited
by state law.
(Prior Code, § 4.60)
(Ord. 555, passed 8-5-1991)
SIDEWALKS GENERALLY
§ 151.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian
travel.
(Prior Code, § 4.61)
§ 151.41 SPECIFICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk, except in
accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established for such
sidewalk, nor without first obtaining a written permit from the Manager. The
fee for such permit shall be $0.01 per square foot and a minimum of $1 per
stake shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 4.62) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.42 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Sidewalks shall not be less than four inches in thickness and expansion
paper shall be placed in the joints. Sidewalks at driveway crossings shall be
not less than six inches in thickness. All concrete used in sidewalk
construction shall, 28 days after placement, be capable of resisting a pressure
of 3,500 pounds per square inch without failure. The City Manager may establish
additional detailed specifications in addition hereto and not inconsistent
herewith.
(Prior Code, § 4.64) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.43 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Manager may issue a stop order to any permittee holding a permit issued
under the terms of this subchapter for failure to comply with this subchapter,
or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established for the
construction, rebuilding or repair of any sidewalk and the issuance of such
stop order shall be deemed a suspension of such permit. Such stop order shall
be effective until the next regular meeting of the City Council and, if
confirmed by the Council, at its regular meeting, such stop order shall be
permanent and shall constitute a revocation of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.65)
§ 151.44 ORDERING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and
premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon
such lots and premises.
   (B)   When such resolution shall be adopted, the Manager shall give notice
thereof, in accordance herewith, to the owner of such lot or premises requiring
him to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within 20 days from the date of such
notice.
(Prior Code, § 4.66)
§ 151.45 CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.
   If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular
sidewalk as described in said notice, and within the time and in the manner
required thereby, the Manager is hereby authorized and required, immediately
after the expiration of the time limited for the construction or rebuilding by
the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and 60% of the expense
thereof may be charged to such premises and the owner thereof, and collected as
a single lot assessment as provided in §
150.01 of this code of ordinances and 40% of the costs of any such new
construction shall be borne by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.67) (Ord. 489, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 151.46 MAINTENANCE.
   No person shall permit any sidewalk within the city which adjoins property
owned by him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe.
(Prior Code, § 4.68) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.47 REPAIR.
   Whenever the Manager shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe or in a state
of disrepair, the city may cause the repair or restoration of said sidewalk and
the cost thereof to be borne by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.69) (Ord. 489, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 151.48 SNOW AND ICE CLEARANCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Establishment of snow and ice clearance districts. The Council shall,
from time to time, establish by resolution snow and ice clearance districts the
boundaries of which shall be drawn so as to include the substantial pedestrian
traffic areas within the city.
   (B)   Sidewalks to be cleared within clearance districts. The occupant of
every lot or premises, or the owner of such lot or premises located within any
snow or ice clearance district, shall clear all ice and snow from sidewalks
adjoining such lot or premises within the time herein required. When any snow
or ice shall cease to fall during the daylight hours, such snow or ice shall be
cleared from the sidewalks within 18 hours after such cessation. When a fall of
snow or ice shall have ceased during the nighttime, it shall be cleared from
the sidewalks by 6:00 p.m. of the day following.
   (C)   Failure to clear. If any occupant or owner of a lot or premises
located within a snow or ice clearance district shall neglect or fail to clear
ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining his or her premises within the time
limited, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on such sidewalk,
he or she shall be guilty of a violation of this section and, in addition, the
City Manager may cause the same to be cleared and the expense of removal shall
become a debt to the city from the owner of such premises, and shall be
collected as a single lot assessment pursuant to §
150.01 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4.70) (Ord. 413, passed 10-4-1982) Penalty, see §
10.99
STREET NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS
§ 151.60 STREET NAMES.
   (A)   All streets shall be known and designated by the names applied thereto
on the map of the city known as the street plan, filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The naming of any new street or the changing of the name of any street
shall be done by resolution, which resolution shall amend said map.
(Prior Code, § 1.21)
§ 151.61 VACATING STREETS.
   Vacated portions of streets and alleys shall be eliminated from said street
plan map. The vacating of any street or alley shall be done by resolution,
which resolution shall amend said map.
(Prior Code, § 1.22)
§ 151.62 STREET NUMBERS.
   All premises shall bear a distinctive street number on the front at or near
the front entrance of said premises in accordance with and as designated upon
the street plan map on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1.23)
§ 151.63 NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
   The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the
correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with said street plan map.
No person shall display other than the officially designated numbers on any
house or building.
(Prior Code, § 1.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.64 NUMBERS.
   (A)   As used in this subchapter, NUMBERS shall mean Arabic numbers which
are a minimum of four inches high and which are of a color which contrasts to
the premises or building on which the numbers are located.
(Prior Code, § 1.25)
   (B)   If the location of the premises or building or the existence of
obstructions do not allow the numbers on a building to be plainly visible from
the road, the numbers shall not only be displayed on the premises or building,
but shall also be displayed on a post or similar object which shall be adjacent
to the drive or access to the premises or building and the numbers shall be a
minimum of four feet above the ground and shall be plainly visible from the
road. Numbers shall not be placed on mailboxes.
(Prior Code, § 1.26)
(Ord. 676, passed 9-16-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 152: TREES
Section
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Permits for tree planting, care and removal
   
152.03   Tree planting orders
   
152.04   Removal of dead, diseased and prohibited trees
   
152.05   Planting regulations
   
152.06   Tree protection
   
152.07   Excavation near trees
   
152.08   Covering surface near trees
   
152.09   Gas main or leakage
   
152.10   Trees on private property; removal and trimming
   
152.11   Overhead lines; trimming permits
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEPARTMENT. The department of the city responsible for tree care.
      PARK. All public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by
the city or to which the public has free access as a park.
      PROHIBITED SPECIES. Any tree of the species of poplar (Populus Sp.)
willow (Salix Sp.) and box elder (Acer Negundo).
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or
conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or
right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or
telegraph service.
      STREET. All of the land lying between property lines on either side of
all streets, highways and boulevards in the city.
      TREE. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, trees, shrubs,
bushes and all other woody vegetation.
   (B)   The terms of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated
herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land
publicly owned or controlled by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.91)
§ 152.02 PERMITS FOR TREE PLANTING, CARE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Except where contemplated herein, no person shall trim, prune, cut,
spray or otherwise modify the trees of the City of Charlevoix.
   (B)   The Department may undertake such actions to maintain the trees of the
city including pruning or cutting when a public way is obstructed or when a
tree may cause damage to an adjacent structure, lawfully erected.
   (C)   The Department may undertake actions to maintain the public spaces,
parks, and recreation areas of the city consistent with the direction of the
City Council and the Shade Tree and Park Commission to maintain public access
and enjoyment balanced with ecological conditions for the maintenance and
preservation of the same.
   (D)   Property owners adjacent to a street, public space or park may request
to the Shade Tree and Park Commission in writing for the maintenance of trees
not discussed above. If the request is granted, the city shall be compensated
for all costs associated with the request and receive payment, as the Shade
Tree and Park Commission may determine, for the appropriate planting of
additional trees at rate of at least two new trees for every one tree removed.
New trees shall be planted on city property or a street and shall be at the
discretion of the city. The Shade Tree and Park Commission shall render a
decision on such requests within 45 days of receipt.
   (E)   Property owners who make a request under subsection (D) whose request
is denied or partially denied by the Shade Tree and Park Commission or if the
Shade Tree and Park Commission does not render its decision within the required
45 days, may appeal the decision to the Charlevoix City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4.92) (Ord. 809, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 152.03 TREE PLANTING ORDERS.
   The Shade Tree and Park Commission and the Department, separately or in
conjunction, shall, from time-to-time recommend the planting of trees to the
City Council to ensure the city maintains a strong tree canopy. The Council may
also consider the planting of trees as a special assessment for the benefit of
abutting property owners, either upon its own initiative or upon a petition as
contemplated in Article IX of the Charter of the City of Charlevoix.
(Prior Code, § 4.93) (Ord. 809, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 152.04 REMOVAL OF DEAD, DISEASED AND PROHIBITED TREES.
   (A)   All dead trees and trees afflicted with any fatal or communicable
disease shall be removed by the Department or private contractor with the
approval of the Manager. The City Manager is hereby authorized to direct the
Department to remove any tree of a prohibited species, but the cost of such
removal shall not be assessed against the property benefitted unless the
Council shall have approved the removal under the provisions of §
152.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.94)
   (B)   Trees may be removed which are not dead or infected with any disease
when such trees are of an undesirable (though not prohibited) species, but only
upon notice to the owner of the abutting property, and, if such owner shall
file written objection with the City Clerk within seven days after service of
such notice, a public hearing on such removal shall be had before the City
Council, and the abutting owner shall be notified of the time and place of such
hearing. The cost of any such removal shall not be assessed to the property
benefitted thereby unless Council shall order such removal originally under the
provisions of §
152.03 of this chapter. The City Manager is hereby authorized to direct the
Department to remove any tree growing within any street, park or public place,
when such tree interferes with fire hydrants, sewer and water mains, visibility
of street intersections, traffic-control devices or construction within street
rights-of-way or otherwise hinders municipal operations.
(Prior Code, § 4.95)
§ 152.05 PLANTING REGULATIONS.
   No tree of any prohibited species shall be planted in any street or park,
nor shall any such tree be planted on any private property within 50 feet of
any street, sidewalk or sewer right-of-way. Shade trees planted in street
right-of-way shall be spaced as required by the City Manager or authorized
representative in conformance with the recommendations of the state’s
Agricultural Department or other recognized authorities. In no event shall any
tree be placed closer than six feet to any water, sewer or gas service.
(Prior Code, § 4.96) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.06 TREE PROTECTION.
   No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub,
or set any fire, or permit any fire, or the heat thereof, to injure any portion
of any tree. No harmful chemicals or other materials injurious to a tree shall
be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No electric
wires or any other lines or wires shall be permitted to come in contact with
any tree or shrub in any manner that shall cause damage thereto, and no person
shall attach any electric insulation to any tree. No person shall use any tree
as an anchor, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All
persons having under their care, custody or control, facilities which may
interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree, shall after notice thereof
by the Department, promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall
permit the trimming or removal of such tree by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 4.97) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.07 EXCAVATION NEAR TREES.
   Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within six feet of any tree
without written permit from the City Manager. Any person making such excavation
or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good,
substantial frame box to be approved by the Department, and all building
material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree. All
persons desiring to make such excavation or construction shall deposit with the
city a sum sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and any damage which may
result therefrom; provided that, such charge shall not be less than $2 in any
case.
(Prior Code, § 4.98) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.08 COVERING SURFACE NEAR TREES.
   No person shall place within the street right-of-way, any stone, brick,
sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free
passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a sidewalk
of authorized width and location.
(Prior Code, § 4.99) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.09 GAS MAIN OR LEAKAGE.
   Gas pipes or mains within any public rights-of-way or on any public property
shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. In the event a leak
exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and main, and
the leak shall be repaired within 24 hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or
grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired,
and the cost of the work, including the cost of removal and the replacement of
any trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the
damage.
(Prior Code, § 4.100) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.10 TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REMOVAL AND TRIMMING.
   (A)   Every owner of any dead or diseased and dying tree upon the private
property of such owner shall, upon notice, remove such dead or diseased and
dying tree from such private property within 30 days of receipt of such notice,
or in such additional time as the city may in writing authorize. The owner
shall be responsible for the cost of said removal.
   (B)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp, obstruct the view of any street intersection,
obstruct city maintenance equipment, obstruct a portion of any sidewalk or
touch or interfere with any public utility line. Said owners shall remove all
dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute
a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any
tree or shrub on private property which violates this section.
(Prior Code, § 4.101) (Ord. 658, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.11 OVERHEAD LINES; TRIMMING PERMITS.
   The City Manager shall annually issue permits granting permission to public
utilities to trim and keep trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks
and public places of the city, in such a manner as shall keep the overhead
lines of such public utilities safe and accessible. Such trimming shall be done
in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the
Department. Said permit, as provided for in this section, shall require
reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder;
provided, however, that, in the event of an emergency requiring immediate
maintenance work on the overhead lines of said public utilities, prior notice
of commencing work under said permit shall not be required. The word EMERGENCY,
as used in this section, shall be defined to mean the occurrence or happening
of an event which could not be foreseen by the exercise of reasonable care and
foresight, which might cause damage to the overhead lines of the public
utilities.
(Prior Code, § 4.102)
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING AND ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Short title
   
153.003   Purpose
   
153.004   Scope
   
153.005   Definitions
   
153.006   Amendments
   
153.007   Conditional zoning
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.020   Administrative officer
   
153.021   Zoning permits
   
153.022   Project staking and inspection
   
153.023   Enforcement
   
153.024   Fees and escrow
Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA)
   
153.035   Creation and membership
   
153.036   Officers
   
153.037   Rules of procedure
   
153.038   Powers and duties
   
153.039   Procedure
   
153.040   Decision of the Board
   
153.041   Stay of proceedings
   
153.042   Hearings
Mapped Districts
   
153.055   Zoning Map
   
153.056   Zoning of vacated areas
   
153.057   Zoning of annexed areas
Residential Districts
   
153.070   Intent
   
153.071   Schedule of uses
   
153.072   Area, height and placement requirements
Non-Residential and Mixed Use Districts
   
153.085   Intent
   
153.086   Schedule of uses
   
153.087   Area, height and placement requirements
   
153.088   Additional SR, Scenic Reserve, District requirements
   
153.089   Mixed use regulations
   
153.090   Architectural design standards commercial mixed-use
Overlay Districts
   
153.100   Intent and scope
   
153.101   Central Business District Overlay District
   
153.102   West Garfield Avenue General Commercial Overlay District
   
153.103   West Carpenter/State Street Industrial Overlay District
Use Requirements
   
153.115   Specific use requirements
   
153.116   Accessory buildings and uses
   
153.117   Residential uses
   
153.118   Lodging, dining and entertainment uses
   
153.119   Recreation and open space uses
   
153.120   Retail use; gross leasable area greater than 20,000 square feet
   
153.121   Office and service uses
   
153.122   Medical marijuana related uses
   
153.123   Vehicle related uses
   
153.124   Industrial and storage uses
   
153.125   Other uses
Provisions Generally Applicable to All Districts
   
153.140   Access
   
153.141   Building regulations
   
153.142   Corner clearance (clear vision triangle)
   
153.143   Essential services
   
153.144   Grading
   
153.145   Fences and walls
   
153.146   Structure height calculations and height limits
   
153.147   Illegal dwellings
   
153.148   Keeping of animals
   
153.149   Projections into required yards
   
153.150   Site excavation
   
153.151   Setback requirements
   
153.152   Lot coverage requirements
   
153.153   Outdoor storage
   
153.154   Temporary buildings, structures, uses and special events
   
153.155   Through lots
   
153.156   Voting place
   
153.157   Water supply and sewage disposal facilities
   
153.158   Renting of residential properties
   
153.159   Landscaping features and portable storage bins
   153.160   Residential raised decks
General Site Development Requirements
   
153.170   Building appearance
   
153.171   Landscaping
   
153.172   Lighting
   
153.173   Trash receptacles
   
153.174   Mechanical equipment
Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation
   
153.185   Description and purpose
   
153.186   Applicability
   
153.187   Parking requirements and limitations
   
153.188   Parking alternatives
   
153.189   Off-street parking facility design
   
153.190   Off-street loading requirements
Signs
   
153.205   Purpose
   
153.206   General provisions
   
153.207   Sign standards for all signs
   
153.208   Sign standards for specific signs
   
153.209   Sign standards for specific land use; schedule of regulations
   
153.210   R1, R2, R4, PC and SR Zoning Districts
   
153.211   PUD Zoning District
   
153.212   PF Zoning District
   
153.213   GC Zoning District
   
153.214   CM Zoning District
   
153.215   CBD Zoning District
   
153.216   I Zoning District
   
153.217   PO and MC Zoning Districts
   
153.218   CH Zoning District
   
153.219   Schedule of regulations
Site Plan Review
   
153.230   Intent
   
153.231   Applicability
   
153.232   Exemptions
   
153.233   Pre-application conference
   
153.234   Site plan review procedures
   
153.235   Submittal requirements
   
153.236   Coordination with other departments and agencies
   
153.237   Standards for site plan approval
   
153.238   Conditions of site plan approval
   
153.239   Performance guarantee
   
153.240   Authority and limitations
   
153.241   Amendment to approved site plan
   
153.242   Expiration
   
153.243   As-built plan
Special Land Use Review
   
153.250   Intent
   
153.251   Procedures
   
153.252   Conditions of approval
   
153.253   Review standards
   
153.254   Expiration of permit
   
153.255   Revocation of an approved special land use
   
153.256   Appeals
   
153.257   Restrictions on resubmittal of a special land use request
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs)
   
153.270   Intent
   
153.271   Qualifying conditions
   
153.272   PUD requirements
   
153.273   General provisions
   
153.274   PUD review procedures
   
153.275   Review standards
   
153.276   Development agreement
   
153.277   Deviations from approved final PUD site plan
   
153.278   Appeals and variances
Non-Conformities
   
153.290   Intent
   
153.291   Non-conforming lots of record
   
153.292   Non-conforming uses
   
153.293   Non-conforming buildings or structures
   
153.294   Unlawful non-conformities
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   An ordinance enacted under Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.3101 to 125.3702, to regulate and restrict the use of land and structures;
to meet the needs for food, fiber, energy and other natural resources, places
of residence, recreation, industry, trade, service and other uses of land; to
ensure that uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and
relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion
of population, transportation systems and other public facilities; to
facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage
disposal, water, energy, education, recreation and other public service and
facility needs; and to promote public health, safety and welfare; and for those
purposes to divide the city into districts; to prescribe penalties for the
violation thereof; and to repeal conflicting ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5.1) (Ord. 791, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “The Zoning Ordinance” and may be cited as
such.
(Prior Code, § 5.2)
§ 153.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   As they are interpreted and applied, the provisions of this chapter
shall be the minimum requirements adopted to promote public health, safety and
general welfare.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are intended, among other things, to:
      (1)   Protect the lands, water and other natural resources of the
community by encouraging uses that are best suited to the capabilities and
characteristics of those resources and limiting their improper use;
      (2)   Promote orderly development in accordance with the city’s Master
Plan, as amended; to facilitate economical municipal water and sewer services,
adequate traffic capacity, recreational areas, schools and other public
requirements;
      (3)   Provide adequate light, air and healthful conditions in
residential, commercial and industrial areas;
      (4)   Promote convenient and safe access;
      (5)   Protect against fire and other dangers;
      (6)   Avoid undue concentrations of people by regulating the height and
bulk of buildings;
      (7)   Establish and require adequate yards, courts and other open spaces;
      (8)   Regulate and restrict the location of all uses, trades, industries
and buildings in relation to safe traffic and pedestrian movement;
      (9)   Achieve stability in the expenditure of funds for public
improvements and services;
      (10)   Promote mixed use developments in appropriate locations;
      (11)   Promote higher density in appropriate locations; and
      (12)   Protect and enhance neighborhood character.
(Prior Code, § 5.3)
§ 153.004 SCOPE.
   This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those
specifically repealed by this chapter, or of any private restrictions placed
upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement. Where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions than are imposed or required by existing laws or
ordinances, or by rules, regulations or permits, or by private restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 5.4)
§ 153.005 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Construction of language. The following rules of construction apply to
this chapter.
      (1)   The particular shall control the general and the use of a general
term shall not be taken to have the same meaning as another specific term. For
example, a “dry cleaning retail establishment” shall not be interpreted to be
the same as a “retail business supplying commodities on the premises” if each
term is listed as a separate and distinct use.
      (2)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
      (3)   A building or structure includes any and all of its parts.
      (4)   The phrase “used for” includes, but is not limited to, “arranged
for”, “designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained for” and “occupied for”.
      (5)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word “may” is permissive.
      (6)   The word “person” includes any individual, corporation,
partnership, incorporated association, limited liability company or any other
similar entity.
      (7)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunctions “and”, “or” or “either...or”, the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   “And” indicates that all of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events apply.
         (b)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         (c)   “Either...or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events may apply singly, but not in combination.
      (8)   Terms not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABUTTING. See ADJOINING.
      ABUTTING LOT, PARCEL OR RIGHT-OF-WAY. A lot, parcel or public or private
street right-of-way that shares a common property line with the subject lot or
parcel.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. An attached or detached building on the same lot with
and of a customarily incidental nature that is subordinate to the principal use
or building. (See §
153.116 of this chapter.)
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). See DWELLING UNIT: DWELLING, ACCESSORY
(ADU).
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. See STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use located on the same lot that is customarily found in
connection with, but clearly incidental to the principal use to which it is
related. (See §
153.116 of this chapter.)
      ACTIVE USE. A period of time where a recreational vehicle is uncovered
and operational for intermittent use instead of covered or disabled, as in
shrink-wrapped or fuel stabilized.
      ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
      ADJACENT. See ADJOINING.
      ADJOINING. All lands which touch, border or are contiguous to a specific
parcel of land including, but not limited to, those lands separated from the
parcel by a road right-of-way, easements, public utility rights-of-way or
inland lakes and streams as defined by the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501 et seq.
      ADULT. A person at the legal age of adulthood, as defined by the laws of
the state.
      ADULT DAY CARE HOME. A private residence with the approved capacity to
receive six or fewer adults, to be provided with foster care for periods of
less than 24 hours per day, five or more days per week and for two or more
consecutive weeks, as licensed and regulated under the Adult Foster Care
Facility Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et
seq., as amended.
      ADULT FOSTER CARE. See FOSTER CARE.
      AGGRIEVED PERSON. A person who has suffered a special damage from a
zoning decision not in common to other property owners similarly situated.
      ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way that provides a secondary means
of access to an abutting property, usually an improved surface providing access
to the rear of the lot.
      ALTERATION. A change, addition or modification in construction or type of
occupancy; any change in a building, such as walls, partitions, columns or
joists; any change in the dimensions or configuration of the roof, exterior
walls or foundation; or any change which may be referred to as altered or
reconstructed.
      AMUSEMENT PARK, SMALL SCALE. An outdoor recreation area in a park-like
setting which, along with required parking and landscaping, is comprised of
limited participatory amusement facilities and activities.
      ASSISTED LIVING. See SENIOR HOUSING.
      ATHLETIC COURT. An improved surface designed or intended for sports
activities including, but not limited to, basketball, tennis, badminton, pickle
ball or shuffleboard. (See §
153.125 of this chapter.)
      AWNING. A permanent shelter constructed on a supporting framework,
projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building.
      BASEMENT.
         (a)   The part of a building between a floor and ceiling, which is
partially below and partially above ground level, but with a vertical distance
from grade to the floor below that is greater than the vertical distance from
grade to the ceiling.
         (b)   A BASEMENT is not counted as a story.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1518.jpg]
 
      BED AND BREAKFAST. Any place of lodging that provides rooms for rent for
more than ten nights in a 12-month period, is the owner’s personal residence,
is occupied by the owner or owner’s representative at the time of rental and in
which a morning meal is served to guests.
      BEDROOM. A separate room or space with a legal means of egress, used or
intended to be used specifically for sleeping purposes. The following spaces do
not qualify as BEDROOMS:
         (a)   Kitchens;
         (b)   Dining areas;
         (c)   Gathering spaces such as family rooms, dens or living rooms; and
         (d)   Attics or basements without egress meeting standards in
applicable Building, Residential and Fire Codes.
      BERM. An earth mound covered with grasses, trees and/or other plants;
designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views and impacts and
help separate incompatible uses.
      BOARDING/ROOMING HOUSE. A building, structure, or portion thereof, where
individual rooms are rented to separate parties for more than 30 consecutive
days, such as seasonal worker housing, transitional homes, hostels or similar
uses.
      BOAT, COMMERCIAL. Any vessel, such as, but not limited to, a tugboat or
freighter, used for commercial purposes without regard to the carrying
capacity.
      BOAT DOCKING SPACE. The space along a dock, pier or similar structure
where a boat may be moored.
      BOATHOUSE. A building or enclosed structure used for the docking and/or
storage of boats, marine equipment and associated uses. (See §
153.116(E) of this chapter.)
      BOAT, RECREATIONAL. Any vessel used primarily for non-commercial use, or
leased, rented or chartered to another for the latter’s non-commercial use.
      BREWPUB. A facility where beer is produced, stored and sold for
consumption on or off the premises that meets the requirements of the state’s
Liquor Control Commission, where no more than 5,000 barrels of beer are
produced per year.
      BUFFER. An undeveloped, open area that does not contain structures,
parking, pavement or buildings, but which may include landscaping, a screen
wall or berm, used to physically separate and screen one land use or property
from another.
      BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot or site, exclusive of required
setbacks, landscaping or open space, within which buildings may be built.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1520.jpg]
 
      BUILDING. A temporary or permanent independent structure with a roof
supported by columns, walls or other supports that is used to house people,
animals, possessions or conduct business activities or other uses. A BUILDING
may or may not have a permanent location on the ground.
      BUILDING ELEVATION. All of that part of a building facade(s) which would
be included in an elevation view rendering of the building drawn parallel to,
and for the entire length of, a lot line.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average finished
grade around the building to the highest point of a flat roof; to the deck line
of a mansard roof; when there is a dormer built into the roof, the height is
measured to the midpoint of the dormer roof if the dormer(s) exceeds 50% or
more of the width of any side of the building; to the average height between
the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip and gambrel roof; or to an equivalent
point on any other roof, excluding structural elements not intended for
habitation and not exceeding six feet above the maximum building height
including antenna arrays, smoke and ventilation stacks, flag poles, mechanical
and elevator equipment, and parapet walls designed solely to screen mechanical
and elevator equipment (See §
153.146 of this chapter.)
      BUILDING OFFICIAL or BUILDING INSPECTOR. The county’s Department of
Building Safety.
      BUILDING ROOF. A structure that covers or forms the top of a building.
Roof styles include, but are not limited to, gable, gambrel, hip, mansard and
flat.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1522.jpg]
 
      CAMPGROUND. A property with two or more campsites that is established or
maintained for commercial occupancy as temporary living quarters for
recreation, education or vacation purposes.
      CANOPY (BUILDING). A permanent rigid structure covered with fabric,
metal, shingles or other material and supported by a building at one or more
points.
      CANOPY (FREESTANDING). A permanent, rigid structure covered with fabric,
metal or other material and supported by columns, posts or other forms of
support not a part of a building.
      CARPORT. A partially open structure providing shelter for one or more
vehicles.
      CARRY-OUT SERVICE. A service that is ancillary to a permitted use
involving the sale of pre-ordered and ready-to-consume food or beverages, which
are packaged and intended for consumption off the premises. These items are
delivered to a customer who is either waiting in the premises or in a motor
vehicle parked in a space designated and used for CARRY-OUT SERVICE.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document issued by the county’s Department of
Building Safety certifying that a structure or use has been constructed and
will be used in compliance with all applicable regulations and, therefore,
occupancy or use of the building can occur.
      CHANGE OF USE. Any use of a building, structure or property different
from the previous use in the way it is classified in this chapter or in the
state’s Building Code, as amended.
      CHILD CARE CENTER. See DAY CARE FACILITY.
      CHURCH. A building, structure or other facility used for public worship
where organized services are held by persons of similar beliefs.
      CLINIC. An establishment that admits patients on an outpatient basis for
examination and treatment by physicians, dentists or similar professionals.
CLINIC does not include a marijuana collective, cooperative or dispensary, or
the business of a primary caregiver or other business or use involved in the
medical use of marijuana.
      CLUB/LODGE. An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, but
not typically operated for profit.
      COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets that serve as a link between local and
arterial streets. Examples include West Carpenter, May Street and Park Avenue.
      COMMISSION. The city’s Planning Commission.
      COMPOSTING FACILITY. A facility where organic matter is delivered,
degraded and then transported elsewhere.
      CONDITIONAL REZONING. A rezoning that is conditioned by a specific use
and approved site plan voluntarily proposed by the applicant.
      CONDOMINIUM, SITE.
         (a)   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area of a condominium unit within which
the principal building or structure may be constructed, together with any
accessory structures, as described in the master site condominium deed.
         (b)   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§
559.101 through 559.272, as amended.
         (c)   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. That portion of the condominium project
designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the
master deed of the condominium project, within which a building or other
improvements may be constructed by the condominium unit owner. A SITE
CONDOMINIUM UNIT is considered a lot by this chapter.
         (d)   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A plan or project consisting of not less
than two condominium units, established in conformance with the Condominium
Act.
         (e)   LIMITED COMMON ELEMENT. An area that is appurtenant to a site
condominium unit and that is reserved in the master deed for the site
condominium development for the exclusive use of the owner(s) of the site
condominium unit.
         (f)   MASTER DEED. The condominium document recording the condominium
project which is attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the
approved by-laws for the project and the approved condominium subdivision plan
for the project.
         (g)   SITE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium development in which each
condominium unit consists of an area of vacant land and a volume of vacant air
space, within which a building or other improvements may be constructed.
         (h)   SITE CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT. A development consisting of not
less than two site condominium units, established in compliance with the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through
559.272.
         (i)   SITE CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The plans, drawings and
information prepared for a site condominium development, as required by § 66 of
the Condominium Act and this chapter, for review by the Planning Commission.
      CONVALESCENT HOME or NURSING HOME. A facility licensed as a “nursing
home” by the state’s Department of Public Health under Art. 17 of the Public
Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.2010 et seq., as
amended, where residents generally require 24-hour care and monitoring to meet
their health and security needs. A NURSING HOME shall include an extended care
facility, hospice and convalescent home.
      COUNCIL. The Charlevoix City Council.
      CUL-DE-SAC. The vehicle turn-around area constituting the terminus of a
street that has only one outlet to another street. A CUL-DE-SAC LOT has
frontage on such a turn-around area.
      DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed under the Child Care Organizations
Act, Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through 722.128. DAY
CARE FACILITIES include the following.
         (a)   DAY CARE CENTER or NURSERY. A facility other than a private
residence in which one or more preschool or school age children are given care,
and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child.
A CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER includes a facility that provides care
for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of
care per day. The facility is generally described as a CHILD CARE CENTER, DAY
CARE CENTER, DAY NURSERY, NURSERY SCHOOL, PARENT COOPERATIVE PRESCHOOL, PLAY
GROUP, BEFORE- OR AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM or DROP-IN CENTER.
         (b)   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which one or more, but
fewer than seven, minor children are received for care, unattended by a parent
or legal guardian, excluding children related to an adult member of the family
by blood, marriage or adoption. FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES include a home in which
care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a
calendar year.
         (c)   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which more than six, but
not more than 12, minor children are given care and supervision, unattended by
a parent or legal guardian, excluding children related to an adult member of
the family by blood, marriage or adoption. A GROUP DAY CARE HOME includes a
home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four
weeks during a calendar year.
      DECK. A structure, which may be directly attached to a dwelling, without
a roof or walls, except for railings, that is constructed on piers or an above-
grade foundation wall and used as an outdoor living area.
      DECK, ROOF TOP. A finished surface constructed above any top plate of a
structure without a roof or walls, except for railings, and which is designed
to function as useable outdoor area for human activity.
      DENSITY, NET. The number of dwelling units per net acre of land. Net
acreage is calculated by subtracting the land area in rights-of-way or private
easements for streets and roads from the total gross acreage, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.
      DREDGING. The process of cleaning out the bed of a harbor, river or other
water bodies or waterways by scooping out sand, mud or other materials with a
dredge.
         (a)   UPLAND DREDGING. Removing material from above the ordinary high
water mark in order to allow for water body access.
         (b)   INLAND DREDGING. Removing material from inland water bodies to
maintain watercraft navigability or increase water depth.
      DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. A facility designed to serve patrons of a
business while in their motor vehicles, either exclusively or in addition to
service within a building or structure.
      DRIVEWAY. A privately controlled and maintained easement, right-of-way or
other interest in land providing vehicular access from a public or private
street to a lot.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building, designed for use and
occupancy by individuals, or one family, for living, kitchen and bathing
facilities. A recreational vehicle, vehicle chassis or tent is not considered a
DWELLING.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2142.png]
         (a)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building containing three or more
dwelling units where each unit may have access to a common hallway, stairs or
elevator, or where each unit may have individual access to a street or common
courtyard.
         (b)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.
            1.   DETACHED. A single-family dwelling unit that is separate and
distinct from any other dwelling. A single-family dwelling that does not share
a party wall with any other dwelling is a DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.
            2.   ATTACHED. A dwelling designed for occupancy by one family in a
row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear
access to the outside, no unit is located over another, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant
walls. (Also known as a TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE.)
         (c)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A single-family dwelling unit attached to
one other single-family dwelling by a common wall or floor. (Also known as a
DUPLEX.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1524.jpg]
 
         (d)   DWELLING, ACCESSORY (ADU). An accessory building that
incorporates one dwelling unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2140.png]
         (e)    DWELLING, COURTYARD. A structure or series of structures
consisting of multiple detached, side-by-side, and/or stacked dwelling units
oriented around a courtyard or series of courtyards. The courtyard typically
replaces the function of a rear yard and is more open to the street in low
intensity neighborhoods and less
      EASEMENT. A grant of one or more rights over, across or under land which
benefits and/or burdens other land or which grants rights to the public, a
utility or third party.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
         (a)   The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by a
public utility or municipal department of underground, surface or overhead gas,
communication, telephone, electrical, steam, fuel or water, transmission,
distribution collection, supply or disposal systems.
         (b)   This includes related poles, wires, pipes, conduit, cables,
public safety alarm and communication equipment, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories that are necessary to furnish adequate service addressing
general public health, safety, convenience or welfare.
         (c)   These do not include wireless telecommunication towers (unless
located on public property and used as part of a municipal emergency
communications network), wind energy conversion systems, office buildings,
substations or structures that are enclosures or shelters for service equipment
or maintenance depots.
      EXCAVATION. The process of altering natural grade by cutting or filling
earth, or any activity by which soil or rock is cut, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced or relocated.
      FAMILY. Either of the following defines a FAMILY:
         (a)   An individual or group of two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, together with foster children and servants of the
principal occupants who are domiciled together as a single, domestic,
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
         (b)   A collective number of individuals, domiciled together in one
dwelling unit whose relationship is of a continuing, domestic character, and
who cook and live as a single non-profit housekeeping unit. This does not
include a society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, halfway house,
lodge, organization, group of students or other individuals whose domestic
relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature, such as a school term, a
period of rehabilitation or treatment or is otherwise not intended to be of a
permanent nature.
      FENCE. A permanent outdoor partition, structure or gate erected as a
barrier or enclosure.
      FILLING. Depositing or dumping any matter into or onto the ground.
      FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal area of all building floors,
measured from the interior faces of exterior walls, excluding porches, patios,
terraces, breezeways, carport garages, unfinished attic areas and basements.
      FLOOR AREA, USABLE. The sum of the total horizontal area of all building
floors that are used or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or to
serve clients or customers, and all areas devoted to employee work space. FLOOR
AREA is measured from the interior faces of exterior walls. Excluded from
USABLE FLOOR AREA are those parts of a building principally used or intended to
be used to store or process merchandise, and hallways, elevators, stairs,
bulkheads or utility or sanitary facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1526.jpg]
 
      FOSTER CARE.
         (a)   ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY. A facility defined by the Adult
Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§
400.701 et seq., as an establishment providing foster care to adults. Included
are foster care facilities and family homes for adults that are aged, mentally
ill, developmentally disabled or physically disabled, and that require
supervision on an ongoing basis, but do not require continuous nursing care.
            1.   ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. A private residence with an
approved capacity of six or fewer adults, where foster care is provided 24
hours per day, five or more days per week, and for two or more consecutive
weeks. It is licensed and regulated under the Adult Foster Care Facility
Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et seq., as
amended. The person issued the adult foster care family home license is a
member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
            2.   ADULT FOSTER CARE GROUP HOME. A private residence where adults
are provided with foster care 24 hours a day, five or more days per week, and
for two or more consecutive weeks. A FOSTER CARE GROUP HOME with an approved
capacity of at least seven, but not more than 12 adults is a “small group
home”. A GROUP HOME with an approved capacity of at least 13, but not more than
20 adults is a “large group home”. An ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY is licensed
under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et seq., as amended, and the person issued the adult
foster care group home license is a member of the household and an occupant of
the residence.
         (b)   FOSTER FAMILY HOME. A private home, licensed under Public Act
116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through 722.128, in which at least one,
but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member
of the house by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household
pursuant to the Adoption Code (Public Act 288 of 1939, M.C.L.A. §§ 701.1 to
713.6, as amended), are given care and supervision 24 hours per day, four or
more days per week for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or
guardian. The person issued the license is a permanent resident of the home.
         (c)   FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME. A private home, licensed under Public
Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through 722.128, in which more than
four, but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult
member of the house by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the
household pursuant to the Adoption Code (Public Act 288 of 1939, as amended),
are given care and supervision 24 hours per day, four or more days per week for
two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or guardian. The person
issued the license is a permanent resident of the home.
      FRONTAGE. The linear distance where a property line coincides with a
street right-of-way line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1528.jpg]
 
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a principal building
designed for the parking or storage of automobiles, boats, house trailers or
similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory.
      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any garage that is not private.
      GRADE. The elevation of the ground adjacent to a structure; existing or
natural grade is the elevation that exists or existed prior to manmade
alterations. Finished grade is the elevation established after filling or
excavation. For a sloping site, FINISHED GRADE is the average between the
highest and lowest elevation of the ground adjacent to each face of a building,
wall or other structure being measured. (See §
153.144 of this chapter.)
      GOOD VISITOR GUIDELINE MATERIALS.
         (a)   Materials prepared by the city’s Planning and Zoning Department
that may include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   A summary of the city’s noise ordinance, fireworks ordinance,
trash disposal ordinances and applicable offenses against the public peace;
            2.   A reminder that the rental property is located in a
residential neighborhood and that neighbors may not be vacationing;
            3.   Information regarding amenities and regulations regarding
pets;
            4.   Parking rules and designated areas;
            5.   Street address;
            6.   Safety features; and
            7.   A statement informing the renters that neighboring property
owners may contact the local agent and local police to report any issues
relating to the property.
         (b)   The GOOD VISITOR GUIDELINE MATERIALS may be revised by the
city’s Planning and Zoning Department from time to time.
      GREENBELT. A strip of land providing visual relief between properties
reserved for landscaping, berms, walls or fencing; often between abutting uses
of differing intensities.
      HOME OCCUPATION (MAJOR). A vocational activity conducted as an accessory
use in a dwelling, which is accessory and incidental to the principal
residential use of the dwelling. MAJOR HOME OCCUPATIONS are vocational
activities that do not meet the definition of minor home occupations.
      HOME OCCUPATION (MINOR). A vocational activity conducted as an accessory
use in a dwelling unit by a member or members of the resident family, which is
accessory and incidental to the principal residential use of the dwelling.
MINOR HOME OCCUPATIONS have two or less employees, have no exterior signage,
and conduct business in a manner not known to the general public.
      HOSPITAL. A building, structure or institution in which sick or injured
persons are given medical or surgical treatment, operating under license by the
Health Department and the state, and which is used primarily for inpatient
services, including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, central service facilities and staff offices.
      HOUSEHOLD. A house, apartment, group of rooms or a single room occupied
as separate living quarters, that includes a bathroom(s), sleeping quarters and
area to prepare food.
      HOTEL. See MOTEL/HOTEL.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any material that substantially reduces or prevents
the infiltration of storm water into the earth.
      INFILL DEVELOPMENT. The process of developing vacant or underutilized
parcels within existing urban areas that are already largely developed. See
image labeled Missing Middle Housing below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2166.png]
 
      INOPERABLE VEHICLE. An unlicensed, uninsured motor vehicle that is
incapable of being operated under its own power.
      JUNK. Including, but not limited to, inoperable vehicles; solid waste;
motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise with missing
parts; scrap metals or materials that are damaged or deteriorated; or vehicles
or machines in a condition preventing them from being used as manufactured.
      JUNK YARD or SALVAGE YARD. An area used for any of the following:
collection, storage, dismantling, dumping, display, resale, exchange, baling,
cleaning or handling of secondhand, salvaged or used waste materials,
machinery, vehicles, trailers, equipment or furnishings; but excluding vehicle,
boat, truck or trailer sales areas.
      KENNEL. A lot or facility on which four or more dogs, cats or other
household pets, three months of age or older, are either permanently or
temporarily kept for sale, boarding, breeding, training, competition or
showing, whether for commercial or non-commercial purposes.
      LIFE-SAFETY FEATURES. A necessary component of a building whose primary
use is to eliminate or reduce danger and hazards to occupants and users of a
building, including but not limited to enclosed stairwells on a roof, or
enclosed elevator systems on a roof, railings on a roof, or fire suppression
systems on a roof.
      LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot as a building or group
of buildings, used to temporarily park a commercial vehicle while loading and
unloading merchandise or materials.
      LOCAL AGENT. An individual designated to oversee the short-term rental of
a dwelling unit in accordance with this chapter and to respond to calls from
renters, concerned citizens, law enforcement and representatives of the city.
The LOCAL AGENT must be available to accept telephone calls on a 24-hour basis
at all times that the short-term rental is rented and occupied. The LOCAL AGENT
must have a key to the rental unit and be able to respond to the short-term
rental within 60 minutes to address issues or must have arranged for another
person to address issues within the same timeframe.
      LOCAL STREETS. Streets that primarily access individual properties and
homes.
      LOT. A parcel of land intended for individual ownership and use,
separately described on a deed or other instrument recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds, whether by metes and bounds, as part of a platted
subdivision or a site condominium.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1530.jpg]
 
         (a)   LOT, CORNER. A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting
two intersecting streets, and where the interior angle of the intersecting
streets is less than 135 degrees. Also, a lot located on a curved street or
streets if tangents of the curve, at the points of beginning with the lot or
the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line,
intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
         (b)   LOT, CUL-DE-SAC. A lot having more than one-half of its required
lot frontage on a cul-de-sac. The cul-de-sac shall be determined to begin at
the intersection of the radius of the cul-de-sac with the right-of-way or
easement line.
         (c)   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two
more or less parallel streets. (Also known as a THROUGH LOT.)
         (d)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or through lot.
      LOT AREA. The area of land included within a lot as defined by property
lines, but excluding any public or private rights-of-way.
      LOT COVERAGE. The lot area, stated as a percentage of the total, covered
by all buildings and impervious surfaces such as asphalt or concrete driveways,
stone patios and sidewalks.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the road
right-of-way.
      LOT LINES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1532.jpg]
 
         (a)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of an interior lot, the line
separating the lot from the street right-of-way or road easement. For a corner
lot, the PRINCIPAL FRONT LOT LINE shall be the location of the traditional
front entrance of the structure. In the case of a through lot, the FRONT LOT
LINE shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the dominant
orientation of abutting and facing lots.
         (b)   REAR LOT LINE. The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or flared lot, the rear
lot line shall be a line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. An undeveloped
through lot does not have a REAR LOT LINE.
         (c)   SIDE LOT LINE. A lot line that is neither a front lot line, nor
a rear lot line.
         (d)   STREET SIDE LOT LINE. A side lot line abutting a street on a
corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1534.jpg]
 
      LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land separately described on a plat,
condominium document or metes and bounds description recorded in the office of
the county’s Register of Deeds. When an owner has combined two or more lots
into a single building site, or combined two or more lots contained in any
recorded plat, the combination of lots shall be deemed to be a SINGLE LOT OF
RECORD.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the
two points where the required front setback intersects the side lot lines.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure (formerly known as a mobile home) used as
a single-family dwelling, and built to the Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards (HUD Code) and which displays a red certification label on the
exterior of each transportable section. MANUFACTURED HOMES are built in the
controlled environment of a manufacturing plant and are transportable in one or
more sections on a permanent chassis.
      MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY. A property that has been planned, designed,
improved and maintained for the placement of manufactured homes and permitted
accessory uses.
      MANUFACTURED HOME SITE. A property within a manufactured home community
designed to accommodate a single manufactured home.
      MARQUEE. A permanent structure of rigid materials supported by and
extending from, or above, the facade of a building.
      MASTER PLAN. A physical plan adopted by the Planning Commission and/or
the City Council, including graphic and written proposals indicating the
general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and existing and
future land use within the city, including any unit or part of the plan, and
any amendment to the plan or parts thereof.
      MINOR ARTERIALS. Streets whose primary function is to move traffic
between principal arterials and local streets and between major parts of the
city such as neighborhoods, employment and shopping. These provide important
roadway links into the city and to major activity areas and are considered
secondary gateways. Examples include Ferry and Belvedere Avenues, State Street
and Division.
      MOBILE HOME. A factory built single-family dwelling manufactured prior to
the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code). See
MANUFACTURED HOME.
      MOTEL/HOTEL. A building or group of buildings on the same lot, containing
sleeping or dwelling units in which lodging is provided for compensation on a
transient basis. The term includes tourist cabins, motor courts, motor lodges
and similar facilities.
      MOTOR HOME. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or any of its parts lawfully
existing on the effective date of this chapter or its subsequent amendment that
does not conform to the current provisions of the district in which it is
located.
      NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot lawfully existing on the effective date of this
chapter or its subsequent amendment that does not meet the current area and/or
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A use or activity lawfully existing on the effective
date of this chapter or its subsequent amendment that does not conform to the
current use provisions of this chapter.
      NURSERY SCHOOL. See DAY CARE FACILITY.
      NURSING HOME. See CONVALESCENT HOME OR NURSING HOME.
      OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. A room, suite of rooms or building in which a
person transacts the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or
government.
      OPEN SPACE. A parcel or area of land or water that may or may not be
improved and that is reserved for public or private use.
      ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The line between upland and bottomland which
persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence
and action of the water is common or recurrent so that the character of the
land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself,
the configuration of the soil and the vegetation. On an inland lake which has
had a level established by law, it means the high established level. On a river
or stream, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK shall be the ten year flood limit line.
The ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK shall be at elevation 581.5 feet (International
Great Lake Datum, IGLD-1985) for Lake Michigan, the Pine River Channel, Round
Lake and Lake Charlevoix.
      OUTDOOR DISPLAY, SALES. The outdoor placement, storage or keeping, for
display purposes, of equipment, vehicles, trailers and other similar goods for
sale on a premises.
      OUTDOOR STORAGE. The outdoor placement of goods such as building or
construction materials, equipment, vehicles, trailers and other supplies for
future use, production, assembly, preservation or disposal.
      PARCEL. See LOT.
      PARKING LOT. A facility providing parking spaces, along with adequate
drives, aisles and maneuvering space, to allow unrestricted ingress and egress
to at least two vehicles.
      PARKING SPACE. A space used to park one motor vehicle.
      PATIO. An uncovered at-grade courtyard or outdoor platform.
      PENNANT. A small, often triangular, flag used in multiples.
      PERSONAL TRAILER. A wheeled vehicle that is not self-propelled, but
capable of transporting contents. It is designed to be towed by a motor
vehicle, but not designed or intended to be used as a living quarters.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A use which allows a development to be
designed and built as a unit and which is designed to encourage quality land
development and site design outside the typical zoning standards through
flexible design and use standards and a greater latitude in the mix or uses
resulting in more efficient and effective use of the land and infrastructure.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The city’s Planning Commission.
      PLANTS.
         (a)   GROUND COVER. Low-growing plants such as perennial flowers,
grasses and vines. Chipped wood, bark mulch, concrete, gravel and similar
materials or artificial plants are not considered GROUND COVER.
         (b)   SHRUBS. Woody plants with several stems arising from the base.
      PLAT. A map of a subdivision of land, recorded with the Register of Deeds
pursuant to the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 560.101 through 560.293, and the Land Division Act, Public Act 591 of 1996,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., as amended.
      PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS. Roads that generally carry long distance, through-
travel. They also provide access to important traffic generators, such as
employment centers and shopping areas. These are important routes through the
city and are also primary entrances or gateways from outlying areas. (Examples
include U.S. 31 and M-66.)
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building in which a principal use is located.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The primary use to which a premises is devoted.
      RECREATION FACILITY, INDOOR. A facility open either to the general public
or to members and their guests, located in an enclosed building that is
designed to accommodate sports, recreational activities, training or related
enterprises such as racquet clubs, fitness clubs, skating rinks and the like.
Also included are accessory uses that are clearly in support of the primary
use, such as sporting goods shops, food service and party/banquet facilities
serving patrons of the indoor recreation use, spectator accommodations,
changing/locker rooms and employee offices.
      RECREATION FACILITY, OUTDOOR. A recreation facility that is operated
primarily for outdoor recreation uses, as well as related buildings and
structures that are accessory to the primary outdoor nature of the activities.
Included are golf courses and related support facilities, court games, field
sports, shooting ranges, winter sports, swim clubs, campgrounds and resorts, or
a combination of such uses.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or EQUIPMENT. Vehicle or equipment used for travel
and leisure activities including:
      (1)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation uses; and which is permanently identified as a TRAVEL TRAILER by the
manufacturer.
      (2)   PICKUP CAMPER. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use
as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
      (3)   MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an
integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
      (4)   FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A canvas or plastic folding structure,
mounted on wheels, designed for travel and vacation use.
      (5)   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle designed for the purpose of hauling
miscellaneous goods and materials.
      (6)   BOATS and BOAT TRAILERS. Includes boats, floats, rafts, canoes and
kayaks; plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
      (7)   OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Includes snowmobiles, personal
watercraft, all terrain or special terrain vehicles, mopeds, motorcycles,
utility trailers, motorized and non-motorized, plus the normal equipment used
to transport them on the highway.
      RENTALS.
         (a)   LONG-TERM RENTALS. Any dwelling or condominium or portion
thereof, that is available for use for a fee or other compensation for a term
of 30 consecutive days or more.
         (b)   SHORT-TERM RENTALS. Any dwelling or condominium or portion
thereof, that is available for use for a fee or other compensation for a term
of less than 30 consecutive days, but not including hotel rooms, transitional
housing operated by a non-profit entity, group homes such as nursing homes and
adult foster care homes, and hospitals or other health care related facilities.
      RESIDENCE. The act of living in a given place for a period of time.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. The R1, R2, R2A, R4 and PC Zoning Districts.
      RETAINING WALL. A permanent structure used to secure dirt, sand, rock or
other materials to prevent downslope movement or erosion.
      SANITARY LANDFILL. Land designed, developed and operated for the disposal
of solid waste in a manner consistent with criteria established by Public Act
451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501 et seq., as amended, and any related
rules and regulations.
      SCREENING or BUFFERING. A way of visually shielding or obscuring an
abutting or nearby structure or use from another, using a fence, wall, berm
and/or vegetation.
      SCREEN WALL. A solid wall or fence erected to shield, buffer and/or
screen incompatible uses.
      SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. A building or a group of buildings in a
controlled-access compound where individual compartments, stalls or lockers are
rented out to tenants to store goods.
      SENIOR HOUSING. See also CONVALESCENT HOME OR NURSING HOME.
         (a)   INDEPENDENT LIVING. A housing development consisting of attached
or detached single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings designed for
and generally limited to housing of persons over 62 years of age who maintain a
degree of physical independence, and thus shared medical services and
congregate meals are generally not provided.
         (b)   ASSISTED LIVING. A housing development consisting of attached or
detached single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings designed for
and generally limited to housing of persons over 62 years of age, who because
of physical or other limitations, need access within the development to medical
and other services and where congregate meals are provided; however, 24-hour
care and monitoring is not necessary.
      SERVICE AREA. An outdoor area related to a non-residential use that is
used for loading and unloading operations and to receive and temporarily store
goods, materials and equipment.
      SETBACK. The minimum required horizontal distance, measured from the lot
lines to a building or structure as designated for a zoning district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1536.jpg]
 
         (a)   FRONT SETBACK LINE. The line marking the required setback from
the front lot line, which establishes the required front yard setback.
         (b)   REAR SETBACK LINE. The line marking the required setback
distance from the rear lot line, which establishes the required rear yard.
         (c)   SIDE SETBACK LINE. The lines marking the required setback
distance from the side lot lines, which establishes the required side yards.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL. Any dwelling or condominium or portion thereof,
excepting boat docks, that is available for use for a fee or other compensation
for a term of less than 30 consecutive days, not including bed and breakfasts,
hotel rooms, transitional housing operated by a non-profit entity, group homes
such as nursing homes and adult foster care homes, and hospitals or other
health care related facilities.
      SIGN. A structure, including its base, foundation and erection supports
upon which is displayed any words, letters, figures, emblems, symbols, designs
or trademarks by which any message or image is afforded public visibility from
outdoors on behalf of, or for the benefit of, any product, place, activity,
individual, firm, corporation, institution, profession, association, business
or organization. (See below for detailed definitions.)
         (a)   SIGN, AIRBORNE DEVICES. A sign supported by aerodynamic forces
or propelled through the air by force including, but not limited to, air filled
balloons, signs animated by forced air and lighter than air signs.
         (b)   SIGN, AWNING. A sign painted, printed, attached flat against or
integrated within the surface of an awning.
         (c)   SIGN, BANNER. A sign made of a non-rigid material; however, not
including pennants or flags.
         (d)   SIGN, BILLBOARD-HIGHWAY ADVERTISING. An off-premises sign owned
by a person, corporation or other legal entity that engages in the business of
utilizing and/or selling the space on that sign. See OFF-PREMISES SIGN.
         (e)   SIGN, BUSINESS CENTER. An on-premises sign which identifies or
gives directions to a business complex or group of contiguous stores which may
contain the names of the individual stores, businesses, institutions, or other
organizations located within the complex or group. See ON-PREMISES SIGN.
         (f)   SIGN, CANOPY. A sign affixed, applied to or part of a canopy.
         (g)   SIGN, ELECTRONIC SIGN FACE. The portion of a sign face capable
of changing its message or image electronically.
         (h)   SIGN, FLAG. A sign made of non-rigid material having a
distinctive size, color and design used as a symbol or emblem.
         (j)   SIGN, GROUND. A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles,
braces or some other structure, placed in the ground surface and not attached
to any building.
         (k)   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign that includes artificial light by
either emission, reflection or refraction.
         (l)   SIGN, INTERNALLY LIGHTED. A sign having an internal lighting
source which allows light to be visible through the sign face.
         (m)   SIGN, MARQUEE. Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee.
         (n)   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign which contains a message regarding a
land use, service or activity provided on property other than the premises
where such sign is located.
         (o)   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which contains a message regarding a
land use, service or activity provided on the property where such sign is
located.
         (p)   SIGN, PORTABLE. A freestanding sign, often with a changeable
message, that is not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or
the ground.
         (q)   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign which is affixed to any building or
structure other than a marquee or canopy and projects in such a way that the
sign face is not parallel to the wall to which it is attached.
         (r)   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign or part of a sign which is erected on, or
as a part of, the roof of a building.
         (s)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign, often with a non-changeable message,
with or without a structural frame, intended for a limited period of display.
         (t)   SIGN, WALL. A sign which is attached directly to, or painted
upon, a building wall, the exposed face of which is essentially in a plane
parallel to the building wall or structure.
         (u)   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof
that is placed on the interior of a window pane or glass with the intent to be
visible from the outdoors.
      SIGN FACE. The portion of a sign excluding its base, foundation and
erection supports.
      SINGLE OWNERSHIP. A parcel of land in separate and distinct ownership
from adjacent parcels.
      SITE PLAN. A plan of a proposed project that shows all relevant features
necessary to determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter.
      STORY. The part of a building, except a mezzanine level, that is between
the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor. If there is no
floor above, then a STORY is the space between the floor and the above ceiling.
See also BASEMENT.
      STORY, HALF. The uppermost habitable story under a sloped roof with a
usable floor area that does not exceed 75% of the floor area of the story
immediately below.
      STREAMERS. A long narrow wavy strip resembling or suggesting a banner
floating in the wind.
      STREET. A public or private thoroughfare, used or intended to be used for
passage or travel by motor vehicles. STREET also includes the term ROAD.
         (a)   STREET, PRIVATE. A privately owned and maintained street serving
three or more lots, parcels, buildings or dwellings, and constructed on a
privately owned easement.
         (b)   STREET, PUBLIC. An easement, right-of-way or other interest that
has been conveyed to and accepted by a governmental body for the purpose of
providing access to abutting land.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected requiring a permanent location
in or on the ground, or that must be attached to something having such a
permanent location. STRUCTURES include, but are not limited to, houses,
buildings, accessory structures or buildings, fences, signs, decks, retaining
walls, parking lots, access drives and swimming pools.
      STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. An attached or detached structure on the same lot
and of a customarily incidental nature that is subordinate to the principal use
or building/structure (see §
153.116).
      SWIMMING POOL. A basin or structure designed to hold water for aquatic
recreation; not including temporary, portable pools located upon the ground and
holding less than 300 gallons of water, or decorative pools less than two feet
deep.
      TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER. A freestanding structure or one that is attached
to another structure, supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio or
other communication.
      TRAILERS. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      TREE.
         (a)   CANOPY TREE. A deciduous shade tree.
         (b)   EVERGREEN TREE. A tree with foliage that persists and remains
green throughout the year.
         (c)   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A small deciduous tree grown for its foliage
and/or flowers.
      TRUCK STOP. A facility intended to provide services to the trucking
industry including, but not limited to, the following activities, dispensing of
fuel, repair shops, automated washes, restaurants and motels all as part of the
facility.
      USE. Any purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged,
intended, used, maintained or occupied.
         (a)   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use of the structure or premises.
         (b)   USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT. A principal or accessory use that,
because of its nature, is allowed as regulated within a specified zoning
district.
         (c)   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary purpose for which land or a structure
may be used.
         (d)   TEMPORARY USE. A use or activity that may be permitted for a
limited time.
      VARIANCE. An allowed modification to the requirements of this chapter, as
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of this chapter
and Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 to 125.3702, as amended.
      VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. An establishment where motor vehicle fuel is
sold and/or where charging services are provided for electric vehicles. Minor
vehicle repair services may be offered, including the sale of related vehicle
products and accessories. The facility may also sell convenience retail items,
including such items as snacks, food, beverages and small household items.
      VEHICLE REPAIR.
         (a)   MAJOR. The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles or parts thereof, including powertrain and suspension repair or
rebuilding, body work, frame alignment, undercoating, painting, tire recapping,
engine rebuilding, dismantling upholstery, auto glass work and other vehicle
repair work creating noise, glare, fumes or smoke, but not including vehicle
wrecking, junking or salvaging.
         (b)   MINOR. The services related to general routine maintenance of
motor vehicles, including the sale and installation of oil and other fluids
(other than fuel), tires, batteries, belts, windshield wipers, mufflers and
exhaust systems, brakes and shock absorbers, air conditioners and wheel
alignment and balancing.
      VEHICLE SALES. The use of a building, property or other premises for the
display and sale of vehicles, trucks, boats, trailers, farm equipment or other
similar mobile equipment in operable condition, whether new or used. It may
also include vehicle preparation, washing or minor repair conducted in
association with the sale of vehicles.
      VEHICLE WASH ESTABLISHMENT. All or part of a building, premises or
property regularly used for washing vehicles. (Also referred to as a CAR WASH.)
      VETERINARY CLINIC. A veterinary establishment that admits animals on an
outpatient basis for examination and treatment and that does not usually lodge
animals overnight.
      VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A place where animals are given medical care and
their boarding is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
      WAREHOUSE.
         (a)   A building primarily used to store goods, materials and
commodities including associated driveway, vehicle circulation and parking
areas and also a self-storage warehouse where customers deliver and store goods
and remove them when storage is terminated.
         (b)   A WAREHOUSE may include goods, materials and commodities stored
on a wholesale basis before being distributed for retail sale.
      WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS).
         (a)   A WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM is a combination of:
            1.   A surface area (typically a blade, rotor or similar device),
either variable or fixed, for utilizing the wind for electrical power;
            2.   A shaft, gearing, belt or coupling utilized to convert the
rotation of the surface area into a form suitable for driving a generator,
alternator or other electricity-producing device;
            3.   The generator, alternator or other device to convert the
mechanical energy of the surface area into electrical energy, generally housed
in a nacelle;
            4.   The tower, pylon, building mount or other structure upon which
any, all or some combination of the above are mounted;
            5.   Other components not listed above, but that are associated
with the normal construction, operation and maintenance of a WECS; and
            6.   A WECS may have a horizontal axis with a rotor that spins
perpendicular to the ground or a vertical axis with a rotor that spins parallel
to the ground.
         (b)   WECS HEIGHT. The distance measured between the ground (at normal
grade) and the highest point of a WECS (for a horizontal axis WECS, the
measurement shall be to the tip of the rotor blade when the blade is in the
full vertical position). The height of a building mounted WECS shall be
measured from the grade of the building upon which it is attached.
         (c)   SINGLE ACCESSORY WECS. A single WECS placed upon a lot or parcel
with the primary intent to service the energy needs of only the structures and
uses on the same lot or parcel.
      WINE TASTING ROOM. The retail premises of a winemaker or winemaker
licensee, as defined by the state’s Liquor Control Commission, where wine is
not produced, but is offered for tasting and for sale, including the retail
sale of wine-related items and pre-packaged and prepared food items.
      YARD. The open spaces on a lot located between a building and a lot line.
The term REQUIRED YARD refers to the portion of the yard lying between the lot
lines and required setback lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1538.jpg]
 
         (a)   YARD, FRONT. The space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the furthest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the building line of the principal building.
         (b)   YARD, REAR.
            1.   The space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the furthest horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the
building line of the principal building.
            2.   A through lot is not considered to have a REAR YARD.
         (c)   YARD, SIDE. The space between a principal building and the side
lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is
the furthest horizontal distance from the side lot line to the nearest building
line of the principal building.
         (d)   YARD, STREET SIDE. A side yard located between a principal
building and a street side lot line on a corner lot.
         (e)   YARD, REQUIRED. The area within the required setback, on all
sides of a building.
      ZONING ACT. The state’s Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 to 125.3702 as amended.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the City Manager to
administer this chapter.
      ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ZBA). The city’s Zoning Board of Appeals.
      ZONING DISTRICT (ZONE). A portion of the city within which certain uses
of land or buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and
requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter.
      ZONING PERMIT. A standard form issued by the Zoning Administrator upon
application and declaration by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent
regarding proposed construction and use of land and buildings and structures
thereon granting approval for the construction or use applied for.
(Prior Code, §§ 5.5—5.16) (Ord 784, passed 10-16-2017; Ord. 791, passed 3-19-
2018; Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018; Ord. 801, passed
4-15-2019; Ord. 805, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 821, passed 10-19-2020; Ord. 823,
passed 1-4-2021; Ord. 835, passed 1-2-2023; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023; Ord.
850, passed 7-1-2024)
§ 153.006 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Initiation of rezoning and chapter text amendments. The city may from
time to time amend, modify, supplement or delete any provision of this chapter
(text amendment) or change the zoning district boundaries shown on the Official
Zoning Map (rezoning) pursuant to the provisions of the state’s Zoning Enabling
Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 to 125.3702).
      (1)   Initiation of rezoning. An amendment to the zoning district
boundaries contained on the Official Zoning Map (rezoning) may be initiated by
the City Council, the Planning Commission, the owner or owners of property or
with permission of the owner which is the subject of the proposed amendment.
      (2)   Initiation of text amendment. Amendments to the text provisions of
this chapter may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission or
by petition of one or more residents or property owners of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.190)
   (B)   Application procedure. A rezoning or text amendment request, except
those initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission, shall be initiated
by submission of a completed application on a form supplied by the city,
including an application fee to cover publication, administrative costs and
fees for any consultant reviews. Such fees and escrow amounts shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
      (1)   Application for rezoning. The following information shall accompany
the rezoning application form:
         (a)   A legal description and street address of the subject property;
         (b)   A map identifying the subject property in relation to
surrounding properties;
         (c)   The name, signature and address of the owner of the subject
property; a statement of the applicant’s interest in the subject property, if
not the owner in fee simple title, and proof of consent from the property
owner;
         (d)   The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the
subject property;
         (e)   A site analysis at a scale not less than one inch equals 100
feet or aerial photography illustrating existing conditions on the site and
adjacent properties such as woodlands, wetlands, soil conditions, topography,
drainage patterns, existing buildings, adjacent land uses, any sight distance
limitations and access points on both sides of the streets within 200 feet of
the subject site;
         (f)   A written evaluation to support that the request addresses
consistency with the city’s Master Plan, demonstrates all uses in the requested
zoning district will be compatible with the surrounding area and other similar
factors; and
         (g)   The Planning Commission and/or City Council may require a
traffic impact analysis for a rezoning that results in potential uses that
would be expected to have 50 or more peak hour directional trips or 500 or more
vehicle trips daily.
      (2)   Application for text amendment. An application for a text amendment
shall include a general description and indication of the purpose of the
proposed amendment.
(Prior Code, § 5.191)
   (C)   Rezoning and chapter amendment procedure.
      (1)   Pre-application conference (optional). An optional pre-applicant
conference with the Zoning Administrator to review the amendments, discuss the
level of environmental information, land uses and the need for a traffic study
may be requested by the applicant.
      (2)   Public hearing. Upon initiation of a rezoning or zoning ordinance
text amendment, a public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be scheduled
before the Planning Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in
accordance with the Zoning Act.
      (3)   Planning Commission review and recommendation. Following the public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors
relevant to the petition and shall report its findings and recommendation to
the City Council. In the case of a rezoning request, the Planning Commission
shall consider the criteria in making its finding and recommendation.
      (4)   City Council review and action. Following receipt of the findings
and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider
the proposed amendment.
         (a)   In the case of a rezoning request, the City Council shall
approve or deny the request, which may be based on the consideration of the
criteria for amendment of the Official Zoning Map (rezoning).
         (b)   In the case of a text amendment, the City Council may modify or
revise the proposed amendment prior to enactment.
      (5)   Notice of adoption. Following adoption of a zoning map amendment
(rezoning) or text amendment by the City Council, a notice will be published in
accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Act and the city.
      (6)   Resubmittal. A petition for a rezoning or zoning ordinance text
amendment that has been denied by the City Council shall not be resubmitted for
a period of one year from the date of denial except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to all of the reasons noted
for the denial found to be valid by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5.192)
   (D)   Criteria for amendment of the official zoning map (rezoning).
      (1)   In considering a rezoning application, the Planning Commission and
the City Council shall consider the following criteria in making their
findings, recommendations and decisions:
         (a)   Consistency with the goals, policies and future land use map of
the Charlevoix Master Plan, including all applicable subarea and corridor
studies. If conditions have changed since the Master Plan was adopted, then
consistency with recent development trends in the area shall be evaluated;
         (b)   Whether development under current zoning is impractical or less
reasonable than the requested or desired zoning district given factors such as
development trends;
         (c)   Capability of the site’s physical, geological, hydrological and
other environmental features to accommodate the potential uses allowed in the
proposed zoning district;
         (d)   Compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed
zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability,
impacts on the environment, noise, density, nature of use, traffic impacts,
aesthetics, infrastructure, impact on the ability to develop adjacent
properties under existing zoning and potential influence on property values;
         (e)   Capacity of city infrastructure and services sufficient to
accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising
the health, safety and welfare of the city;
         (f)   The apparent need for the types of uses permitted in the
requested zoning district in the city in relation to the amount of land in the
city currently zoned to accommodate that need; and
         (g)   Other factors as determined by the Planning Commission and the
City Council.
      (2)   Where a rezoning is reasonable given the above criteria, a
determination shall be made that the requested zoning district is more
appropriate than another or by amending the list of permitted or special land
uses within a district.
(Prior Code, § 5.193)
   (E)   Amendments required to conform to court decree. An amendment for the
purpose of conforming to a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction shall be
adopted by the City Council and published without necessity of a public hearing
or a referral to any other commission or agency.
(Prior Code, § 5.194)
(Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 153.007 CONDITIONAL ZONING.
   (A)   An applicant requesting a rezoning may voluntarily offer a conditional
zoning agreement along with an application for rezoning before, or following,
the public hearing for a proposed rezoning. A decision to submit a conditional
zoning agreement shall be pursuant to the Zoning Act and this chapter.
   (B)   The conditional zoning agreement shall be in writing, executed by the
applicant and the city and recorded with the county’s Register of Deeds.
   (C)   The conditional zoning agreement may include limitations on the uses
permitted on the property in question, specification of lower density or less
intensity of development and use; may impose greater restrictions on the
location, size, height or other measure for buildings, structures,
improvements, setbacks, landscaping, buffers, design, architecture and other
features; or may provide for financing and installation of public works
necessary to serve the proposed project.
   (D)   (1)   The conditional zoning agreement shall not authorize uses or
developments of greater intensity or density, or uses and developments that are
not permitted in the proposed zoning district.
      (2)   The conditional zoning agreement may not permit variations from
height, area, setback or similar dimensional requirements that are less
restrictive than the proposed zoning district; however, any variance approved
by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with §§
153.035 through
153.042 of this chapter may be allowed as part of a conditional rezoning
agreement.
      (3)   If a special land use or site plan review is required by this
chapter for the use proposed or subject to conditions within the rezoning
agreement, the use(s) shall comply with the review and approval requirements as
applicable prior to establishing or commencing the use(s).
   (E)   The conditional zoning agreement shall include conditions that bear a
reasonable and rational relationship and/or benefit to the property in
question. The conditional zoning agreement may include conditions related to
the use and development of the property that are necessary to:
      (1)   Serve the property with improvements including, but not limited to,
the extension, widening or realignment of streets; construction or extension of
utilities and other infrastructure improvements serving the site; or the
construction of recreational facilities serving the site or uses thereon;
      (2)   Minimize the impact of the development on surrounding properties
and the city overall; or
      (3)   Preserve natural features and open space beyond what is normally
required.
   (F)   In addition to any limitations on use or development of the site,
preservation of site features or improvements described above, the conditional
zoning agreement shall also include the following:
      (1)   An acknowledgment that the conditional zoning agreement was
proposed voluntarily by the applicant;
      (2)   A statement that the property shall not be developed or used in any
manner that is not consistent with the conditional zoning agreement;
      (3)   A statement that the approval of the rezoning and the conditional
zoning agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property
owner and the city, and also their respective heirs, successors, assigns,
receivers or transferees. Where the applicant for rezoning is acting on behalf
of the landowner through some form of purchase agreement or other mechanism,
then the landowner must also consent and sign the agreement;
      (4)   A statement that, if a rezoning with a conditional zoning agreement
becomes void in accordance with this section, that no further development shall
take place and no permits shall be issued unless and until a new zoning
district classification for the property has been established;
      (5)   A statement that no part of the conditional zoning agreement shall
permit any activity, use or condition that would otherwise violate any
requirement or standard that is otherwise applicable in the new zoning
district;
      (6)   A legal description of the land to which the agreement pertains;
and
      (7)   Any other provisions as are agreed upon by the parties.
   (G)   The conditional zoning agreement shall be reviewed concurrently with
the petition for rezoning following the process in§
153.006(C) above and the following.
      (1)   The conditional zoning agreement may be submitted prior to or
following the Planning Commission public hearing. If the agreement is provided
following the public hearing it must be reviewed by the Planning Commission
prior to the Planning Commission making its recommendation on the rezoning to
the City Council. The conditional zoning agreement shall be reviewed by the
City Attorney to determine that the conditional zoning agreement conforms to
the requirements of this section and the Zoning Act and shall confirm that the
conditional zoning agreement is in a form acceptable for recording with the
county’s Register of Deeds.
      (2)   Following the public hearing for a proposed zoning amendment, the
Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council based upon
the criteria listed in division (D)(1) above. In addition, the Planning
Commission shall consider whether the proposed conditional zoning agreement:
         (a)   Is consistent with the intent of this section;
         (b)   Bears a reasonable and rational connection or benefit to the
property being proposed for rezoning;
         (c)   Is necessary to ensure that the property develops in such a way
that protects the surrounding neighborhood and minimizes any potential impacts
to adjacent properties;
         (d)   Is necessary to allow the rezoning to be approved, in that the
property could not or would not be rezoned without the proposed conditional
zoning agreement;
         (e)   Leads to a development that is more compatible with abutting or
surrounding uses than would have been likely if the property had been rezoned
without a conditional zoning agreement or if the property were left to develop
under the existing zoning classification; and
         (f)   Is clearly in the public interest and not inconsistent with the
recommendations of the city’s Master Plan.
      (3)   If a conditional zoning agreement has been offered by the applicant
and recommended for approval by the Planning Commission, the City Council may
approve the conditional zoning agreement as a condition to the rezoning if it
meets all requirements of division(G)(2) above. The conditional zoning
agreement shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable
part of the ordinance adopted by the City Council to accomplish the requested
rezoning.
      (4)   If the rezoning and conditional zoning agreements are approved, the
zoning classification of the rezoned property shall consist of the district to
which the property has been rezoned and a reference to the conditional zoning
agreement. The Official Zoning Map shall specify the new district, plus a
parenthetical “CZ” to indicate that the property is subject to a conditional
zoning agreement (i.e., “R1 (CZ)”). The City Clerk shall maintain a listing of
all properties subject to conditional zoning agreements and shall provide
copies of the agreements upon request.
      (5)   The approved conditional zoning agreement shall be recorded with
the county’s Register of Deeds.
      (6)   Any uses proposed as part of a conditional zoning agreement that
would otherwise require approval of a special land use or site plan approval
shall be subject to the applicable review and approval requirements of §§
153.230 through
153.239 and
153.243 through
153.257 of this chapter.
   (H)   (1)   The rezoning and conditional zoning agreement shall expire one
year after adoption of the rezoning and conditional zoning agreement, unless
substantial construction on the approved development of the property pursuant
to building and other required permits issued by the city commences within the
one-year period and proceeds diligently to completion, unless extended by the
City Council for good cause.
      (2)   In the event that substantial construction on the approved
development has not commenced within one year, the conditional zoning agreement
shall be void.
      (3)   Should the conditional zoning agreement become void, all
development on the subject property shall cease and no further development
shall be permitted. Until action satisfactory to the city is taken to bring the
property into compliance with the conditional zoning agreement, the city may
withhold or, following notice to the applicant and being given an opportunity
to be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in addition to, or in lieu of,
any other lawful action to achieve compliance.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the above, if the property owner applies in writing
for an extension of the conditional zoning agreement at least 30 days prior to
the expiration date, the City Council may grant an extension of up to one year.
Further extensions may be granted by the City Council, although the number of
previous extensions granted to a particular conditional zoning agreement shall
be considered in relation to the diligent effort of the land owner to satisfy
the conditions of the agreement.
   (I)   If the rezoning and conditional zoning agreement becomes void as
previously outlined, then the land shall revert back to its prior zoning
classification as set forth in the Zoning Act. The Zoning Administrator or
designee shall initiate the rezoning to the prior zoning classification and
notify the land owner and/or developer of the reversion of zoning by registered
letter.
   (J)   Provided that, all development and/or use of the property in question
is in compliance with the conditional zoning agreement, an authorized use or
development may continue indefinitely; provided that, all terms of the
conditional zoning agreement continue to be met.
   (K)   The conditional zoning agreement may be amended by the city with the
landowner’s consent in the same manner as was prescribed for the original
rezoning and conditional rezoning agreement.
   (L)   Nothing in the conditional zoning agreement, nor any statement or
other provision shall prohibit the city from later rezoning all or any portion
of the property that is the subject of the conditional zoning agreement to
another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance
with this chapter and the Zoning Act.
   (M)   The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a
requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect
the owner’s rights under this chapter.
   (N)   The city is not required or obligated to accept any or all conditions
offered by a developer on a rezoning application. In no way is an offer of a
conditional zoning agreement the basis for requiring the city to approve a
rezoning application.
(Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.020 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   The City Manager shall appoint a Zoning Administrator who shall be
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such official shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the powers of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 5.160)
§ 153.021 ZONING PERMITS.
   (A)   No building or structure shall be erected or installed on any lot
unless, or until, a zoning permit has been issued by the city for such building
or structure. No permit shall be issued by the city or any official thereof for
the construction, erection, alteration, placing or moving of any building or
structure on any parcel of land unless such building or structure is designed
and the proposed location on its lot, or its intended lot, is arranged to
conform with the provisions of this chapter; except that, no permit shall be
required for alterations which do not result in change in height, floor area,
lot coverage, location of walls or other structural alterations.
   (B)   All applicants for zoning permits shall pay the City Treasurer a fee
according to the schedule as shall be prescribed by the City Council.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator may require applicants to post approved
zoning permits in a location easily visible to the public and adjoining
property owners based on one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   The permit authorizes a construction project requiring substantial
excavation;
      (2)   The permit authorizes a construction project that has been
controversial in the area it is located in or with the general public;
      (3)   The permit authorizes a major construction project; and
      (4)   The permit authorizes a construction project for a new primary
building or use.
   (D)   Exempted from the zoning permit requirements are facial alterations,
installation of siding, windows, doors, shingles and replacements of existing
or deteriorated materials and ordinary maintenance repairs made on all
dwellings and their related outbuildings. This exemption does not eliminate the
necessity for compliance with other county, state or federal permitting
requirements.
   (E)   Zoning permits shall expire two years from the date of issuance,
unless substantial construction has begun.
(Prior Code, § 5.161)
§ 153.022 PROJECT STAKING AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant or their
representative shall accurately stake the location of the parcel property lines
and the location of the proposed construction such that the Zoning
Administrator may, by use of a tape measure and horizontal measurements,
confirm that the construction as staked is as represented on the applicant’s
site plan which accompanies their application. On sloping sites, the lowest
finished grade level shall be established on a grade stake which is offset from
the construction such that it remains undisturbed during the course of the
construction and may be used to check the final grade by the Zoning
Administrator by means of a string line level.
   (B)   After issuing a zoning permit, the Zoning Administrator shall from
time to time conduct inspections of construction for which a permit has been
issued, as may be required to determine compliance with the permit.
   (C)   Prior to commencing any construction of improvements which are a part
of a project approved with a special use permit such improvements shall be
staked both horizontally and vertically such that the Zoning Administrator may
verify that the improvements are located as shown on the approved site plan.
   (D)   At a minimum, inspections may be required at the following times:
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a zoning permit;
      (2)   Prior to commencement of construction of any site improvements
which are a part of a special use permit; and
      (3)   After site preparation, but prior to construction of any foundation
system.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the applicant or its agent to notify the
Zoning Administrator when work is ready for inspection. Such inspection shall
be made within a reasonable time following notification giving due
consideration to the Zoning Administrator’s work schedule and work load.
Required inspections shall be deemed a requirement of a zoning permit or a
special use permit even though the inspection requirement is not listed on the
permit document.
   (F)   In the event the Zoning Administrator is unable to determine if parcel
boundaries are accurately located or that proposed or actual construction is
properly located on a parcel, the Administrator may require that the applicant
have a survey of the parcel of proposed or actual work prepared by a registered
land surveyor, at the applicant’s cost. Such survey shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review and as a part of the applicant’s zoning file.
   (G)   Inspections on the part of the Zoning Administrator shall in no way
absolve the applicant of responsibility for properly locating and undertaking
construction in a manner which meets the requirements of this section of any
permit issued in accord with this section, nor making any corrections to the
construction which are necessary to meet the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5.162)
§ 153.023 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any land, dwellings, buildings or structures used, erected, altered, razed
or converted in violation of this chapter or in violation of any regulations,
conditions, permits or other rights granted, adopted or issued pursuant to this
chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.
(Prior Code, § 5.163)
§ 153.024 FEES AND ESCROW.
   (A)   To defray costs, which can reasonably be anticipated to exceed those
normal costs covered by the application fee, related to the processing of
applications for any type of discretionary decision authorized by this chapter,
an escrow account with the city must be established and funded as provided in
this section. Examples of these discretionary decisions include, but are not
limited to, special use permits, planned unit developments, appeals to or
requests for interpretations by the Zoning Board of Appeals, rezoning requests
from individual property owners, variance applications and site plan review.
Applications initiated by an employee or any board, commission or branch of the
city shall not be subject to this section.
   (B)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application fee will
not cover the actual costs of processing the application to a final decision or
if the body reviewing the application determines that review of the application
and/or participation in the review process or appeal by qualified professional
planners, engineers, attorneys or other professionals is necessary, then the
applicant shall deposit with the City Treasurer such additional zoning fees in
an amount determined by the Zoning Administrator equal to the estimated
additional costs. Any determination regarding whether additional zoning fees
are needed shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   The complexity of the application, including all documents
submitted with the application;
      (2)   The complexity of the subject matter of the application;
      (3)   Whether the application involves interpretations of this chapter
for which there is no established interpretation;
      (4)   Whether the application involves legal issues or is of a complexity
such that the assistance of legal counsel would be reasonably prudent; and
      (5)   Whether the application involves planning, engineering, traffic or
other issues such that the assistance of a qualified professional would be
reasonably prudent.
   (C)   The additional zoning fees shall be held in escrow in the applicant’s
name and shall be used solely to pay these additional costs. If the amount held
in escrow becomes less than 10% of the initial escrow deposit, or less than 10%
of the latest additional escrow deposit, and review of the application or
decision on the appeal is not completed, then the Zoning Administrator shall
require the applicant to deposit additional fees into escrow in an amount
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be equal to the estimated costs to
complete processing the application to a final decision. Failure of the
applicant to make any escrow deposit required under this chapter shall be
deemed to make the application incomplete or the appeal procedurally defective
and thereby cause the denial of the application or the dismissal of the appeal.
Any unexpended funds held in escrow shall be returned to the applicant
following final action on the application or the final decision on the appeal.
Any actual costs incurred by the city in excess of the amount held in escrow
shall be billed to the applicant and shall be paid by the applicant prior to
the issuance of any permit or the release of a final decision on an appeal. The
applicant, who has placed funds in escrow pursuant to this section, shall be
entitled to an accounting of the expenditure of funds from the escrow account
if an additional escrow deposit has been requested, if any, and at the time of
the return of any unexpended funds. The request for an accounting shall be made
in writing to the City Treasurer. The accounting shall consist of a listing of
all expenditures made from the escrow fund and shall include the name of the
payee, a summary of the services or costs included in the expenditures and the
date of the services.
(Prior Code, § 5.164)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ZBA)
§ 153.035 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   General. A Zoning Board of Appeals (also referred to hereafter as
“ZBA”) is hereby established, having the powers authorized by the Zoning Act,
as amended, and in accordance with the City Charter.
   (B)   Membership. The ZBA shall consist of five members appointed by the
City Council, one of whom may be a member of the Planning Commission, and two
alternate members.
   (C)   Terms.
      (1)   Members shall be appointed for a term of three years; except that,
the terms for the Planning Commission members shall be the same as that for
their office.
      (2)   All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder
of the term.
   (D)   Alternates. The City Council shall appoint two alternate members to
serve on the ZBA, appointed by the City Council to serve a three-year term. The
alternate members shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the
ZBA and shall:
      (1)   Sit as regular members of the ZBA in the absence of a regular
member or for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular
member has abstained due to conflict of interest; and
      (2)   Once an alternate has been called to serve in a particular case, he
or she shall continue to participate in that case until a decision has been
rendered.
   (E)   Removal. Members of the ZBA or alternates shall be removable by the
City Council for malfeasance, misfeasance or non-feasance in office, upon
filing of written charges and after a public hearing.
   (F)   Conflict of interest. A member shall disqualify themselves from a vote
in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to
disqualify themselves from a vote in which the member has a conflict of
interest constitutes malfeasance in office. Any Planning Commissioner or City
Council member on the ZBA shall abstain from any vote on an issue which they
have previously voted upon as a member of the Planning Commission. ZBA members
shall also follow the city’s adopted Ethics and Conflict of Interest Policy, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 5.175) (Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 153.036 OFFICERS.
   The Board shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson
and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5.176)
§ 153.037 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations. Copies of such
regulations shall be made available to the public at the Office of Planning and
Zoning.
   (B)   Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the Board may
determine but, at least one time annually. There shall be a fixed place of
meeting, and all meetings shall comply with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of
the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, as amended.
   (C)   The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum. The concurring
vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass by this chapter, or to grant variation from the requirements of the
chapter, except that a concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to
grant a land use variance.
   (D)   The ZBA shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the action of
the Board and the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations
and other official actions, all of which shall be filed promptly with the
office of the City Clerk and shall be public record.
   (E)   The ZBA may call on other city departments or contracted city
consultants for assistance in the performance of its duties and it shall be the
duty of such other city departments or consultants to render such assistance to
the Board as may be reasonably required.
   (F)   The ZBA may appoint an investigating committee of not more than three
members of the Board to review an application and the affected site(s).
   (G)   Applications submitted to the ZBA shall consist of the following, as
applicable:
      (1)   Signed and dated application form, as provided by the city;
      (2)   A scaled drawing with sufficient detail to indicate the nature and
necessity of the request;
      (3)   Payment of a fee, as may be prescribed from time to time by the
City Council, by resolution; and
      (4)   The city or ZBA, in furtherance of decisions related to the
application, may request other materials deemed necessary including, but not
limited to, traffic impact studies, market studies or environmental
assessments.
(Prior Code, § 5.177) (Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 153.038 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The ZBA shall have jurisdiction and powers granted by the Zoning Act,
jurisdiction and powers prescribed in other subchapters of this chapter and the
following specific jurisdiction and powers.
   (A)   Powers.
      (1)   The ZBA shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning
district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of
this chapter.
      (2)   The decision of the ZBA shall be final. However, a person having an
interest affected by this chapter may appeal to the Circuit Court for review
pursuant to the Zoning Act.
      (3)   In granting a variance, the ZBA may attach thereto such conditions
regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses as it
may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   Appeals of administrative decisions.
      (1)   General. The ZBA shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
by the appellant that there is error in any order, interpretation, requirement,
permit, decision or refusal made by any administrative official or body in
enforcing any provision of this chapter. Appeals may be taken by a person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the state or city.
In order to be aggrieved by a decision of the city, the person or other entity
making the appeal must have a property interest and sufficient standing as
recognized under the law to challenge the decision.
      (2)   Filing and hearing of appeal.
         (a)   Appeals shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within 30
days of the action being appealed.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator or designee and any person from whom
the appeal is taken shall transmit to the ZBA all of the documents and records
related to the appeal.
         (c)   The ZBA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and shall provide notice as required by the Zoning Act.
         (d)   The applicant, or his, her or their duly authorized agent, must
appear in person at the hearing in order for the ZBA to take action. Failure to
appear may result in tabling or denial of the application.
      (3)   Decisions on appeal.
         (a)   An appeal to an administrative decision may be reversed by the
ZBA only if it finds that the action or decision appealed meets one or more of
the following requirements:
            1.   Was arbitrary or capricious;
            2.   Was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact;
            3.   Constituted an abuse of discretion;
            4.   Was based on an erroneous interpretation of this chapter or
zoning law.
         (b)   If a determination is made that the administrative official or
body making the decision did so improperly, the ZBA may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make an order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers
of the administrative official or body from whom the appeal was taken.
   (C)   Interpretation. Upon request of the Planning Commission, City Council,
Zoning Administrator or designee, or applicant, the ZBA may interpret and
clarify the meaning of ordinance text. The ZBA may also be requested to
interpret boundaries of zoning districts where the zoning district
classification cannot be clearly discerned on the zoning map.
   (D)   Special land uses and planned unit developments (PUDs).
      (1)   The ZBA may grant dimensional or other site plan related variances
for special land uses; however, the ZBA shall not have the power to reverse or
modify the Planning Commission’s decision to approve or deny a special land use
permit nor grant variances to any conditions placed on special land use
approval.
      (2)   The ZBA shall not have the authority to grant variances to the PUD
regulations of §§
153.270 through
153.278 of this chapter or any requirements placed on PUD approval. However,
the ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide appeal requests by
individual lot owners for variances from other sections of this chapter
following final approval of the PUD; provided, such variances do not affect the
terms or conditions of the original PUD approval or constitute a variance to
the PUD regulations of §§
153.270 through
153.278 of this chapter.
   (E)   Approvals. To hear and decide requests for other decisions that this
chapter specifically authorizes the ZBA to pass.
   (F)   Dimensional variances.
      (1)   The ZBA, after holding a public hearing in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Act, shall have the power to grant requests for
dimensional variances from the provisions of this chapter where it is proved by
the applicant that there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of this chapter relating to the construction, equipment or
alteration of buildings or structures, or of storm water management
requirements so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public
safety secured and substantial justice done.
      (2)   A dimensional variance may be allowed by the ZBA only in cases
where the applicant has shown a practical difficulty in the official record of
the hearing. The applicant must prove that all of the following conditions have
been met:
         (a)   Extraordinary circumstances. There are exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question
that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district.
Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions may include:
            1.   Exceptional narrowness, shallowness, small size or shape of a
specific property on the effective date of this chapter;
            2.   Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary
situation on the land, building or structure; and
            3.   The use or development of the property immediately adjoining
the property in question, whereby the literal enforcement of the requirements
of this chapter would involve practical difficulties.
         (b)   Substantial justice. Compliance with the strict letter of the
restriction’s governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density or
other dimensional provisions would unreasonably prevent the use of the
property. Granting of a requested variance or appeal would do substantial
justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district
and such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the
same zoning district and in the vicinity. Any variance granted shall be the
minimum necessary to allow the preservation of these substantial property
rights. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be
deemed sufficient to warrant a variance.
         (c)   Impact on the surrounding neighborhood. The variance will not be
detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood or interfere
with or discourage the appropriate development, continued use or value of
adjacent properties and the surrounding neighborhood as compared to other uses
in the neighborhood.
         (d)   Public safety and welfare. The granting of the variance will not
impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably
increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or
endanger the public safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of
the city.
         (e)   Not self-created. The immediate practical difficulty causing the
need for the variance request was not self-created by the applicant or previous
owners of the subject property.
   (G)   Use variances.
      (1)   Application requirements. In addition to the information required
for other variance requests, an application for a use variance shall include a
plan drawn to scale detailing the specific use and improvements proposed by the
applicant and a summary of the facts which support each of the following
conclusions:
         (a)   Applicant’s property cannot be used for the purposes permitted
in the zoning district;
         (b)   Applicant’s plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to
his property and not to general neighborhood conditions;
         (c)   Applicant’s suggested use would not alter the essential
character of the area;
         (d)   Applicant’s problem has not been self-created;
         (e)   Unavailability of administrative relief which may afford
reasonable use of the applicant’s property; and/or
         (f)   At the end of each of divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e)
above, identify all persons who will testify at the hearing with respect to
each of the facts and, separately, identify all persons who will testify at the
hearing relative to the respective conclusion (and if any person is to be
offered as an expert witness, include with the application a resume which shows
the education and experience of such person within the particular area of
expertise).
      (2)   Use variance; pre-hearing conference.
         (a)   Prior to the scheduling of a hearing, the applicant shall
contact the Zoning Administrator or designee for the purpose of scheduling a
pre-hearing conference.
         (b)   The purposes of the pre-hearing conference shall be to:
            1.   Review the procedure for the hearing and identify all persons
who will testify (directly or through affidavit) and the evidence to be offered
on behalf of the applicant;
            2.   Attempt to secure a statement of agreed-upon facts to be used
to narrow the matters of dispute and shorten the hearing;
            3.   Explore a means of providing relief to the applicant by way of
a non-use variance from the ZBA, or other relief which may require action by
persons or bodies other than the ZBA which will afford an adequate remedy for
the applicant; and
            4.   Discuss the need, desirability and the terms of providing a
verbatim record of the hearing.
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator or designee shall determine who should
be present at the pre-hearing conference based upon the application submitted
and taking into consideration the discussion with the applicant or the
applicant’s representative.
         (d)   The pre-hearing conference shall be scheduled and conducted on
an expeditious basis so as to avoid unreasonable delay to the applicant.
Sufficient time shall be taken, however, to achieve the purposes of the pre-
hearing conference stated above.
      (3)   Use variance; hearing procedure.
         (a)   The applicant will have the burden of proof. In order to be
entitled to relief, the applicant must demonstrate each of the five factors in
division (G)(1) above.
         (b)   Manner of presentation.
            1.   Community representatives shall present an overview of the
zoning regulations involved. This may include an indication of the objectives
sought to be achieved in the zoning district, and any planning, engineering,
financial, environmental or other considerations which are generally relevant
within the zoning district and/or in the general area of the property at issue.
            2.   The applicant may present witnesses, including the applicant,
or may submit affidavits for the purpose of attempting to prove facts or
conclusions. The applicant shall be provided with the opportunity to present
all testimony and evidence proposed to be presented at the pre-hearing
conference, either through witnesses or affidavits; however, the Chairperson of
the ZBA may restrict testimony and evidence which would result in unreasonable
duplication. In addition, by motion made on its own or at the request of a
person at the hearing, the ZBA may require the presence of any witness who has
offered either testimony by affidavit on a material question of fact or
testimony of an expert nature, with the view of permitting members of the ZBA
to ask questions of such witnesses.
            3.   At the conclusion of the applicant’s presentation, interested
persons attending the hearing shall be provided with the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence in the same manner, and subject to requiring the
presence and questioning of witnesses as provided above for the applicant.
         (c)   When interested persons have completed their presentations, at
the same meeting and/or at an adjourned meeting date, testimony and evidence
may be presented on behalf of the community in the same manner, and subject to
requiring the presence and questioning of witnesses, as provided above for the
applicant. The purpose of such presentation shall be to ensure that a full
picture, including all relevant information, is before the ZBA for
consideration as it relates to the specific application presented.
         (d)   If testimony or evidence has been offered by or on behalf of
interested persons and/or the community, the applicant shall have the
opportunity to make a responsive presentation, restricted to answering the
points raised by interested persons and community representatives. The manner
of presenting witnesses, and requirement of their presence and questioning,
shall be the same as provided above for the applicant’s principal case.
         (e)   If a hearing is not completed at a given meeting within the time
period allowed by the ZBA, the Board shall adjourn the hearing to a date
certain for continuation.
      (4)   Use variance; decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
         (a)   The ZBA may deem it appropriate in any given case to provide an
opportunity for anyone presenting testimony or evidence to submit proposed
findings of facts and conclusions.
         (b)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the ZBA may make its decision
at that meeting, or it may adjourn the hearing to a new date for the purpose of
reviewing the testimony and evidence, and reviewing proposed findings and
conclusions submitted by hearing participants in preparation for making its
decision.
         (c)   If the ZBA determines to grant variance relief, it shall be the
minimum relief required to allow reasonable use of the property while
maintaining the essential character of the area. Such relief may be in the form
of one or more non-use variances and/or in the form of a use variance.
Conditions which are designed to ensure compliance with the intent of this
chapter and other regulations of the city may be imposed on a use variance.
Conditions imposed shall be based on the following criteria:
            1.   Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the
proposed land use and site plan will not be adversely affected;
            2.   Ensure that the use is compatible with adjacent land uses and
activities;
            3.   Protect natural resources, the health, safety, welfare and
social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity
under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the
proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole;
            4.   Ensure compatibility between the proposed use or activity and
the rights of the city to perform its governmental functions;
            5.   Meet the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance, be
related to the regulations and standards established in the ordinance for the
land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance
with those standards;
            6.   Ensure compliance with the intent of other city ordinances
that are applicable to the site plan; and
            7.   Ensure compatibility with the other uses of land in the
vicinity.
         (d)   If the ZBA adopts a motion to grant variance relief, such a
motion may be made as a tentative grant of relief, subject to review by the
Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator/consultant, engineer or other person
or official with expertise with a view of obtaining recommendations on any
conditions that may be relevant and authorized by law, and for the further
purpose of ensuring that the grant of relief would not violate applicable law.
If such a tentative grant of relief is approved, the ZBA shall request the
completion of all reviews by other boards or persons by a specific date so that
relief may be expeditiously finalized.
      (5)   Use variance standards for review. A use variance may be allowed by
the ZBA only in cases where the applicant has shown an unnecessary hardship in
the official record of the hearing. The applicant must prove that all of the
following conditions have been met:
         (a)   Hardship. The applicant has demonstrated that the site cannot
reasonably be used for any of the uses allowed within the current zoning
district designation. The ZBA may require professionals or certified experts to
submit documents to substantiate this finding;
         (b)   Unique circumstances. The condition or situation of the specific
parcel of property or the intended use of such property for which the variance
is sought is unique to that property and not commonly present in the general
vicinity or in the zone district. The applicant must prove that there are
certain features or conditions of the land that are not generally applicable
throughout the zone and that these features make it impossible to reasonably
use the property. Such unique conditions or situations include:
            1.   Exceptional narrowness, shallowness, small size or shape of a
specific property on the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived;
            2.   Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary
situation on the land, building or structure;
            3.   The use or development of the property immediately adjoining
the property in question; and
            4.   Any other physical situation on the land, building or
structure deemed by the ZBA to be extraordinary.
         (c)   Character of neighborhood. The use variance will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood or the intent of the comprehensive
development plan, or be a detriment to adjacent properties;
         (d)   Capacity of roads, infrastructure and public services. The
capacity and operations of public roads, utilities, other facilities and
services will not be significantly compromised; and
         (e)   Not self-created. The immediate practical difficulty causing the
need for the variance request was not self-created by the applicant or previous
owners of the subject property.
(Prior Code, § 5.178)
§ 153.039 PROCEDURE.
   The following procedures shall be followed.
   (A)   An application for decision for all matters delegated to the Board by
this chapter, or for interpretation of the provisions herein, or of the zoning
map, may be filed with the Zoning Administrator for a hearing by the ZBA.
   (B)   The appeal or application shall be accompanied by the required fees,
established by resolution of the City Council, payable to the City Treasurer.
   (C)   A request for a variance that has been denied by the Board shall not
be re-submitted within one year of the decision by the Board, unless the
applicant can show that conditions have changed to the extent that
reconsideration is merited, and the ZBA agrees to rehear the case.
(Prior Code, § 5.179)
§ 153.040 DECISION OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   After a final hearing, the ZBA shall make a decision on an application
or appeal. A copy of the Board's decision shall be transmitted to the applicant
or appellant. Such a decision shall be binding upon the Zoning Administrator
and observed by them, and they shall incorporate its terms and conditions in a
permit to the applicant or appellant whenever a permit is authorized by the
Board.
   (B)   Zoning Board of Appeals decisions shall expire one year from the date
of issuance, unless substantial construction has begun.
(Prior Code, § 5.180) (Ord. 823, passed 1-4-2021)
§ 153.041 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Zoning Administrator or designee certifies to the Board after
notice of appeal shall have been filed with them, that by reason of fact stated
in the certificate, a stay would, in their opinion, cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order which may, with due cause shown, be granted by the Board
or by the Circuit Court, on application, after notice to the Zoning
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 5.181)
§ 153.042 HEARINGS.
   When an application for a hearing or appeal has been filed with the required
data in proper form, and the fee paid, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately schedule the application or appeal for a hearing and serve notices
stating the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing. The notice shall be
given to all property owners and to the occupants of residential dwellings
within 300 feet of the subject property. The names of owners shall be
determined from the last assessment roll. If a tenant’s name is not known, the
term “occupant” may be used. The notices shall be served by first-class mail or
by personal delivery and shall be served at least three days prior to the
hearing. Any interested party may appear and be heard at the hearing in person
or by agent or attorney. The Board may adjourn the hearing in order to obtain
additional information, or to provide further notice as it deems proper. In the
case of an adjourned hearing, persons previously notified and persons already
heard need not be notified of the resumption of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 5.182)
MAPPED DISTRICTS
§ 153.055 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map:
      (1)   Residential districts.
         (a)   R1 - Low Density Single-Family Residential;
         (b)   R2 - Medium Density Single-Family Residential;
         (c)   R4 - Planned High Density Residential; and
         (d)   PC - Private Club Residential.
      (2)   Non-residential districts and mixed-use districts.
         (a)   GC - General Commercial;
         (b)   CBD - Central Business District;
         (c)   CM - Commercial Mixed Use;
         (d)   MC - Marine Commercial;
         (e)   CH - Commercial Hospitality;
         (f)   PO - Professional Office;
         (g)   SR - Scenic Reserve;
         (h)   I - Industrial; and
         (i)   P - Public Facilities.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the zoning districts as provided in
this chapter are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled “Official
Zoning Map of the City of Charlevoix”, a copy of which accompanies this chapter
and is incorporated into and made a part of this chapter by reference.
   (C)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map,
which shall be located in the City Hall, shall be the final authority as to the
current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, zoning district, use, building
or structure in the city.
   (D)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of land use districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules of interpretation shall
apply.
      (1)   A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a
highway, street, alley or easement shall be interpreted as following such line.
      (2)   A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded parcel
line or a property line shall be interpreted as following such line.
      (3)   A boundary indicated as approximately following the corporate
boundary line of the city shall be interpreted as following such line.
      (4)   A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be
interpreted as being the centerline of the railroad right-of-way.
      (5)   A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be interpreted
as following such shoreline, and in the event of change in a shoreline shall be
interpreted as following the actual shoreline.
      (6)   A boundary indicated as following the centerline of a water body
shall be interpreted as following such centerline at the time of
interpretation.
      (7)   A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, a feature
indicated in divisions (D)(1) through (D)(6) above shall be interpreted as
such.
      (8)   A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map
shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(Prior Code, § 5.20) (Ord. 816, passed 4-13-2020; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 153.056 ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
   Whenever all or part of a street, alley or other public way is vacated, it
shall automatically become a part of the zoning district to which it attaches.
If a vacated area is bordered by two different zoning districts, the area is
divided along a line halfway between them, according to the adjacent zone,
unless the City Council shall designate otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 5.21)
§ 153.057 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.
   Where land is annexed into the city, it shall be automatically zoned R1,
Residential, upon annexation, unless or until the City Council initiates action
to classify it as another zoning district in accordance with the procedures
specified in §
153.006(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.22)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 153.070 INTENT.
   (A)   R1, Low Density Family Residential District. This district is intended
to provide stable, low-density neighborhoods of predominantly detached,
attached, and clustered single-family dwellings. Where new infill development
occurs, housing may include: accessory dwelling units, two-family dwellings,
courtyard dwellings, and multi-family structures that are compatible in scale
with detached single-family homes and maintain single-family character. This
district also permits non-residential uses that contribute to the culture and
well-being of single-family neighborhoods, such as parks, schools and churches.
   (B)   R2, Medium Density Family Residential District. The R2 District is
intended to provide for residential neighborhoods where a mix of detached,
attached, and clustered single-family dwellings, accessory dwelling units, two-
family dwellings, courtyard dwellings, and multi-family structures that
maintain single-family character.
   (C)   R4, Planned High Density Residential. This district allows for higher
density developments such as condominiums, apartment buildings, site
condominiums and large multiple-family dwellings. Multiple-family dwellings may
include apartment buildings, townhouses, courtyard dwellings and clustered
housing.
   (D)   PC, Private Club Residential District.
      (1)   This district is intended to accommodate established single-family
residential developments that are generally seasonal in nature, governed by a
private club association, and in which the homes are privately owned, but the
land is in common ownership.
      (2)   In addition, the district may include facilities for the common use
and benefit of the members such as clubhouses, boathouses and other recreation
related uses such as athletic courts, trail systems and beach cabanas.
(Prior Code, § 5.25) (Ord. 802, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 805, passed 9-3-2019;
Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 153.071 SCHEDULE OF USES.
   Uses permitted in the R1, R2, R4 and PC Districts are listed in Table
153.071 of this chapter. Additional requirements related to a specific use, if
any, are referenced in the “Specific Requirements” column.
Table 153.071: Allowed Uses in Residential Zones
P = Permitted Use by Right
S = Special Land Use
 R1 R2 R4 PC Specific Requirements
Table 153.071: Allowed Uses in Residential Zones
P = Permitted Use by Right
S = Special Land Use
                                                                      R1 R2 R4 PC Specific
                                                                                  Requirements
ACCESSORY
Accessory uses, building and structures                               P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.116(A)
Bed and breakfast establishments                                      S  S  -  -  §
                                                                                  153.116(D)
Boathouses, upland dredging                                           S  -  -  S  §
                                                                                  153.116(E)
Day care
   Family day care home                                            S  S  -  -
   Group day care home                                             S  S  -  -  §
                                                                                  153.116(F)
Foster care
   Adult foster care family home                                   S  S  -  -
   Foster family home and foster family group home                 S  S
Major home occupation                                                 S  S  S  -  §
                                                                                  153.116(H)
Minor home occupation                                                 P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.116(H)
Solar panels                                                          P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.116(J)
Wind energy conversion systems, single accessory                      P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.116(K)
RESIDENTIAL
Adult foster care large group home                                    -  -  S  -
Adult foster care small group home                                    S  S  -  -
Convalescent and nursing homes                                        -  -  S  -
Dwellings
   Single-family, detached                                         P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.117(A)
   Single-family, attached (3 or more units)                       P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.117(A)
   Two-family                                                      P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.117(G)
   Multiple family (3 or more units)                               P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.117(G)
   Accessory dwelling unit                                         P  P  -  -
   Senior housing; independent living, assisted living and similar -  -  S  -  §
facilities                                                                        153.117(B)
   Rentals                                                         P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.158
   Boarding/rooming houses                                         S  S  -  -
OFFICES AND SERVICES
Day care center/nursery                                               S  S  -  -  §
                                                                                  153.121(A)
RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
Public parks/playgrounds                                              P  P  P  P
Athletic courts                                                       P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.125(A)
PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL
Churches and customary related uses                                   P  P  P  P
Colleges and universities                                             -  -  S  -
Community centers                                                     -  -  S  -
OTHER USES
Essential service, publicly owned                                     P  P  P  P
Site condominium                                                      P  P  P  P  §
                                                                                  153.117(C)
 
(Prior Code, § 5.26) (Ord. 791, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 802, passed 4-15-2019;
Ord. 805, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 840, passed 6-19-2023; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-
2023)
§ 153.072 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot and width requirements. All lots in the residential districts
shall conform to the requirements of Table 153.072(a) of this chapter:
 
Table 153.072(a): Lot and Width Requirements in Residential Districts
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
R1              9,000                      70
R2              6,000                      50
R4              15,000                     80
PC              NA                         NA
 
   (B)   Dimensional requirements. Building height, setbacks, lot coverage and
minimum floor area for development of a principal structure in the R1, R2, R4,
and PC Districts shall conform to the requirements of Table 153.072(b) of this
chapter.
Table 153.072(b): Dimensional Requirements in Residential Districts
                  Minimum Yard Setbacks               Min. Gross
                  (ft.)                               Floor Area     Principle
         Max.                                Maximum  (sq. ft.)      Structure
Zoning   Building       Side                 Lot                     Minimum
District Height                              Coverage 2              Width
         (ft.)    Front Interior Street Rear 1 story  stories        (ft.)7
                                 Side

R1       266      152   102      152    252  403,5    800     1200   20
R2       266      15    8        15     25   404,5    800     1200   20
PC       26       01    01       01     01   NA       0       0      20
R48      35       15    15       15     25   50       800     1200   20
NOTES TO TABLES 153.072(a) and 153.072(b)
1 No minimum lot size or width is required; provided, the land is in common
ownership. If the land is subdivided, the requirements of the R1 District
shall apply.
2 Setbacks within the C&O Club Development shall be 35 feet for front yard, 15
feet for side yard and 25 feet for rear yard.
3 Maximum lot coverage shall be 50% for lots less than 7,000 square feet.
4 Maximum lot coverage shall be 50% for lots less than 4,500 square feet.
5 Lot coverage may be increased to 50% if additional landscaping requirements
are met. See § 153.171(A), (B), (E).
6 Single multi-family structures 30-foot maximum height.
7 Does not include clustered homes, or courtyard homes.
8 Planning Commission Site Plan Approval.
 
   (C)   Dimensional requirements: square footage for accessory dwelling units
and single multifamily buildings units. Square footage for accessory dwelling
units and single multifamily building units shall conform to the requirements
of Table 153.072(c).
 
Table 153.072(c): Dimensional Requirement: Square footage for Accessory
Dwelling Units and Single Muti-Family Building Units
Zoning District Minimum Maximum
R1 and R2       300     900 for ADU only
 
   (D)   Dimensional requirements, R4 District. Building height, setbacks, lot
coverage and minimum floor area for multiple-family developments in the R4
District shall conform to the requirements of Table 153.072(d).
 
Table 153.072(d): Dimensional Requirement in Multiple-family Dwellings in the R4
Zone
Max.     Minimum Yard Setbacks              Min. Floor Area (sq. ft.),
Building (ft.)                     Lot      based on number of bedrooms  Distance
Height   Yard                      Coverage 1 bedroom/ 2        3        Between
(ft.)    Adjacent  Front Side Rear (%)      efficiency bedrooms bedrooms Buildings
         to:
35       All       15    15   25   50       400        600      900      20
         districts
 
   (E)   R4 District; additional requirements for multiple-family dwellings.
      (1)   Development standards. The general plan for multiple-family
dwellings shall include evidence and facts showing that it has considered and
made provisions for, and the development shall be executed in accordance with,
the following essential conditions.
         (a)   The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with
an overall plan and shall be designed as the unified architectural unit (each
building, excluding accessory structures, shall have consistent roof lines,
roof pitch, architectural features and building materials) with appropriate
landscaping meeting the requirements of §
153.171 of this chapter.
         (b)   If the development of the R4 Zone is to be carried out in
stages, each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and the
intent of this subchapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of any
stage and the development of each stage shall take place in sequential order as
designated by the plan.
      (2)   Development requirements.
         (a)   Distance between buildings. The horizontal distance measured
between buildings, forming courts and courtyards, shall not be less than 20
feet.
         (b)   Parking. A parking area shall be placed so that it does not
interfere with any recreation or service area and shall be set back at least 15
feet from property lines.
         (c)   Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all
pedestrian walks shall be surfaced with bituminous asphalt, concrete, pervious
concrete or similar materials and be properly drained.
         (d)   Service. Areas for loading and unloading delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other
services shall be provided, shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged
that they may be used without interference with the use of access ways or
parking facilities.
         (e)   Vehicular circulation system. The proposed development will have
a planned circulation system that is designed in the best interest of the
public health, safety, and welfare in regard to the overall circulation of the
community. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
the public streets and highways without undue congestion to, or interference
with, normal traffic flow.
         (f)   Utilities. All buildings within the R4 Zone shall be serviced by
a public sanitary sewer disposal system and public water supply system. All
utility lines within the subject property including, but not limited to, power,
water, sewer and telephone shall be placed underground by the developer for new
developments. Each unit will be considered as a separate dwelling for the
purpose of utility connections.
         (g)   Open space. The developer shall be required where possible to
preserve or incorporate natural features such as wooded areas, streams and open
space areas, which add to the overall cohesive development of the R4 Zone and
overall community development.
   (F)   Dimensional requirements, clustered housing. Building height,
setbacks, lot coverage and minimum floor area for single-family attached,
single-family detached, two-family dwellings or any combination in an R4
District clustered housing development shall conform to the requirements of
Table 153.072(f).
 
Table 153.072(f) Dimensional Requirements: Single-Family Attached, Single-
Family Detached and Two-Family Dwellings in an R4 Clustered Housing
Development Zone
Max.     Minimum Yard Setbacks (ft.)               Min. Gross Floor
Building                              Lot Coverage Area (sq. ft.)    Distance
Height   Yard                         (%)                            Between
(ft.)    Adjacent to: Front Side Rear              1 story 2 stories Buildings

30       All          15    10   20   NA           800     1,100     10
         districts
 
   (G)   Additional requirements for single-family attached, single-family
detached and two-family dwellings in the R4 District.
      (1)   Development standards. The general plan for the development shall
include evidence and facts showing that it has considered and made provisions
for, and the development shall be executed in accordance with, the following
essential conditions: if the development is to be carried out in stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and the intent of
this subchapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of any stage and
the development of each stage shall take place in sequential order as
designated by the plan.
      (2)   Development requirements.
         (a)   Parking. Parking areas shall be placed so that they do not
interfere with any recreation or service areas.
         (b)   Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all
pedestrian walks shall be surfaced with bituminous asphalt, concrete or similar
materials and be properly drained.
         (c)   Service. Areas for loading and unloading delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other
services shall be provided, shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged
that they may be used without interference with the use of access ways or
parking facilities.
         (d)   Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress
and egress to the public streets and highways servicing the R4 zone without
undue congestion to, or interference with, normal traffic flow.
         (e)   Utilities. All buildings within the development shall be
serviced by a public sanitary sewer disposal system and public water supply
system. All utility lines for new developments within the subject property
including, but not limited to, power, water, sewer and telephone shall be
placed underground by the developer. Each unit will be considered as a separate
dwelling for the purpose of utility connections.
(Prior Code, § 5.27) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018;
Ord. 802, passed 4- 15-2019; Ord. 835, passed 1-2-2023; Ord. 840, passed 6-19-
2023; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023)
NON-RESIDENTIAL AND MIXED USE DISTRICTS
§ 153.085 INTENT.
   (A)   GC, General Commercial District. This district accommodates retail and
service establishments within the city, particularly along major corridors
leading into and out of the city. The uses permitted in the GC District are
intended to provide convenient and attractive retail, professional office and
service establishments for the community and its rural trade area. This
district is intended to accommodate larger scale commercial development and
associated uses, due to larger lot sizes and consistency with the existing
built commercial environment.
   (B)   CBD, Central Business District. This zone regulates land within the
area traditionally considered to be Downtown Charlevoix. Its purpose is to
support the central activity area of the city by accommodating a mix of retail,
office, service, entertainment and residential uses in a walkable, pedestrian-
friendly environment. Business uses which are inconsistent with this purpose or
which detract from the convenience of this district are not permitted.
   (C)   CM, Commercial Mixed Use. This zone is intended to provide a
transitional area between the GC and CBD districts on the south side and the
CBD and R1 Districts north of the Bridge. This area south of the CBD includes a
mix of residential and homes that have been converted to offices or mixed use
buildings. Due to smaller lot sizes and structures with residential
appearances, the area is intended for professional offices, mixed use
buildings, retail and service establishments. This zone is intended to restrict
larger scale commercial development, better suited for the outer north and
south ends of the city.
   (D)   MC, Marine Commercial District. The MC District is established at
locations in the community with water frontage to protect and promote the
historic and unique heritage of the city. The historic marine use of the
waterfront is a keystone to the ambiance of the “fishing village” feeling of
the city. This district is intended to accommodate a mix of land uses including
single-family, condominiums, marine related commercial and professional
offices.
   (E)   CH, Commercial Hospitality District. The CH District provides for
overnight lodging and complementary facilities and services, such as gift shops
and restaurants. By precluding larger scale retail and other relatively intense
commercial uses, it is intended to be limited to lodging and associated uses to
complement the city as a vacation and wedding destination area.
   (F)   PO, Professional Office. This district is intended to accommodate uses
that are administrative and/or professional in nature in appropriate areas,
without adverse impacts to adjacent residential land uses.
   (G)   SR, Scenic Reserve District. The purpose of this district is to
protect the scenic attributes of certain properties along the shores of the
city’s abutting lakes where development has not occurred and views to and from
the water remain relatively unspoiled. The visual connection to the water and
the views from the lakes are considered essential elements of the city’s
character that bring economic health and vitality to the community. Scenic
reserve areas may also be forested lands or natural areas intended to be
protected from future development because of their community or environmental
value. Any uses permitted within this district must be undertaken in a manner
that will respect the environment and the scenic or visual value of the
designated areas. The SR District includes both public and private lands that
are also highly valued for recreational activities.
   (H)   I, Industrial District. This zone is intended to accommodate the
industrial needs of the entire community in such a manner that unreasonable
noise, dust, vibration or any other like nuisance shall not affect adjoining
properties.
   (I)   P, Public Facilities. This zone is intended to accommodate municipal,
county and federal government related buildings and uses. Public facilities
also include schools, public parking lots and the Charlevoix Public Library.
(Prior Code, § 5.30)
§ 153.086 SCHEDULE OF USES.
   Uses permitted in non-residential/mixed use districts are listed in Table
153.086. Additional requirements related to a specific use, if any, are
referenced in the “Specific Requirements” column. The requirements in footnotes
are an integral part of this subchapter and shall apply in all instances.
Table 153.086: Allowed Uses, Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zones
P = Permitted Use by Right
S = Special Land Use
  PO GC CBD CH MC SR I P CM Specific Requirements
Table 153.086: Allowed Uses, Non-Residential and Mixed Use Zones
P = Permitted Use by Right
S = Special Land Use
                                       PO GC CBD CH MC SR I P CM Specific
                                                                 Requirements
ACCESSORY
Accessory uses, buildings and          P  P  P   P  P  P  P P P  §
structures                                                       153.116 (A)
Boathouses                             -  -  -   -  P  S  - - -  §
                                                                 153.116 (E)
Dock, boat launch; accessory           -  -  -   -  P  P  - - -
Drive-through facility, except those   -  P  P   -  -  -  - - P  §
serving a restaurant                                             153.116 (G)
Outdoor display and sales              -  P  P   -  S  -  P - P  §
                                                                 153.116 (I)
Outdoor seating area for restaurants,
taverns and similar uses serving food  -  P  P   P  P  P  - - P
and beverages
Recreation and meeting facilities      -  P  P   P  -  -  - - -
accessory to a motel/ hotel
Restaurant or retail store accessory   -  P  P   P  -  -  - - P
to a motel/hotel
Solar panels                           P  P  P   P  P  -  P P P  §
                                                                 153.116 (J)
Wind energy conversion system, single  S  S  S   S  S  -  S P P  §
accessory                                                        153.116 (K)
RESIDENTIAL
Adult foster care group home           -  S1 -   -  -  -  - - -
Dwellings above the first floor        P2 P3 P   -  P  -  - - P
Convalescent and nursing homes         -  P  -   -  -  -  - - -
Dwellings
   Multiple-family                  -  P  P   P  P4 -  - - P
   Single-family, attached          -  -  -   -  P  -  - - P  §
                                                                 153.117 (A)
   Single-family, detached          -  -  -   -  P  -  - - P  §
                                                                 153.117(A)
OFFICES AND SERVICES
Bank/financial institution             P  P  P   -  -  -  - - P
Barber shop or beauty salon            -  P  P   P  P  -  - - P
Contractor’s shop, indoor only       -  P  -   -  -  -  P - -
Day care center/nursery                -  P  -   -  -  -  - - P  §
                                                                 153.121 (A)
Dry cleaning pick up/delivery          -  P  -   -  -  -  - - P
Kennel, commercial                     -  -  -   -  -  -  P - -  §
                                                                 153.121 (B)
Laundry, self-service                  -  P  -   -  -  -  - - P
Office/Professional                    P  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
   Medical and dental               P  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
Photography studio                     P  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
Veterinary clinic or hospital          -  S  -   -  -  -  S - -  §
                                                                 153.121(C)
RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
Dock, boat launch, public              -  -  P   -  P  P  - - -
Dock, private non-commercial           -  -  P   -  P  P  - - -
Health club and fitness center         -  P  P   P  -  -  P - P
Marina, public or private              -  -  -   -  P  -  - - -
Park, playground, beach; private       -  -  P   P  P  P  - - -
Park, playground, beach; public        -  P  P   P  P  P  P P P
Recreation        Indoor               -  P  P   -  -  -  P - -
facility/Athletic Outdoors             -  -  -   -  -  P  S - P  §
courts                                                           153.119(A)
LODGING, DINING AND ENTERTAINMENT
Bakery and baked goods                 -  P  P   P  P  -  - - P
Bed and breakfast                      -  -  P   P  P  -  - - S  §
                                                                 153.116 (D)
Billiards, pool hall                   -  P  -   -  -  -  - - -
Bowling alley                          -  P  -   -  -  -  - - -
Brewpub                                -  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
Fishing charter service                -  -  P   -  P  P  - - -
Lodges and private clubs               -  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
Motel or hotel                         -  P  P   P  -  -  - - P
Restaurant with drive-through          -  P  -   -  -  -  - - -  §
                                                                 153.118 (B)
Restaurant without drive-through       -  P  P   P  P  -  P - P
Wine tasting room                      -  P  P   P  P  -  - - P
Tavern                                 -  P  P   P  P  -  - - -
Theater, indoor                        -  P  P   -  -  -  - - -
RETAIL
Any retail establishment with a gross                            §
leasable area greater than 15,000 sq.  -  P  -   -  -  -  P - -  153.120
ft. (60,000 sq. ft. maximum)
Building material, lumber, bulk        -  -  -   -  -  -  P - -
storage yard
Convenience store                      -  P  P   -  -  -  P - P
Floral shop/florist                    -  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
Furniture and appliance sales          -  P  -   -  -  -  - - -
Grocery, meats, delicatessen           -  P  P   -  P  -  - - P
Nursery/garden shop                    -  P  -   -  -  -  P - P
Retail sales of durable and dry goods:
apparel, hardware, pharmaceuticals,    -  P  P   -  -  -  - - P
books, gifts, jewelry, etc.
VEHICLE RELATED USES
Boat fuel/gasoline sales               -  P  -   -  S  -  - - -
Boat service and repair                -  P  -   -  P  -  P - -
Boat/marine sales and related retail   -  P  P   -  P  -  P - P
(e.g., fishing equipment, etc.)
Public garages, parking lots/          -  -  P   -  -  -  - S -
structures as a principal use
Vehicle service station with
convenience retail, in conjunction     -  S  -   -  -  -  S - -
with a bulk petroleum distribution
facility
Vehicle service station, including                               §
accessory service/repair and/or        -  P  -   -  -  -  P - -  153.123 (C)
convenience retail
Vehicle parts sales, indoor only       -  P  -   -  -  -  P - -
Vehicle sales                          -  P  -   -  -  -  P - -
Vehicle repair, major                  -  -  -   -  -  -  P - -  §
                                                                 153.123 (A)
Vehicle repair, minor                  -  S  -   -  -  -  P - -  §
                                                                 153.123 (B)
Vehicle wash establishment             -  S  -   -  -  -  P - -  §
                                                                 153.123(D)
PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL
Churches and customary related uses    P  P  P   P  P  P  P P P
Colleges and universities              -  S  S   -  -  -  S S S
Community centers                      P  P  P   -  -  -  P P P
Hospital, clinic                       P  P  P   -  -  -  - - P
Publicly owned building                P  P  P   P  P  P  P P P
School (elementary, middle and high)   -  -  P   -  -  -  - P S
INDUSTRIAL AND STORAGE
Boat/marine construction and           -  -  -   -  P  -  P - -
maintenance equipment use and storage
Boat storage, indoor, in a permanent   -  -  -   -  P  -  P - -
structure
Boat storage, outdoor (permanent)      -  -  -   -  -  -  P - -
Boat storage, outdoor (off season)     -  P  -   P  P  P  P P -
Manufacture, compounding, assembly and
treatment of articles from prepared    -  S  -   -  S  -  P - -
materials, such as metal, plastics,
fiber and wood
Manufacturing, compounding, processing
and packaging products, such as candy,
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and food    -  S  -   -  -  -  P - -
products (but not refining or
rendering)
Self-storage facility                  -  -  -   -  -  -  P - -  §
                                                                 153.124 (A)
Warehousing, truck terminal, logistics -  -  -   -  -  -  P - -
and transportation equipment storage
OTHER USES
Essential services                     P  P  P   P  P  P  P P P
Similar use                            P  P  P   P  P  P  P P P  §
                                                                 153.125 (C)
Wireless telecommunication towers      -  S  -   -  -  -  S S -  §
                                                                 153.125(D)
NOTES TO TABLE:
1 Subject to any use restrictions and the area, height and setback
requirements of the GC District.
2 Mixed use developments where dwelling units are proposed above professional
offices shall comply with the area, height and placement requirements of the
PO District.
3 Mixed use developments where dwelling units are proposed above GC structure
shall comply with the area, height and placement requirements of the GC
District.
4 Developments of a single multiple-family dwelling may be developed to the
requirements of the R2 District, while Developments of more than one
Multiple-family dwellings shall be developed to the requirements of the R4
District.
 
(Prior Code, § 5.31) (Ord. 805, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 153.087 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All lots in the non-residential districts shall conform to the requirements
of the Table 153.087. The requirements in footnotes are an integral part of
this subchapter and shall apply in all instances.
Table 153.087: Dimensional Requirements, Non-Residential and Mixed Use
Districts
         Min. Lot  Min. Lot Max.     Minimum Yard Setbacks (ft.)     Lot
Zoning   Area (sq. Width    Building       Side                      Coverage
District ft.)      (ft.)    Height   Front Interior Street Side Rear (%)
                            (ft.)
Table 153.087: Dimensional Requirements, Non-Residential and Mixed Use
Districts
                            Max.       Minimum Yard Setbacks
Zoning   Min. Lot  Min. Lot Building   (ft.)                      Lot
District Area (sq. Width    Height           Side                 Coverage
         ft.)      (ft.)    (ft.)      Front Interior Street Rear (%)
                                                      Side
PO       NA        75       26         15    10       15     25   NA
GC       20,000    100      26         15    10       15     25   NA
CBD      NA        NA       40         0     0        0      01   NA
CH       43,560    150      30         25    202      20     301  50/803
MC       10,000    50       354        20    0        0      0    NA
SR       NA        NA       §         25    20/50    20/50  50   30
                            153.088(A)
I        43,560    150      30         30    20       20     25   60
P        NA        100      35         20    10       15     15   NA
CM       6,000     50       MU-R 27,   156   04       154&5  204  NA
                            MU-CL 39
NOTES TO TABLE:
1 The minimum rear yard in the CBD District when adjacent to the Pine River
Channel or Round Lake shall be 50 feet.
2 In the CH District, the minimum side or rear yard adjacent to any
residential district shall be 50 feet.
3 In the CH District, lot coverage of buildings shall not exceed 50%; lot
coverage of all impervious surfaces shall not exceed 80%.
4 Non-residential: none, residential: see §
153.072 standards for R1 & R2 Districts.
5 Street side setbacks may be reduced to 10 feet for 2 story buildings and
10 feet for 3 story buildings with design review when the reduction
improves the overall site design, design of the building or better
integrates the building with its site and surroundings and a 6-foot-wide
sidewalk is provided.
6 Front may be reduced to 10 feet with design review when the reduction
improves the overall site design, design of the building or better
integrates the building with its site and surroundings and a 10-foot-wide
sidewalk is provided.
 
(Ord. 866, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 153.088 ADDITIONAL SR, SCENIC RESERVE, DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No building shall exceed 25 feet in height to the peak of the roof.
   (B)   Any path, road or similar passage within the setback shall be
constructed and surfaced to effectively control erosion, and shall meet the
requirements of this chapter and any other applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5.33) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.089 MIXED USED REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these zoning regulations is to implement the
Master Plan.
   (B)   Applicability. The zoning regulations set forth in §
153.087 of this chapter shall apply citywide to all permit applications, as
defined in this section. As they apply to the city's review and consideration
of permit applications, these zoning regulations supersede any conflicting
provisions of the existing zoning ordinance in effect on the effective date of
these zoning regulations.
   (C)   Land use definitions to implement zoning regulations. The following
definitions are for the purpose of implementing the zoning regulations
established by §
153.087 of this chapter.
      ARTISAN/SMALL-SCALE MANUFACTURING. The artisan/small-scale manufacturing
use type refers to establishments primarily engaged in on-site production of
goods by hand manufacturing or artistic endeavor, which involves only the use
of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding five horsepower or
kilns not exceeding 25 kilowatts, and the incidental direct sale to consumers
of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios,
candle making shops, and custom jewelry manufacturers.
      ARTIST'S STUDIO. Workspace for an artist or artisan, including
individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or an applied
art or craft. This use may include incidental display and retail sales of items
produced on the premises and instructional space for small groups of no more
than 18 students per instruction. It does not include joint living and working
units (see LIVE-WORK).
         STUDIO-LIGHT. Small-scale art production is generally of a low impact
and no more than a maximum floor area of 2,500 square feet. Typical uses
include painting, photography, jewelry, glass, textile, and pottery studios.
         STUDIO-HEAVY. Art production on a medium or large scale generally
using heavy equipment and greater floor area than 2,500 square feet. Typical
uses include large-scale metal and woodworking studios.
      BREWPUB. A full-service or limited-service restaurant with a micro-
brewery as an accessory use that meets the requirements of Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, where no more than 5,000 barrels of beer are produced per
year. A brewpub may sell other supplier's beer, including other hand-crafted or
micro-brewed beers as well as wine to patrons for consumption on its premises.
      BREWERIES, LIMITED. Small-scale facilities that produce beer and similar
beverages onsite.
         BREWERY, BREW-ON-PREMISES. A do-it-yourself brewery where customers
produce craft style beer or wine on the premises of a brewery or micro-brewery.
Customers also may purchase the ingredients, rent the equipment, time, and
space, and be provided assistance by an on-site brewmaster.
         MICRO-BREWERY. An establishment that produces annually less than 5,000
barrels of ales, beers, meads, hard ciders and/or similar beverages onsite.
Micro-breweries may also serve beverages onsite and sell beverages for offsite
consumption pursuant to the regulations of the Michigan Liquor Control Board
and the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.
      CATERING SERVICE. A business that prepares food for consumption on the
premises of a client or at any other location separate from where the food was
prepared.
      CULTURAL FACILITY. Facilities engaged in activities to serve and promote
aesthetic and educational interest in the community that are open to the public
on a regular basis. This classification includes performing arts centers for
theater, music, dance, and events; spaces for display or preservation of
objects of interest in the arts or sciences; libraries; museums; and public art
galleries. It does not include schools or institutions of higher education
providing curricula of a general nature.
      MEDIA PRODUCTION. Facilities for production of motion pictures,
television, video, sound, computer, and other communications media production.
      OFFICES FOR WALK-IN CLIENTELE. Offices providing direct services to
patrons or clients without prior appointments. This use classification includes
employment agencies, insurance agent offices, real estate offices, travel
agencies, utility company offices, and offices for elected officials. It does
not include banks or check-cashing facilities, which are separately classified
and regulated.
      PRINTING & PUBLISHING. A use engaged in printing by letterpress,
lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying;
and other activities serving the printing trade such as bookbinding,
typesetting, engraving, photo-engraving and electrotyping. This use also
applies to the publishing of newspapers, books, and periodicals; manufacturing
business forms and binding devices. Quick printing services are included in the
printing and copying use classification.
      RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. The research and development use type refers to
establishments primarily engaged in the research, development, and controlled
production of high-technology electronic, industrial or scientific products or
commodities for sale, but excludes uses that may be objectionable by reason of
production of offensive odor, dust, noise, bright lights, vibration or the
storage of hazardous material or products, or uses that threaten public safety.
Typical uses include biotechnology and software development firms.
      RETAIL SALES.
         GENERAL RETAIL SALES, SMALL-SCALE. The retail sale or rental of
merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This
classification includes retail establishments with 15,000 square feet or less
of sales area; including department stores, clothing stores, pet supply stores,
small hardware and garden supply/nurseries stores, and businesses retailing
goods including, but not limited to, the following: toys, hobby materials,
handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services
(including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and
equipment, pharmacies, electronic equipment, sporting goods, kitchen utensils,
hardware, appliances, antiques, private art galleries, art supplies and
services, glass and windows, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering,
office supplies, bicycles, video rental, and new automotive parts and
accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be
combined with other services such as office machines, computers, electronics,
and similar small-item repairs.
         GENERAL RETAIL SALES, LARGE-SCALE. Retail establishments with over
15,000 square feet of sales area that sell merchandise and bulk goods for
individual consumption, including membership warehouse clubs, where sales of
grocery items do not occupy more than 25 of the floor area.
         WITH DRIVE-THROUGH. A retail establishment with drive-through
facilities.
   (D)   Overlay districts established. The purpose of this division (D) is to
establish the following overlay districts consistent with the Master Plan. The
locations and boundaries of the overlay districts are delineated in Exhibit A
attached to Ordinance 866 and incorporated herein.
      (1)   MU-R Residential Mixed Use. The Residential Mixed-Use District
prioritizes residential development with associated non-residential
development, neighborhood-scale retail and office space. In addition to a mix
of housing types, other uses like live/work units, artist studios, and
businesses that are less than 4,000 square feet are permitted. Residential
units are required with densities ranging between 16 and 30 housing units per
gross acre.
      (2)   MU-CL Commercial Mixed-Use Low. The Commercial Mixed-Use Low
District provides for developments that integrate residential and non-
residential uses. It is intended for a mixture of uses in a single building;
however, if a mixture of uses is infeasible due to site constraints or
development costs, single uses are allowed, including neighborhood and
community retail; eating and drinking establishments; small- scale commercial
recreation; residential; financial, business, and personal services;
educational and social services; and offices. No separate residential density
standards shall apply.
   (E)   Effect of section on existing zoning districts. To the extent that the
existing zoning ordinance applies a different zoning district designation to
any area within the boundaries of an overlay district established by this
section, the zoning district designation of the existing zoning ordinance shall
be superseded and have no force.
   (F)   Basis for Zoning Map. The zoning districts established in Exhibit A to
Ordinance 866 are based on the Master Plan Land Use Designations for Mixed Use
for pedestrian-oriented development.
   (G)   Zoning district regulations. The purpose of this division (G) is to
establish use and development regulations for the zoning districts.
      (1)   Uses permitted, conditionally permitted, and prohibited. Land uses,
as classified in the existing zoning ordinance and in this section, are
permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited in the zoning districts as
indicated in Table 1. Permitted uses are indicated by a "P", conditionally
permitted uses are indicated by a "C", uses subject to specific standards are
indicated by a "S", and prohibited uses are indicated by a blank. Where a
subclassification, which is indented, has a different designation from the one
given to the more general land use, that designation governs. Conditionally
permitted uses are allowed upon the approval of a use permit pursuant to §
153.234 of this chapter and any additional findings that may be required by
this section.
TABLE 1: LAND USE REGULATIONS FOR MIXED USE ZONES
P = Permitted C = Conditional S = Specific Standards Apply; See § 153.234
Blank= Not Allowed
Zoning Districts MU-R MU-CL Additional Regulations
TABLE 1: LAND USE REGULATIONS FOR MIXED USE ZONES
P = Permitted C = Conditional S = Specific Standards Apply; See § 153.234 Blank= Not Allowed
Zoning Districts                                   MU- MU-CL         Additional Regulations
                                                   R
A. Commercial Uses
1. Animal care and sales
Animal care facilities, excluding exterior pens or     C              
runs
Animal retail sales and supplies, excluding            C              
exterior pens or runs
Taxidermy shops                                                       
2. Business sales and service
Locksmith                                              P
Office furniture sales and rentals                     P
Office supply and equipment shops (incl. accessory
repair)
Printing and copy shops                                P
Printing and publishing                                P              
3. Food and beverage service establishments, stores
                                                   See
Food service establishments                        subclassifications
                                                   below
   With or without accessory serving of beer or CS* P
wine                                                                 *For restaurants, cocktail lounges and bars, with outdoor seating see §
   With a bar, live entertainment or dancing        CS            153.118(C)
   With drive-through use                           CS            Drive-through, see §
Food and beverage stores, specialty                P   P             153.118(B)
Bakeries, retail                                   P*  P*            *C if operating 24 hours or before 7:00 a.m. and/or adjacent to
Brewpubs                                               CS            residential
Catering service
Convenience market                                 C   P
Grocery stores and supermarkets                        P
Liquor stores                                          C*
4. Motor vehicle sales and service
Sales, new or used vehicles (including repair
accessory to sales)
Sales, parts and supplies (and accessory service)
5. Personal services
Artist studio, light                               P   P              
Artist's studio, heavy                                 P
Barber shops, beauty salons, nail salons, personal P   P
grooming
Check cashing, bail bond services                                    *C if > than 5,000 sf
Dry cleaning, laundromats, laundries                   P*
Mail services                                      P   P
Shoe repair and shoeshine                          P   P
Tailor/seamstress                                  P   P              
Travel agencies                                        P              
Weight loss establishments                             P              
6. Recreation facilities, commercial
Health clubs/gyms                                      P             *C if > than 3,000 sf
Health spas, nails, other                          P*  P
7. Retail uses
Auction house
                                                   See
General Retail Sales                               subclassifications*C if > than 5,000 sf
                                                   below              
   Large scale                                                    Drive-through, see §
   Small scale                                      P             153.118(B)
   With drive through uses                          CS
Secondhand and consignment shops                       P
Shopping centers
8. Visitor accommodations
Hotels, motels, STRs                                   P*            *C if > than 10,000 sf
Visitor information centers                            P
B. Industrial Uses
Artisan/small-scale manufacturing                      P              
"Boutique" food processing with retail sales           P              
C. Offices and Related Uses
1. Financial services
Banks, savings and loans, and other financial          P*
institutions                                                         *C if > than 5,000 sf
Financial services offices                             P
2. Offices and Related Uses
Clinics                                                C              
Media production                                       P              
Medical, dental and health-related offices             P*            *C if > than 5,000 sf
Office (administrative, business, and                  P*            *C if > than 5,000 sf
professional)
Offices with walk-in clientele                     P   P              
D. Public and Quasi-Public Uses
1. General
Clubs and lodges, including for youth                  P              
Cultural facility                                      P
Other public/quasi-public uses of an
administrative, educational, religious,                P
communications or public service nature
2. Schools
Parochial, private                                 C   C
Public                                             P   P
Vocational, business trades                                           
3. Transportation facilities
Parking facilities, commercial or municipal (5+        C
spaces)
Transit or bus stations
Single-family attached                             P   P             For condominiums, see §
Multifamily residential                            P   P             153.117(B)

Group residential, including SROs                  CS  CS             
Live/work developments                                 C              
Residential care facilities
   Small (0-6 residents)                            P              
   Large (7 or more residents)                      CS             
Day care facility, child or adult (up to 6         P   P              
children or 6 adults)
Day care center (13 or more children or 7 or more      CS             
adults)
F. Accessory Structures and Uses
Accessory structures and uses                      P if principal use is permitted; C if principal use requires a use permit. See §
                                                   153.116
Automatic teller machines                              P              
G. Other Uses
Nonresidential condominiums                            P             See standards §
                                                                     153.117(B)
 
      (2)   Additional land use regulations.
         (a)   Mixed use development. Mixed use development is permitted on a
site that (i) is designated for mixed uses by the Master Plan, (ii) all of the
proposed uses are permitted in the applicable zoning district, and (iii) no
conversion of an existing residential rental unit is proposed with the
exception of division (2)(b) below.
         (b)   Residential rental units. Conversion of existing residential
rental units to nonresidential units is allowed only with a conditional use
permit and is subject to the same standards as new development unless waived by
the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Commercial development in MU-R District. Commercial only
development is not allowed. The area devoted to commercial uses cannot exceed
30% of the total building floor area, and all non-residential uses must be
located at the ground level.
      (3)   Development standards. The development standards for the Commercial
Mixed-Use Zoning Districts are shown in Table 2.
TABLE 2: CM USE DISTRICTS - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Property Development Standards MU-R MU-CL Additional Standards
TABLE 2: CM USE DISTRICTS - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Property                                                        Additional
Development         MU-R  MU-CL                                 Standards
Standards
Maximum density     30*   NA                                    * >.5 round up
(units/gross acre)
Maximum height (in  27    39                                     
feet)
Maximum number of   2     3                                      
stories
Minimum lot area    6,000 6,000                                  
(sq. ft.)
Minimum lot
frontage (feet) at  50    50                                     
front property line
Front setback                                                  
(feet)
-   Arterial or  15    10                                    (1)
collector
-   Local street 15    15                                    (1)
Street side setback                                            
(feet)
-   Arterial or  15    15                                    (2) (3)
collector
-   Local street 15    15                                    (2) (3)
Garage door
setbacks from       20    20                                     
street (feet)
Side and rear       Non-residential: none, residential: see §   
setback (feet)      153.072 standards for R1 & R2 Districts
Notes:
(1)   Front may be reduced to 10 feet with design review when the reduction
improves the overall site design, design of the building or better integrates
the building with its site and surroundings and a 10-foot-wide sidewalk is
provided.
(2)   Street side setbacks may be reduced to 10 feet for 2 story buildings and
10 feet for 3 story buildings with design review when the reduction improves
the overall site design, design of the building or better integrates the
building with its site and surroundings and a 6-foot-wide sidewalk is
provided.
(3)   Commercial and mixed-use development on land that abuts a residential
district will be designed and constructed, and will be operated and maintained
to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity; will be compatible with adjacent uses of
land; and will not change the essential character of the area in which it is
proposed.
 
      (4)   Build-to line, MU-CL. Buildings shall be constructed at the street
frontage or required setback line (the "build-to" line) for at least 60% of the
building frontage. Portions of the area between the building and lot line shall
be paved so that it functions as a wider public sidewalk and public areas. This
requirement may be modified or waived by the Planning Commission upon finding
that:
         (a)   Substantial landscaping will be located between the build-to
line and ground floor residential units to soften visual impact of buildings;
         (b)   Entry courtyards, plazas, entries, or outdoor eating and display
areas will be located between the build-to line and building, provided that the
buildings will be built to the edge of the courtyard, plaza, or outdoor dining
area; or
         (c)   The building will incorporate an alternative entrance design
that will create a welcoming entry feature facing the street.
      (5)   Required side and rear yards for residential uses. In order to
provide light and air for residential units, the following minimum setbacks
apply to any building wall containing windows for residential units and facing
an interior side or rear yard.
         (a)   For any wall containing windows, a setback of at least five feet
shall be provided.
         (b)   For any wall containing bedroom windows, a setback of at least
ten feet shall be provided.
         (c)   For any wall containing a living room or other primary room
windows, a setback of at least ten feet shall be provided.
         (d)   The required setbacks apply to that portion of the building wall
containing a window and extending three feet on either side of the window.
      (6)   Minimum ground-floor height. The minimum ground-floor height shall
be ten feet for residential uses and 12 feet for non-residential uses.
      (7)   Exceptions to maximum height limits.
         (a)   Architectural features. A parapet wall, cornice, cupolas or
mechanical equipment may project up to four feet above the maximum height
limit.
         (b)   Towers. If the project site is greater than 15,000 square feet,
a tower or other projecting architectural elements may extend up to 12 feet
above the top of a pitched roof, provided that the square footage of the
element(s) do not total more than 15% of the building footprint. The area above
the uppermost permitted floor of the element(s) shall not be a habitable space.
            1.   The composition of the tower element shall be balanced, where
the width of the tower has a proportional relationship to the height of the
tower.
            2.   The tower element shall be proportional to the rest of the
building.
            3.   The tower element shall not be stepped back at any point,
            4.   The maximum horizontal dimension of the tower element shall
not exceed 52 feet. Fenestration shall be greater at the base of the tower than
at the top.
            5.   The roof shall include architectural detailing, such as a
cornice or eave.
      (8)   Upper story limitations. For the MU-CL Zoning District abutting a
R1 or R2 Residential Zoning District, the top story of all three-story
buildings shall contain only residential uses and shall be stepped back a
minimum of ten feet from the story below on the abutting side.
      (9)   Wide buildings. Any building over 50 feet wide shall be broken down
to read as a series of buildings no wider than 50 feet each or 30 feet in the
MU-R Zoning District. Increases in the maximum building width may be approved
through design review if recesses, offsets, or other architectural articulation
modulate a "box-like" appearance.
      (10)   Maximum building length and length of blank walls. The maximum
building length is 100 feet. See Table 3. This limitation does not apply to
buildings with unique design requirements, such as gyms and auditoriums.
Increases in the maximum building length may be approved through design review
if recesses, offsets, or other architectural articulation modulate a "box-like"
appearance. The maxi mum lengt h of blank walls is ten feet on the groun d
floor and 25 feet on upper floors .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2269.png]
 
 
District             MU-R                 MU-CL                 Additional  #
                                                                Regulations
Maximum building     100                  100                               
length (ft.)
Maximum length of    10 for ground floor, 10 for ground floor,             1
blank wall (ft.)     25 for upper floors  25 for upper floors
Bay window           Max. 2 feet from primary facade and min.              2
                     12 feet above
Awnings & overhangs  Max. 4 feet from primary facade and 8 feet            3
(ft.)                above sidewalk grade above public ROW
Awning setback from  Min. 4 feet clear                                     4
curb
 
      (11)   Building projections. The maximum width of any projection,
including bay windows, is ten feet, and the total of all projections along a
building face may not be more than ten feet wide or 25% of the building
frontage, whichever is greater.
      (12)   Building orientation and entrances.
         (a)   Buildings shall be oriented to face public streets or
pedestrian-oriented areas.
         (b)   Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets, and
the primary building entrances shall be located on or within 15 feet of a
public sidewalk.
         (c)   At least one entrance shall be provided per 100 linear feet of
building frontage unless the building has unique security needs.
         (d)   Entrances located at corners shall generally be oriented at a
45-degree angle to the corner and shall have a distinct architectural treatment
to animate the intersection and facilitate pedestrian flow around the corner.
Different treatments may include angled or rounded comers, arches, and other
architectural elements.
         (e)   Entrances to residential units shall be physically separated
from the entrance to the permitted commercial uses and clearly marked with a
physical feature incorporated into the building or an appropriately scaled
element applied to the facade.
      (13)    Building transparency; required openings for non-residenti al
uses. Exterior walls facing and within 15 feet of a front or street side
property line shall include windows, glass doors, or other openings for at
least 60% of the building wall area located between two and one-half and seven
feet above the level of the sidewalk (see Figure 1). No wall may run in a
continuous plane for more than 25 feet without a window or other opening.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2271.png]
 
         (a)   Design of required openings. Openings fulfilling this
requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas,
display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces, or into window
displays that are at least two feet deep.
         (b)   Exceptions for parking garages. Garages are not required to meet
the building transparency requirement of this subsection. Instead, they must be
screened with buffer landscaping.
         (c)   Alternatives through design review. Alternatives to the building
transparency requirement may be approved if the Planning Commission finds that:
            1.   The proposed use has unique operational characteristics with
which providing the required windows and openings is incompatible, such as in
the case of a cinema or theater; and
            2.   Street-facing building walls will exhibit architectural relief
and detail and will be enhanced with landscaping in such a way as to create
visual interest at the pedestrian level.
      (14)   Building design and articulation. Buildings shall provide adequate
architectural articulation and detail to avoid a bulky and "box-like"
appearance. Building design shall reflect and complement the architectural
style of significant historic buildings within the city. This may be
accomplished through the incorporation of architectural style, colors, and
materials similar to those used for historic buildings in the city. The
following standards apply to development projects in the Mixed-Use Districts:
         (a)   Massing. Building massing shall align with the street grid of
adjacent blocks.
         (b)   Relation to existing buildings. Buildings shall be designed to
appear integrated with existing buildings in the district.
         (c)   Vertical relationship. Buildings shall be designed to have a
distinctive base (ground floor level), middle (intermediate upper floor
levels), and top (either top floor or roof level). Cornices, balconies, roof
terraces, and other architectural elements should be used, as appropriate, to
terminate rooflines and accentuate setbacks between stories.
         (d)   Windows.
            1.   Window frames shall be inset at least two inches from the face
of the building to enhance shadow-line around opening.
            2.   Snap-in vinyl mullions between double pane glass is
prohibited. If a divided light appearance is desired, mullions must be made of
dimensional material projecting in front of the panes on both the inside and
outside of the window.
            3.   Exceptions may be granted through the design review process to
accommodate alternative window design complementary to the architectural style
of the structure.
         (e)   Exterior building materials and colors.
            1.   A unified palette of materials shall be used on all sides of
buildings.
            2.   Exterior building materials shall be stone, brick, stucco,
architectural concrete block, painted wood clapboard, painted metal clapboard
or other quality, durable materials approved through the design review process.
            3.   A wainscoting of quality materials on the bottom of the ground
floor facade may be required.
            4.   Colors shall be used to help delineate windows and other
architectural features to increase architectural interest.
         (f)   Building details.
            1.   Building facades shall include building projections or
recesses, doorway and window trim, and other details that provide architectural
articulation and design interest.
            2.   All applied surface ornamentation or decorative detailing
shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building.
            3.   All balconies shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of two
feet.
            4.   Each side of the building that is visible from a public right-
of-way shall be designed with a complementary level of detailing.
      (15)   Pedestrian access.
         (a)   Internal connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall
connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and
bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian
amenities.
         (b)   To circulation network. Regular connections between on- site
walkways and the public sidewalk and other pedestrian walkways within the
project shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary
building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.
         (c)   To neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided
from commercial and mixed-use projects to adjoining residential and commercial
areas to the maximum extent feasible, while still providing safety and
security.
         (d)   Interior pedestrian walkway design.
            1.   Walkways shall have a minimum clear, unobstructed width of six
feet, where feasible, but at least four feet, shall be hard-surfaced, and paved
with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.
            2.   Where a required walkway crosses driveways, parking areas, or
loading areas, it must be clearly identifiable through the use of a raised
crosswalk, a different paving material, or similar method.
            3.   Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto
travel lane, it must be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a
raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or other physical barrier.
      (16)   Limitations on location of parking. Parking may be located within
40 feet of the street facing property line in accordance with Table 4 and the
following standards.
         (a)   Underground and partially submerged parking. Parking completely
or partially underground, may match the setbacks of the main structure. The
maximum height of a parking podium visible from a street is five feet from
finished grade.
            1.   Surface parking. Above ground surface parking may be located
within 40 feet of a street facing property line if the decision-making body
makes all of the following findings;
            2.   Buildings are built close to the public sidewalk to the
maximum extent feasible;
            3.   The parking area is screened along the public right-of-way
with a wall, hedge, trellis, and/or landscaping; and
            4.   The site is small and constrained such that underground,
partially submerged, or surface parking located more than 40 feet from the
street frontage is not feasible.
      (17)   Residential open space. Residential open space is required for any
mixed-use development with dwelling units (see Table 5); it may be provided as
common or private open space. Private areas consist of balconies, decks,
patios, or fenced yards directly accessible from the residence. Common areas
consist of landscaped areas, walks, patios, swimming pools, barbeque areas,
playgrounds, turf, rooftop areas, or other such improvements as are appropriate
to enhance the outdoor living environment of the development. Landscaped
courtyard entries that are oriented towards the public street which create a
welcoming entry feature are also considered common areas. All areas not
improved with buildings, parking, vehicular accessways, trash enclosures, and
similar items or devoted to perimeter landscaping shall be developed as common
areas with the types of attributes described above.
 
TABLE 4: PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS - MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
TABLE 4: PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS - MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2273.png]
 
District                MU-R MU-CL                   Additional Regulation s #
                        40 ft.; buildings shall be
                        placed as close to the
Setback from Street     street as possible, with
Property Line (ft.)     parking underground, behind                         14
                        a building, or on the
                        interior side or rear of the
                        site.
Setback from Buildings  5 ft. walkway plus 3 ft.
and Public Plazas (ft.) landscaping; applicable only                        15
                        to above ground parking.
Access Location         Side street or alley                                 
                        wherever possible
Curb Cuts               Minimized and in area least                         16
                        likely to impede
Loading/Service Area    Side or rear of lot; must be                        17
                        screened from public ROW
 
 
TABLE 5: LANDSCAPING AND OPEN SPACE STANDARDS - MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
District                  MR-R MU-CL                    Additional Regulations
Minimum Residential
Private Open Space (sq.   65   75                        
ft. per unit)
                          For residential and mixed-use
Minimum Public Open Space development: 60 sq. ft. per    
                          unit; for non-residential
                          development: 10% of site
Minimum Amount of         10   15                        
Landscaping (% of site)
 
         (a)   Minimum dimensions.
            1.   Private open space. Private open space located on the ground
level (e.g., yards, decks, patios) shall have no horizontal dimension less than
ten feet. Private open space located above ground level (e.g., balconies) shall
have no horizontal dimension less than six feet.
            2.   Common open space. Minimum horizontal dimension of 20 feet.
         (b)   Usability. A surface shall be provided that allows convenient
use for outdoor living and/or recreation. Such surface may be any practicable
combination of lawn, garden, flagstone, wood planking, concrete, or other
serviceable, dust-free surfacing. The maximum slope shall not exceed 10%.
         (c)   Accessibility.
            1.   Private open space. The space shall be accessible to only one
living unit by a doorway to a habitable room or hallway.
            2.   Common open space. The space shall be accessible to all of the
living units on the lot. It shall be served by any stairway or other accessway
qualifying as an egress facility from a habitable room.
   (H)   Mixed Use Residential District. The Mixed Use Residential (MU-R)
District applies to frontages on arterial streets that are designated for a
pedestrian orientation in the MU-R Overlay District. This designation is
intended to unify and strengthen the commercials where it applies by
establishing standards that will create active street fronts with widened
sidewalks and improved pedestrian connections.
      (1)   Street frontage improvements. New development subject to an MU-
R Overlay District shall provide street frontage improvements in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   Between the property line and curb.
            1.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks that are six to ten feet wide shall be
provided if none exist or if the existing sidewalks are in poor condition.
            2.   Street furniture. Trash receptacles, benches, bike racks, and
other street furniture shall be provided.
            3.   Landscaping. Street landscaping will meet §
153.171 of this chapter and §
152.05 of the Tree Ordinance of the city.
         (b)   Interior from property line. Except where occupied by a building
or necessary for parking access, the street frontage, for a depth of ten feet
from the property line, shall be utilized for pedestrian circulation or active
outdoor uses, including, but not limited to outdoor dining; paved for public
uses so that it functions as part of a wider public sidewalk; or improved with
landscaping, public art, and/or pedestrian amenities, such as outdoor seating.
      (2)   Building orientation and entrances.
         (a)   Buildings shall be oriented to face public streets.
         (b)   Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets, and
the primary building entrances shall be located on or within 20 feet of a
public sidewalk.
         (c)   At least one entrance shall be provided per 100 linear feet of
building frontage unless the building has unique security needs.
         (d)   Entrances located at corners shall generally be oriented at a
45-degree angle to the corner and shall have a distinct architectural treatment
to animate the intersection and facilitate pedestrian flow around the corner.
Different treatments may include angled or rounded corners, arches, and other
architectural elements.
         (e)   Entrances to residential units shall be physically separated
from the entrance to the permitted commercial uses and clearly marked with a
physical feature incorporated into the building or an appropriately scaled
element applied to the facade.
      (3)   Building transparency; required openings for non-residential uses.
Exterior walls facing and within 20 feet of a front or street side property
line shall include windows, glass doors, or other openings for at least 60% of
the building wall area located between two and one-half and seven feet above
the level of the sidewalk. No wall may run in a continuous plane for more than
25 feet without a window or other opening.
FIGURE 2: REQUIRED OPENINGS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN A MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL
OVERLAY DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2275.png]
 
         (a)   Design of required openings. Openings fulfilling this
requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas,
display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces, or into window
displays that are at least three feet deep.
         (b)   Exceptions for parking garages. First floor garages are not
required to meet the building transparency requirement of this subsection.
Instead, they must be screened with buffer landscaping.
         (c)   Alternatives through design review. Alternatives to the building
transparency requirement may be approved through the design review process if
the Planning Commission makes all of the following findings:
            1.   The proposed use has unique operational characteristics with
which providing the required windows and openings is incompatible, such as in
the case of a cinema or theater; and
            2.   Street-facing building walls will exhibit architectural relief
and detail and will be enhanced with landscaping in such a way as to create
visual interest at the pedestrian level.
      (4)   Pedestrian access.
         (a)   Internal connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall
connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and
bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian
amenities.
         (b)   To circulation network. Regular connections between on- site
walkways and the public sidewalk and other planned or existing pedestrian
routes and trails shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the
primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.
         (c)   To neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided
from commercial and mixed-use projects to adjoining residential and commercial
areas to the maximum extent feasible, while still providing safety and
security.
         (d)   To transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be
provided from transit stops to building entrances.
Interior Pedestrian Walkway Design.
            1.   Walkways shall have a minimum clear, unobstructed width of six
feet, where feasible, but at least four feet, shall be hard-surfaced, and paved
with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.
            2.   Where a required walkway crosses driveways, parking areas, or
loading areas, it must be clearly identifiable through the use of a raised
crosswalk, a different paving material, or similar method.
            3.   Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto
travel lane, it must be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a
raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or another physical barrier.
   (I)   Permit application review process.
      (1)   Process for review of permit applications. Each permit application
shall be subject to the review procedure set forth below.
         (a)   Preliminary determination of commercial mixed-use standards
consistency. Under Step 1 of this permit application review process, the
Director shall make a preliminary determination regarding whether the project
described in the permit application is consistent with the commercial mixed-use
standards by determining whether the project (i) is permitted under the
applicable zoning ordinance land use designation, and (ii) considering all its
aspects, will further the goals, objectives and policies of the commercial
mixed-use standards and not obstruct their attainment.
         (b)   If the Director determines that the project described in the
permit application is not consistent with the commercial mixed-use standards,
the permit application shall not be further reviewed or processed until the
applicant revises the project to be consistent with the commercial mixed-use
standards and/or files an application for a zoning variance. If the Director
determines that the project described in the permit application is consistent
with the commercial mixed-use standards, the permit application shall continue.
The permit application shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the
applicable development standards of the existing zoning district, including
whether the proposed use is permitted by right, conditionally permitted, or not
allowed.
         (c)   The permit application shall then be reviewed and processed in
accordance with all of the applicable land use regulations set forth in the
city zoning ordinance.
         (d)   Appeal of Step 1 preliminary determinations. Upon completion of
this Step 1, the Director shall issue to the applicant written notice of its
Step 1 determinations (the "Preliminary Determinations Notice"). Not later than
ten days following the issuance of the Preliminary Determinations Notice, the
applicant may file a single appeal to any or all of the Step 1 determinations
set forth in the Preliminary Determinations Notice in accordance with the
appeal procedures set forth in §
153.240 of this chapter. Any appeal by the applicant must address all of the
Step 1 determinations set forth in the Preliminary Determinations Notice, and
failure to address any Step 1 determination in an applicant's appeal will
result in the applicant's waiver of its right to appeal such determination. No
appeal of a Step 1 determination may be made by an applicant unless and until
the Director has issued the Preliminary Determinations Notice. If no appeal is
filed within ten days of the issuance of the Preliminary Determination Notice,
the permit application will proceed to the decision-making body for review and
action on the permit application.
         (e)   Step 2: final review and action by the Planning Commission;
required findings to support approval of permit application. Upon completion of
Step 1 above, including the completion of any appeal from a Preliminary
Determinations Notice, the permit application shall be reviewed and processed
in accordance with all of the applicable land use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district as determined in Step 1 and acted upon by the
Planning Commission. During the effective period of this section, no permit
application may be approved unless and until the Planning Commission makes each
and all of the following findings regarding the project described in the permit
application, in addition to any other findings required by the applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance and this section:
            1.   The project will further the goals, objectives and policies of
the commercial mixed-use standards and not obstruct their attainment; and
            2.   The project substantially conforms to the zoning ordinance
requirements of the applicable zoning district.
      (2)   Appeal of action by decision-making body on permit application. Any
action on a permit application by the decision-making body pursuant to this
section may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
153.240 of this chapter.
      (3)   Generally applicable laws. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted as exempting permit applications or development proposals from
compliance with generally applicable state or local laws or regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the rights of a property
owner to apply to the city for a zoning amendment or general plan amendment
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 866, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 153.090 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE.
   Commercial mixed-use should respect adjacent development and provide a
pleasing pedestrian street orientation and comfortable living environments.
This section for commercial mixed-use includes design goals and guidelines
organized into six categories:
   1.   Site Planning
   2.   Ground Floor Land Use
   3.   Architectural Design
   4.   Lighting
   5.   Materials and Color
   6.   Streetscape
 
1. Site Planning
Mixed-use residential projects should be designed to create new and enhance
existing pedestrian friendly streets that are effective social and economic
centers for neighborhoods and the community.
Vertical Mixed-use:
• Mixed-use residential projects in existing storefront districts should be
designed to fit into the block reflecting the scale and rhythms found along the
street edge. The majority of new structures should be a minimum of two stories.
When possible, view corridors to protect established views from a given observer
against building development of Lake Charlevoix or other specific point of
interest should be left within a development.
• New areas should establish a pattern and design that provides multi-modal
transit-oriented businesses and life styles.
• Storefront edges should be set back from the curb to accommodate outdoor eating
or other anticipated activities and amenities.
• Mixed-use residential projects should be oriented to take advantage of foot
traffic and visibility from the street.
• Storefront edges should be transparent with a short kickplate, a full height
storefront, and transom windows.
• Parking lots or structures for residents and ground floor commercial tenants
should not separate the project from the street edge. Place parking to the side,
rear or within a mixed-use project so as to not interrupt the pedestrian
orientation.
• Project surface parking areas should be shaded and visually screened from the
sidewalk with landscaping.
• Underground parking structures where possible are encouraged.
• Access drives to parking should be located to minimize their impact on
pedestrians.
• Projects should be set back to traditional front yard depth on residential
streets.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2277.png]
 
 
Horizontal Mixed-use:
• Adjacent commercial and multi-family residential uses should be designed to
create and share public spaces and streets.
• Pedestrian connections between commercial and residential developments should
be active and friendly.
• Commercial storefront uses should face public spaces and street edges.
• Large blank walls should not face streets or walkways.
• Residential entries and lobbies should face streets and common open spaces.
• Landscape concepts should enhance the linkages between residential and
commercial uses.
• Signage, lighting, and landscaping should provide a thematic identity for
mixed-use sites.
• S er vi c e ar e as fo r c o mmercial uses should be located at the edge of the
site and screened to reduce impacts on residents.
• Unnecessary tall concrete block sound walls should not separate commercial uses
from residential uses.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2279.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2281.png]
 
 
2. Ground Floor Activities
Ground floor uses in residential mixed-use projects should generally take
advantage of visual and physical pedestrian access and support economic
objectives for the neighborhood or district.
• Mixed-use projects in the Downtown and neighborhood commercial areas area need
to satisfy economic and social objectives for storefront shopping and commercial
services.
IMAGE
• When ground floor commercial uses are not possible, projects should include
common amenities for projects, such as health clubs and meeting space.
• For lower foot traffic areas, ground floor uses can include live-work spaces
that take advantage of walk-in access for clients.
• Portions of a project's edges facing residential streets should include front
stoops, yards, and entry porches.
• Projects shall not have blank walls or parking garages along public streets and
sidewalks.
 
 
3. Architectural Design
The architectural design of mixed-use projects should reflect the historic or
traditional context utilizing design elements and forms that fit the
neighborhood or district.
• A mixed-use building's form and design should have a deliberate street and
street corner orientation.
• Upper levels should have expressive design features, such as balconies and
bay windows, that give the building a rhythm and residential scale.
• Roof forms should reflect the project's architectural context. In a
commercial context, the roof may be flat or have a strong horizontal cornice
element. In a residential neighborhood edge or village context, roof forms
should include hip or gable elements.
• The massing concepts of multi-story mixed-use development should transition
in scale between commercial streets and smaller single family residential
streets.
Design concepts may include:
- Stepping down the scale and mass and increasing side or rear yard setbacks of
taller mixed-use projects where they adjacent to existing single-family areas;
- Use residential roof forms on residential streets;
- Orienting units towards public streets and commons rather than neighboring
backyards;
- Enclosing parking to reduce the impact on adjacent houses; and/or
- Interfacing single and mixed-use development with streets or open spaces in
new developments.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2283.png]
 
 
 
4. Lighting
Lighting should be an integral part of the plannin g and design of mixed- use
projects anticipa ting the needs of the shopping street, storefro nt businesses,
and residents.
• Lighting on commercial elevations of mixed-use projects should support overall
objectives for the street and storefront design.
• Residential front porches should have individual lights that illuminate
entries and walkways.
• Lighting in common areas should be shielded from adjacent residential units.
• All lighting should be shielded and meet the intent of Dark Sky Ordinances.
 
 
5. Materials and Color
Selection of materials and finishes should reflect the materials in the district
and support overall image and massing concepts.
• Commercial frontage portions of mixed-use projects should utilize materials
and colors that support retailing and image objectives for shopping
environments.
• Portions of mixed-use projects with residential frontage should use colors and
materials that enhance the project's architectural concepts and are compatible
with adjacent residential streets.
• Architecture within each mixed-use project should use a palette of materials
that convey an image of quality and durability. Certain materials have an
inherently inexpensive, insubstantial, or garish quality. These materials should
not be used in new construction or renovation.
Examples include:
Roofs: glazed or painted tiles, highly reflective metal or sheet materials, fake
shingles made from metal or plastic materials.
Walls: vinyl, metal, plywood, T-111 siding, Masonite or other sheet materials.
• Wood or hardboard siding, if used, should be, lap, shiplap or board-and-
batten.
• Shiplap should be installed so there are no visible joints. Board-and-batten
should be installed so there are no visible joints in the underlying "board"
material.
• Painted surfaces should use colors that reinforce architectural concepts and
are compatible with natural materials, such as brick or stone.
 
 
6. Streetscape
New and infill mixed-use residential projects should provide street trees,
lighting and street furniture that support the streetscape concepts for the
district.
• Sidewalks adjacent to mixed-use development should be wide enough to
accommodate outdoor sitting areas and landscape. This should include an area
for planting, for sitting, and for pedestrian travel.
• Street trees are required for sidewalk areas. Trees should be spaced to be
coordinated with the bay spacing and storefront design of the project.
Coordination of tree types with the Shade Tree Commission is encouraged.
• Street furniture and pedestrian-scale lighting should be included in
development planning for mixed-use projects.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2285.png]
(Ord. 866, passed 1-19-2026)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 153.100 INTENT AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of the overlay districts is to establish
regulations in addition to the applicable regulations of the existing
(underlying) zoning district that either supplement or replace those existing
regulations. The overlay districts are applied in specific locations based on
the environmental features, historic assets, scenic qualities, traffic
conditions or other unique characteristics of the area, regardless of the
established zoning districts.
   (B)   Scope. Several overlay districts are established, as described in this
subchapter, to address the varied and unique needs of specific locations within
the city. The boundaries of these districts shall be as described in this
subchapter and shown on the zoning map. The requirements of this article are in
addition to and shall supplement those imposed on the same lands by any
underlying zoning provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city.
These regulations supersede all conflicting regulations of the underlying
districts to the extent of such conflict.
(Prior Code, § 5.40)
§ 153.101 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. To create a vibrant downtown district fronting Bridge Street
consisting of primarily retail and food service businesses that enhance the
city’s economy by defining specific uses intended to increase consumer traffic.
   (B)   Applicability. This overlay district shall include all street level
areas of buildings with store entrances facing Bridge Street from Antrim Street
north to the Pine River Channel.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Food and beverage services, including: grocery stores, restaurants,
cafés (including internet cafés), coffee shops, bars, taverns, wine bars,
breweries, bakeries, delicatessens, bistros and specialty shops;
      (2)   Retail stores having a gross area of less than 5,000 square feet
(Appliance, furniture and similar stores selling large scale consumer products
are not considered retail);
      (3)   Art galleries, frame shops, photography and art studios;
      (4)   Small single building hotels and universities; and
      (5)   Professional offices and residential units as not permitted on the
street level.
   (D)   Other regulations. The Planning Commission, upon request, may
determine if a proposed use not listed above is similar to, or comparable to,
the permitted uses in division (C) above. If the Planning Commission determines
a proposed use is not similar or comparable to the permitted uses, the
applicant may apply for a special use permit. The Planning Commission may issue
a special use permit provided that the proposed use is found to generate
commercial activity in accordance with the purpose of this section and it meets
the requirements for special land use permits in §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter.
   (E)   Outdoor displays and merchandise. Merchandise or similar goods, and
associated displays shall not be permitted on the exterior buildings, entryways
or sidewalks, except during city-sponsored official sidewalk sales.
(Prior Code, § 5.41) (Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 153.102 WEST GARFIELD AVENUE GENERAL COMMERCIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to support the future
development of the 200 block of W. Garfield (north side) and the 200 block of
W. Lincoln (south side) where industrial uses have been present in the past and
commercial development currently exists, surrounded by residential uses.
   (B)   Applicability. This overlay district shall include the following
addresses (see Zoning Map):
      (1)   204 and 208 W. Lincoln; and
      (2)   205 and 207 W. Garfield.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Restaurants, not including drive-through establishments;
      (2)   Convenience stores;
      (3)   Grocery stores;
      (4)   Single Multi-family residential;
      (5)   Retail stores.
   (D)   Other regulations. The Planning Commission, upon request, may
determine if a proposed use not listed above is similar to, or comparable to,
the permitted uses in
Table 153.086. If the Planning Commission determines a proposed use is not
similar or comparable to the permitted uses, the applicant may apply for a
special use permit. The Planning Commission may issue a special use permit
provided that the proposed use is found to generate commercial activity which
furnish convenience goods and services to meet the daily needs of the residents
of the neighborhood in accordance with the purpose of this section and it meets
the requirements for special land use permits in §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter.
   (E)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Setbacks. The minimum setback requirements are as follows:
         (a)   Front: 15 feet;
         (b)   Sides: ten feet; and
         (c)   Rear: 20 feet.
      (2)   Height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 30 feet.
      (3)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50% of the
total lot.
(Prior Code, § 5.42) (Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 153.103 WEST CARPENTER/STATE STREET INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to support the continued use
of, and future development of, larger lots adjacent to the Municipal Airport
without negative impacts to the adjacent residential areas.
   (B)   Applicability. This overlay district shall include the following
addresses (see zoning map):
      (1)   210A W. Carpenter Avenue;
      (2)   1209 State Street;
      (3)   1213 State Street; and
      (4)   1217 State Street.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted as special land
uses, in accordance with the procedures of §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter. Uses normally applied to the I District are
prohibited.
      (1)   Light manufacturing operations with ten or fewer employees;
      (2)   Attached or detached single-family dwellings;
      (3)   R2A multiple-family dwellings;
      (4)   Landscaping/nursery related; and
      (5)   Storage buildings.
   (D)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Setbacks. The minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district shall apply.
      (2)   Height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 26 feet.
      (3)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 40% of the
total lot.
(Prior Code, § 5.43)
USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.115 SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Certain uses, because of their unique locational needs or operational
characteristics are subject to additional requirements beyond those of the
zoning district in which they are located. Those added conditions or
requirements are specified in this subchapter.
   (B)   Requirements listed for any use that is a special land use shall be
considered additional standards of approval, along with the general standards
of review in §
153.253 of this chapter for all special land uses.
(Prior Code, § 5.45)
§ 153.116 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures.
      (1)   Authorized accessory buildings and structures may be erected as
part of the principal building, may be connected to the principal building by a
roofed breezeway or similar structure or may be completely detached from the
principal building.
      (2)    Where an accesso ry building is attached to the principal building
, it shall be considere d part of the principa l building for purposes of
determining setback dimensions and building height. The accessory structure
cannot be more than two feet closer to the front yard setback than the
principal structure. If, however, the attached accessory building is connected
to the principal building by a roofed porch, breezeway or similar covered
structure, it shall not exceed 16 feet in height, shall not be closer than 20
feet to the rear lot line and shall meet the front and side yard setback
requirements of that zone district
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1542.jpg]
 
      (3)   In the R1 and R2 Residential Districts, if the principal building
has an attached accessory building, only one detached accessory building shall
be permitted, meeting divisions (A)(5)(a) and (b) of this section.
      (4)   Lots in the R1, R2, and R2A Zones shall be permitted to have a
secondary detached accessory building, such as a storage shed. Secondary
accessory buildings shall meet all the requirements of this section and not
exceed 200 square feet in area.
      (5)   Building size and massing. Accessory buildings and structures shall
meet the following requirements and Diagram A:
         (a)   No accessory building shall have a building footprint (length x
width) (Diagram A: 1, 2) greater than 900 square feet, with no side to exceed
30 feet. An accessory building shall not be larger than the main structure
(Diagram: A: 4).
         (b)   The minimum distance between principal buildings and detached
accessory buildings shall be five feet (Diagram A:3), and meet all building
code requirements.
   Diagram A: Building Size and Massing
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2126.png]
      (6)    Detached accessory buildings and structures shall meet the
following minimum setbacks.
         (a)   Rear yard: six feet from a rear lot line. Accessory structures
that store vehicles adjacent to alleys or sidewalks shall not be closer than 20
feet from the edge of the alley or sidewalk surface.
         (b)   Side yards: an accessory building shall conform to the side yard
and street side yard setback requirement of the principal building.
         (c)   Front yard: an accessory structure shall not be located within
any front yard.
      (7)    Design standards: The following standards shall apply to buildings
larger than 200 square feet:
         (a)    Detached garages on corner lots shall face side streets.
Detached garages on the corner side with driveways extending from the front
street are prohibited. When an alley is available, access will come from the
alley.
         (b)   The location and design maintain a compatible relationship to
adjacent properties and does not significantly impact the privacy, light, air,
or parking of adjacent properties.
         (c)   The structure shall be designed so that the appearance maintains
that of the principal dwelling. In determining whether a structure is so
designed, the structure shall meet the following requirements and Diagram C:
            1.   Buildings with a flat roof shall have a cornice expression
line. A pitched (sloped) roof shall be compatible with the architecture of the
principal building (1).
            2.   Transparency upper floor. Building façades facing streets
shall have minimum 10% of the façade be glass between the finish floor line of
the second story and bottom of the cornice expression line or bottom eave (2).
            3.   Transparency ground floor. Building façades facing streets
shall have minimum 10% of the façade be glass between the adjacent grade and
the finish floor line of the second story (3).
            4.   Window color and finish should complement the color and
architectural style of the principal building (4).
            5.   Exterior finish should be constructed of similar materials as
the principal building or traditional materials such as wood, wood lookalike,
brick, or stone.
            6.   A permanent foundation is required.
            7.   Any exterior staircases that provide access to a second floor
shall not be on the front of either the principal dwelling or the accessory
building.
            8.   Windows that impact the privacy of the neighboring side or
rear yards have been minimized or screened.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2128.png]
 
         (d)   Driveways, see §
153.189.
         (e)   Design standards do not apply to single family residences that
may be built in the General Commercial (GC), Professional Office (PO) and
Commercial Mixed Use (CM) Districts on lots fronting U.S. 31 (Bridge Street and
Michigan Avenue) and M-66. (See §
153.170 Building Appearance).
      (8)   That all parts of the structure within the setbacks areas comply
with applicable building and fire codes.
      (9)   Prohibited uses within detached accessory structures or accessory
structures connected by a breezeway or similar structure in all districts
except the R1 and R2 Zones:
         (a)   May not contain features that form a habitable dwelling unit or
create a second dwelling unit;
         (b)   These structures may contain utility sinks, one bathroom, and
refrigeration units. Full kitchen facilities that include a range or stove are
prohibited; and
         (c)   Rooms within accessory structures may be used for additional
sleeping quarters for the owner, or resident, and their immediate family
provided that these rooms may not be rented out as short-or long-term rentals
for any length of time.
      (10)   Stand-alone carports are prohibited in all zones. Carports
attached to existing structures shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
Tents, wall tents, garages in a box and similar enclosures are prohibited.
      (11)   Permanent greenhouses shall be considered an accessory structure
and meet the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs).
      (1)   All of the requirements of division (A), above apply in addition to
the ADU-specific requirements of this section with the exception of §
153.116(A)(9)(a), (b), and (c).
      (2)   ADUs shall be permitted as a single use or combined with another
accessory use.
      (3)   ADUs shall be permitted as a second-story use above a first-floor
accessory use.
      (4)   Examples of ADUs. The following images are intended as examples
only and should be used for inspiration in the creation of ADU projects.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2130.png]
      (5)   Ground floor pedestrian access and activation. Accessory dwelling
unit building type ground floor entrances shall meet the following requirement
of Diagram B.
         (a)   Entrance for upper unit is required to be accessed from the
alley, side street, or internal to the lot.
         (b)   Entrance for upper unit shall not be through a garage.
         (c)   Parking may be accessed from the alley, side street, or primary
street per the requirements for off-street parking access in the zoning
district.
         (d)   Parking may be accessed from the front street only when there is
no adjacent alley or side street.
   Diagram B Ground Floor Access
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2132.png]
      (6)    Building type floor height requirements. Building type floor
heights shall meet the following requirements and Diagram D.
         (a)   Ground floor: Floor to ceiling height shall be eight feet
minimum.
         (b)   Upper floors: floor to ceiling height shall be required by
Building Code.
         (c)   Overall height of building type is regulated by zoning district;
refer to §
153.072.
   Diagram D Building Height Story Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2134.png]
      (7)   The maximum lot coverage for parcels with an ADU may be increased
to a maximum of 50% when stormwater runoff equivalent to 20% of the lot
coverage area is collected in rain barrels, rain gardens, or is mitigated via
porous concrete or other materials on the parcel and shown that any additional
stormwater does not leave the property. See §
153.152.
   (C)   Additional requirements for swimming pools and hot tubs.
      (1)   Any pool over 24 inches deep with a surface area of more than 250
square feet shall comply with the requirements of this division (B) and shall
not be constructed, installed, enlarged or altered until a building permit has
been obtained.
      (2)   The outside edge of the pool wall and/or the deck and any other
appurtenances shall not be located closer than ten feet from any rear or side
property line, nor less than ten feet from the principal building. Swimming
pools shall not be located in the front yard.
      (3)   (a)   Each pool shall be enclosed by a minimum four-foot high
fence, wall, or other structure or device, sufficient to make the pool
inaccessible to small children. This enclosure, including gates, shall not be
less than four feet above the underlying ground; all gates must be self-
latching with latches placed at least four feet above the underlying ground or
otherwise made reasonably inaccessible from the outside to small children. The
fence may be located around the perimeter of a deck surrounding an above ground
pool; provided that, the total height of the deck and the fence does not exceed
ten feet. Above ground pools may have gates, removable or swing-up steps or
other means to limit entry in lieu of a fence.
         (b)   Except for hot tubs and spas, a swimming pool cover shall not be
allowed in lieu of a fence.
      (4)   All swimming pool and hot tub installations shall comply with the
state’s Construction Code and all standard codes referred to therein. All
electrical installations or wiring in connection with swimming pools shall
conform to the provisions of the National Electrical Code. If service drop
conductors or other utility wires cross under or over a proposed pool area, the
applicant shall make satisfactory arrangements with the utility involved for
the relocation thereof before a permit shall be issued for the construction of
a swimming pool. A no-fault ground unit shall be provided to protect against
electrical shock.
   (D)   Bed and breakfast establishments.
      (1)   The bed and breakfast shall be located within a residence which is
the principal dwelling unit on the property. Whenever the bed and breakfast is
open for the renting of rooms, the residence shall be occupied by the owner or
innkeeper at all times.
      (2)   The rental rooms within the establishment shall be part of the
principal dwelling. Bed and breakfast establishments shall not contain more
than five rental rooms, however the Planning Commission may approve additional
rooms based on the following criteria:
         (a)   The existing single-family home has the capacity for more than
five rental rooms;
         (b)   It is a single-family home which has been operated as a bed and
breakfast establishment in the past;
         (c)   The Planning Commission finds that the additional rooms will not
have an adverse impact to the residential character of the neighborhood.
      (3)   The residence shall have at least two exits to the outdoors.
      (4)   Signage shall be subject to the requirements of §§
153.205 through
153.219.
      (5)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall be consistent with the
essential character of the residential neighborhood in terms of use, traffic
generation and appearance.
      (6)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall not be permitted on a lot
or parcel, (including a non-conforming lot or parcel of record) which does not
meet the established lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it
is located.
      (7)   A minimum of one parking space per rental room is required. Parking
may include street spaces in front of the property according to city parking
rules. Off-street parking shall be subject to the requirements of §§
153.185 through
153.190.
   (E)   Boathouses and upland dredging. Special land use approval for a
boathouse and upland dredging without a boathouse in the R1 Zone shall be
subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   Boathouses and upland dredging shall not be permitted on Lake
Michigan or Lake Charlevoix;
      (2)   Boathouses shall have a gabled roof with a minimum roof pitch of 8:
12 for new construction. Repair of existing structures may utilize the existing
roof pitch and roof design at the time of application. Multiple peaks and a
variety of rooflines or other architectural features consistent with the
character of the neighborhood are encouraged. Eaves extending out greater than
24 inches shall be considered part of the building footprint;
      (3)   Boathouses are permitted over the water, but may not extend greater
than 80 feet lake ward from the existing sea wall location, or ordinary high
water mark if no sea wall is present;
      (4)   Where inland dredging is required, boathouses may not extend
greater than 50 feet inland from the existing sea wall location or ordinary
high water mark if no sea wall is present;
      (5)   Boathouses and upland dredging shall be located at least ten feet
from side lot lines; no rear yard setback required;
      (6)   Boathouses shall not exceed a building footprint (length x width)
of 2,000 square feet in area, exclusive of eaves;
      (7)   Boathouses and upland dredging shall not contain sleeping quarters,
kitchens or bathrooms;
      (8)   In the R1 Zone, boathouses and upland dredging shall not exceed a
height of 16 feet with the base elevation starting at the ordinary high water
mark.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1544.jpg]
 
      (9)   Existing sea wall locations shall be considered the rear lot line
for the purposes of calculating lot area and coverage requirements.
      (10)   Sea walls may not be extended lake ward, nor shall any filling
take place for the purposes of increasing lot size or relocating the rear lot
line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1546.jpg]
 
      (11)   Upland dredging that would result in permanent alteration of the
shoreline requires a public hearing for a special use permit before the
property owner applies for all applicable permits from relevant local, state
and federal governments and agencies.
      (12)   Boathouses in the Belvedere Club and Chicago Club are excluded
from the height requirements for accessory structures; provided that, they may
be extended in the same building line elevation and size as the existing
boathouses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1548.jpg]
 
   (F)   Day care; group day care home. Special land use approval for a group
day care home shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   A group day care home shall not be located within a 500-foot radius
of any of the following:
         (a)   A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation
service to seven or more people licensed under Art. 6 of the Public Health
Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.6101 to 333.6523; or
         (b)   A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or
other similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction
of the department of corrections.
      (2)   The outdoor recreation area shall be fenced and screened from any
abutting residential district or use by a decorative fence or wall, or a
landscaped equivalent.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide evidence of the ability to comply with
all applicable state licensing requirements.
   (G)   Drive-through facility (except those serving a restaurant).
      (1)   Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through portion of the
operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the
public right-of-way, nor does it interfere with internal circulation of
vehicles. A minimum of two stacking spaces for each drive-through station shall
be provided.
      (2)   The parking and maneuvering areas of the site shall be fenced and
screened from the view of any abutting residential district or use by a
decorative fence or wall, a landscaped equivalent or a combination of both.
      (3)   Outdoor speakers for the drive-through facility shall be located in
a way that minimizes sound transmission toward adjacent property. Amplified
sound shall not be audible at the property line of any adjacent residential
property.
      (4)   Access lanes shall be designed so service and stacking do not
interfere with parking spaces or maneuvering on the site.
   (H)   Home occupations.
      (1)   Minor home occupations do not require a zoning permit. Major home
occupations shall require special land use approval pursuant to §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter.
      (2)   Except for a sign, as allowed by §§
153.205 through
153.219, the home occupation must not be evident from the street or any
neighboring property.
   (I)   Outdoor display and sales (accessory). Outdoor Display and Sales are
allowed in CBD Overlay only during district-wide sidewalk sale events. Outdoor
display and sales that are accessory to a permitted or special land use shall
be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Required setbacks.
         (a)   Outdoor display or sales located within a roofed enclosure shall
be considered to be within an accessory building and subject to all applicable
requirements of division (A) above.
         (b)   If the enclosure is attached in any way to the principal
building, it shall be considered part of the principal building and subject to
all requirements for the principal building.
         (c)   If the enclosure is not attached to the principal building, but
is located within a yard adjacent to a residential district, it shall meet the
minimum setback requirements for a principal building.
         (d)   Open sales, display or storage areas shall meet the minimum
setback requirements for a principal building.
      (2)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage is not permitted in any parking
area. Sales or display of merchandise may be permitted within a parking area;
provided:
         (a)   The items displayed or sold are seasonal in nature and the
display area is for a limited duration;
         (b)   The outdoor sales and displays shall not reduce the available
parking spaces below the minimum required by this chapter; and
         (c)   Sales and display areas shall not interfere with safe and
efficient traffic and pedestrian movements on the site.
      (3)   Outdoor sales. Outdoor sales and display areas adjacent to a
building shall be situated so safe and convenient ingress/egress and emergency
access to the building are maintained.
      (4)   Outdoor display and sales. Outdoor display and sales areas located
within any yard adjacent to a residential district (except for a yard separated
from the residential district by a street right-of-way) shall be screened with
a solid fence or decorative wall with a maximum height of six feet.
   (J)   Solar panels.
      (1)   General requirements.
         (a)   If it is intended that a solar energy collector system be hooked
to the electrical grid, then any single lot or parcel shall be limited to 20
kilowatts (kW) of total aggregated nameplate capacity.
         (b)   The exterior surfaces of a solar energy collector shall be
generally neutral in color and substantially non-reflective of light. A unit
may not be installed or located so sunlight or glare is reflected into
neighboring residences or onto adjacent streets.
         (c)   A solar energy collector shall be permanently and safely
attached to the building or structure. Proof of the safety and reliability of
the means of attachment shall be submitted to the county’s Department of
Building Safety prior to installation.
         (d)   Solar energy collectors, and the installation and use thereof,
shall comply with the county’s Construction Code, the Electrical Code and other
applicable city, county, state and federal requirements.
         (e)   There shall be no signs on the unit greater than three square
feet or other than allowed in §§
153.205 through
153.219.
         (f)   A building-mounted unit may only be attached to the principal
building, or to an accessory building serving the principal use, such as a
barn, garage or shed.
      (2)   Ground-mounted units. A ground-mounted solar energy collector shall
be subject to the requirements for detached accessory structures, as required
in division (A) above. No individual ground-mounted unit shall exceed 500
square feet in area or be greater than 15 feet in height.
      (3)   Roof-mounted units.
         (a)   A roof-mounted unit shall not project above the peak or beyond
the eaves, gables or other edge of the roof on which it is mounted.
         (b)   Installation:
            1.   On a roof surface visible from the street, a roof-mounted unit
shall not extend more than 18 inches above the roof surface. The panel(s) shall
be mounted at the same angle as the roof upon which the unit is mounted.
            2.   On a roof surface that is not visible from the street, a roof-
mounted unit shall not extend more than six feet above the roof surface. The
unit need not be mounted at the same angle as the roof. No portion of the unit
may be visible from the street.
            3.   A roof-mounted unit shall be only of such weight as can safely
be supported by the structure. Proof, in the form of certification by a
professional engineer or other qualified professional, shall be submitted to
the county’s Department of Building Safety prior to installation.
      (4)   Wall-mounted units.
         (a)   A wall-mounted solar energy collector shall not obstruct drives
or other traffic ways and shall not extend further than eight feet from the
building wall. No portion of the unit may extend above the building wall to
which it is attached.
         (b)   A wall-mounted unit may not extend into a required yard.
         (c)   Surface area:
            1.   On any wall visible from a street, the surface area of the
wall-mounted unit shall not exceed 30% of the area of the wall onto which it is
mounted and shall not obscure any window or door.
            2.   On any other wall, the surface area of the unit shall not
exceed 50% of the area of the facade. The unit may be located in front of
windows or other openings.
            3.   For the purpose of this section, the area of the facade wall
shall include all of the area bounded by the height and width of the wall,
including any windows, doors or other openings.
   (K)   Wind energy conversion systems, single accessory. This division (K)
establishes standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of
a single accessory wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be governed
within the city.
      (1)   Prohibited use. Only single accessory WECS shall be allowed. A WECS
with the primary purpose of providing power to the utility grid or any other
use not on the same site is prohibited.
      (2)   Review requirements.
         (a)   A WECS may only be authorized upon approval of a special land
use, according to §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter.
         (b)   In addition to any submittal requirements for special land uses
in §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter or site plan review submittal requirements in §§
153.230 through
153.243 of this chapter, the application and site plan for a single accessory
WECS shall include the following information:
            1.   Name of applicant, name of site plan preparer (if different),
name of WECS manufacturer and name of WECS installer, with contact information;
            2.   A scaled drawing of the property, showing dimensions of all
property lines and the area of the lot in square feet;
            3.   Location and setback of all structures on the site, including
any overhead utility lines;
            4.   Proposed location of the WECS equipment on the site or on the
building;
            5.   Setbacks of the WECS, in accordance with the setback
requirements of this division (K), from property lines and (if ground-mounted)
from structures;
            6.   A scaled elevation drawing of the WECS installation (including
the building, if the WECS is building-mounted) showing the WECS height, rotor
diameter and all other applicable elements to confirm conformance with the
requirements of this division (K); and
            7.   Certification that the WECS system and mount meets any current
standards developed by one of the following: the IEC (International
Electrotechnical Commission), ANSI (American National Standards Institute) or
SWCC (Small Wind Certification Commission).
      (3)   Single accessory WECS general requirements.
         (a)   A property may have either ground-mounted or building-mounted
WECS, but not both.
         (b)   Minimum lot area: A building-mounted WECS shall be allowed on
any lot, except in the SR district, provided that all other requirements are
met. The minimum lot area for installation of a ground-mounted WECS shall be
10,000 square feet.
         (c)   Power rating of the WECS turbine shall not be greater than 25
kilowatts (kW). If it is intended that the WECS be tied into the grid, the
total aggregated nameplate capacity of all turbines shall not exceed 20
kilowatts (kW).
         (d)   The WECS shall provide energy only to the structures and uses on
the same property upon which the tower is located and must be owned or leased
by the owner of the same property; however, this does not prevent the
distribution to the local utility company, through metering required by the
utility, of any power that is generated beyond the needs of the structures or
uses on the property.
         (e)   No sound attributed to the WECS in excess of 55 dBA (A-weighted
decibels) shall be discernible at the property line.
         (f)   There shall be no signs on the unit greater than three square
feet, other than allowed per §§
153.205 through
153.219.
         (g)   There shall be no lighting on or directed at the WECS, except as
may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
         (h)   The WECS shall be painted in a matte color, such as gray or
light blue, intended to blend into the background. A building-mounted WECS may
be painted in similar colors to those on the building.
         (i)   A WECS shall have an automatic braking, governing or feathering
system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over-speeding. Emergency shut-off
information shall be posted on the tower in an easily visible location, or for
a building-mounted WECS, shall be in a location easily accessible and visible.
         (j)   A WECS shall employ an anti-climbing device or be designed to
prevent climbing and other unauthorized access.
         (k)   A WECS shall not be installed in any location where its
proximity to existing fixed broadcast, re-transmission or reception antenna for
radio, television or wireless phone or personal communication systems would
produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception.
         (l)   The applicant shall provide written evidence that the WECS
complies with all applicable federal, state and county requirements, in
addition to city ordinances.
         (m)   All WECS installations shall comply with applicable Electric and
Building Code standards, as adopted by the state and the county’s Department of
Building Safety.
         (n)   A WECS shall be removed when the device or equipment is no
longer operating or when it has been abandoned. A WECS shall be deemed
abandoned when it has not produced electrical energy for 12 consecutive months.
         (o)   1.   An existing and approved WECS may be repaired and
maintained; however, a WECS may only be replaced with a new WECS upon approval
of the Zoning Administrator; provided that, the new WECS is of the same height,
rotor diameter, setback and the like as the WECS it replaces.
            2.   For the purposes of this division (K)(3)(o), a NEW OR
REPLACEMENT WECS shall mean all of the WECS, excluding the tower or support
structure.
      (4)   Ground-mounted single accessory WECS.
         (a)   There shall be no more than one ground-mounted on-site service
WECS per parcel or lot.
         (b)   A ground-mounted WECS shall not be located within a front yard.
         (c)   1.   The WECS shall be located on the property so that it is set
back from all property lines a distance equal to the WECS height.
            2.   The setback shall be measured from the property line
(considered as a plane extending from the ground to the highest point of the
WECS) to the closest extension of the rotor relative to the property line.
         (d)   The WECS height shall be limited by available setbacks as
required in division (K)(4)(c) above; however, no WECS shall exceed 50 feet
high.
         (e)   The minimum rotor blade tip clearance from grade, any structure
or utility line shall be 15 feet.
         (f)   The diameter of the rotor shall be dependent upon maximum WECS
height and rotor blade tip clearance, but in no case shall it exceed 50 feet.
      (5)   Building-mounted single accessory WECS.
         (a)   There may be more than one building-mounted single accessory
WECS on a single property; however, each individual WECS shall meet all of the
requirements in this division (K)(5), and each WECS shall be separated from any
other WECS no less than ten feet, measured between the maximum extension of the
rotors.
         (b)   1.   The WECS shall be mounted so that it is set back from
adjoining property lines a distance equal to the combined height of the WECS
and the height of the portion of the building on which it is mounted.
            2.   The setback shall be measured from the property line
(considered as a plane extending from the ground to the highest point of the
WECS) to the closest extension of the rotor relative to the property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1550.jpg]
 
         (c)   The WECS height shall be limited by available setbacks as
required in division (K)(5)(b) above; however, no building-mounted WECS shall
exceed the maximum permitted height for principal buildings in the district,
plus 20 feet.
         (d)   The diameter of the rotor shall not exceed 25 feet.
         (e)   The mount and the structure used to support a building-mounted
WECS shall meet applicable standards, as certified by an engineer.
      (6)   Conditions of approval.
         (a)   Consistent with the purpose for which conditions of approval for
a special land use may be imposed as provided in §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter, the conditions, among other purposes, may regulate the
construction, installation, use, maintenance, repair and removal of any WECS.
         (b)   Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
            1.   The preservation of existing trees and other existing
vegetation not required to be removed for installation of a WECS;
            2.   The reasonable replacement of trees or other vegetation
removed or destroyed during the construction or installation of a WECS;
            3.   Altering the location of the WECS to prevent impacts on
neighboring properties, provided that all other requirements of this section
are met; and
            4.   Requiring a performance bond or letter of credit, in favor of
the city, and conditioned upon the timely and faithful performance of all
required conditions of the special land use, including, but not limited to, the
timely and complete removal of a WECS, regulated under the terms of §
153.239 of this chapter, when required. Such performance bond or letter of
credit shall remain in effect during and after the operation of a WECS until
its operations have ceased and it has been removed.
(Prior Code, § 5.46) (Ord. 791, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018;
Ord. 801, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 823, passed 1-4-2021; Ord. 835, passed 1-2-
2023; Ord. 839, passed 6-19-2023; Ord. 840, passed 6-19-2023; Ord. 848, passed
4-1-2024)
§ 153.117 RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Dwellings, single-family attached or detached (outside manufactured
home communities). All dwelling units located outside a licensed manufactured
home community shall comply with the following.
      (1)   A dwelling unit shall conform to the minimum floor area
requirements of the district in which it is located.
      (2)   The minimum width of a single-family dwelling unit shall be 20
feet.
      (3)   All dwelling units shall comply with the state's Construction Code
as promulgated by the state's Construction Code Commission under provisions of
Public Act 30 of 1972, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq., or the
Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, as promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 C.F.R. part 3280,
and as from time to time such standards may be amended.
      (4)   A dwelling unit shall be attached to a permanent foundation
constructed in accordance with the state's Construction Code and shall have the
same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling. In the case of a manufactured home,
it shall be installed per the manufacturer's set-up instructions and shall be
secured to a foundation by an anchoring system or device complying with the
rules and regulations of the state's Manufactured Housing Commission or the
state's Construction Code, whichever is stricter.
      (5)   If provided, the wheels of a manufactured home shall be removed and
the towing mechanism, undercarriage and chassis shall not be exposed.
      (6)   All dwellings shall be connected to city sanitary sewer and water
utilities.
      (7)   A recreational vehicle, vehicle chassis, or tent is not considered
a dwelling and is not to be used as a dwelling, temporary or long term.
      (8)   A dwelling may have either a roof overhang of not less than six
inches on all sides or, alternatively, a roof drainage system that concentrates
water at collection points and discharges it away from the dwelling.
   (B)   Site condominiums. This chapter requires preliminary review of site
condominium plans by the Planning Commission to ensure that site condominiums
comply with this chapter and other applicable city ordinances.
      (1)   Optional Planning Commission review of preliminary plans.
         (a)   Prior to final review and approval of a site condominium
development plan, a preliminary site condominium development plan may be
reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures,
standards and requirements provided by this section if requested by the
applicant. Such review shall take place following a public hearing by the
Planning Commission on the preliminary plan. At least 15-days' notice of the
hearing shall be given by ordinary mail, sent to the owners of, or parties with
interest in, the lands within 300 feet of the property to be included in the
development, as listed in the current city tax assessment rolls.
         (b)   Application for review and approval of a site condominium
development plan shall be initiated by submitting the following to the Zoning
Administrator:
            1.   A minimum of ten copies of a preliminary site condominium
development plan which complies with the requirements of
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances; and
            2.   An application fee in accordance with the fee schedule
established by resolution of the City Council.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary site
condominium development plan in accordance with the standards and requirements
contained in §
154.06 of this code of ordinances. All of the requirements for plats, as set
forth in that section, shall apply to site condominium developments. In
addition, the following standards and requirements shall apply.
            1.   In its review of a site condominium development plan, the
Planning Commission may consult with the Zoning Administrator, City Attorney,
City Engineer, City Fire Chief or other appropriate persons regarding the
adequacy of the proposed common elements and maintenance provisions, use and
occupancy restrictions, utility systems and streets, development layout and
design, or other aspects of the proposed development.
            2.   Each site condominium unit shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter, including minimum area, minimum width, required
front, side and rear yards, and maximum building height.
            3.   All streets shall be paved and developed to the minimum
design, construction, inspection, approval and maintenance requirements for
platted public streets, as required by the city.
            4.   If public water and sanitary sewer facilities are not
available, each condominium unit shall be served by a private central system
(designed for connection to a public system when and if a public system is made
available).
            5.   The Planning Commission may require that portions of the plan,
as relevant to the reviewing authority in question, be submitted to the
county’s Drain Commissioner, the state’s Department of Natural Resources, the
state’s Department of Public Health and other appropriate city, state and
county review and enforcement agencies having direct approval or permitting
authority over any aspect of the proposed site condominium development.
         (d)   After reviewing the preliminary site condominium development
plan, the Planning Commission shall prepare a written statement of
recommendations regarding the proposed site condominium development, including
any suggested or required changes in the plan. The Planning Commission shall
provide a copy of its written recommendations to the applicant.
      (2)   Review and approval of final plans.
         (a)   The final site condominium plan shall incorporate all of the
recommendations, if any, made by the Planning Commission based on its prior
review of the preliminary plan. If any of the Planning Commission's
recommendations are not incorporated in the final plan, the applicant shall
clearly specify, in writing, which recommendations have not been incorporated
and the reasons why. Except for changes made to the plan as needed to
incorporate the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the final plan
shall otherwise be identical to the preliminary plan acted upon by the Planning
Commission. Changes made to the plan other than those necessary to incorporate
the recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be resubmitted to the
Planning Commission for further review and recommendation prior to approval of
the plan.
         (b)   After receiving the final site condominium development plan, the
Planning Commission shall proceed to review and may approve, deny, or approve
with conditions the plan in accordance with the standards and requirements
provided the city parcel division ordinance and other applicable procedures,
standards and requirements of this section.
         (c)   As a condition of approval of a final site condominium
development plan the City Manager, with input from staff, may require that a
financial guarantee, covering the estimated cost of improvements associated
with the site condominium development for which approval is sought, be
deposited with the city, as provided by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 to
125.3702, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Contents of site condominium project plans. A condominium
development plan shall include the documents and information required by § 66
of the Condominium Act, by §
154.05(A) of this code of ordinances and by the following:
         (a)   The use and occupancy restrictions and maintenance provisions
for all general and limited common elements that will be included in the master
deed;
         (b)   A storm drainage and storm water management plan, including all
lines, swales, drains, basins and other facilities and easements granted to the
appropriate jurisdiction for installation, repair and maintenance of all
drainage facilities;
         (c)   A utility plan showing all water and sewer lines and easements
granted to the appropriate jurisdiction for installation, repair and
maintenance of all utilities;
         (d)   A narrative describing the overall objectives of the proposed
site condominium development;
         (e)   A narrative describing the proposed method of providing potable
water supply, waste disposal facilities and public and private utilities; and
         (f)   A street construction, paving and maintenance plan for all
private streets.
      (4)   Construction in compliance with approved plan. No buildings or
structures shall be constructed, nor shall any other site improvements or
changes be made on the property in connection with a proposed site condominium
development, except in compliance with a final site condominium development
plan, as approved by the Planning Commission, including any conditions of
approval.
      (5)   Issuance of permits. No building permit shall be issued, and no
public sewer or public water service shall be provided for any dwelling or
other structure located on a parcel established or sold in violation of this
section. The sale or the reservation for sale of site condominium units shall
be as regulated by the Condominium Act. No building in a site condominium
development may be occupied or used until all required improvements have been
completed and all necessary utilities installed.
      (6)   Expandable or convertible condominium developments. Approval of a
final site condominium development plan shall not constitute approval of
expandable or convertible portions of a site condominium development, unless
the expandable or convertible areas were specifically reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission in compliance with the procedures, standards and
requirements of this section.
      (7)   Changes in condominium developments. Any change proposed in
connection with a development for which a final site condominium plan has
previously been approved shall be regulated as follows:
         (a)   The following definitions shall apply:
            1.   EXEMPT CHANGE means a change to a site condominium project
(other than a major or minor change) that is exempt from review and approval,
as required for major or minor changes under this section. EXEMPT CHANGES shall
be limited to the following:
               a.   A change in the name of the development, in the name of a
street within the development or in the name of the developer;
               b.   A change in the voting rights of co-owners or mortgagees;
or
               c.   Any other change in the site condominium development which,
as determined by the Zoning Administrator, does not constitute a major or minor
change or will not otherwise change the site configuration, design, layout,
topography or any other aspect of a development which is subject to regulation
under the zoning ordinance.
            2.   MAJOR CHANGE means a change in the site configuration, design,
layout or topography of a site condominium development (or any portion
thereof), including any change that could result in:
               a.   An increase in the number of site condominium units; or
               b.   Any other change in the site configuration, design, layout,
topography or other aspect of the project which is subject to regulation under
this chapter, including, without limitation, a change in the location of
streets and utilities, or in the size, location, area, horizontal boundaries or
vertical boundaries of a site condominium unit, or that which is determined by
the Zoning Administrator to constitute a major change to the site condominium
project.
            3.   MINOR CHANGE means a change in the site configuration, design,
layout or topography of a site condominium development (or any portion
thereof), that will result in:
               a.   A decrease in the number of site condominium units;
               b.   A reduction in the area of the building site for any site
condominium unit;
               c.   A reduction of less than 10% in the total combined area of
the general common elements of the site condominium;
               d.   A reduction in the total combined area of all limited
common elements of the site condominium; or
               e.   Any other minor variation in the site configuration,
design, layout, topography or other aspect of the development which is subject
to regulation under this chapter, and which, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, does not constitute a major change.
         (b)   Any change which constitutes a major change shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission, at a public hearing and with the notice required for
an original approval of a site condominium development, as provided in this
chapter for the original review and approval of preliminary and final plans.
         (c)   Any change which constitutes a minor change shall be reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         (d)   Any change which constitutes an exempt change shall not be
subject to review by the city, but a copy of the exempt changes shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator.
      (8)   Incorporation of approved provisions in master deed. All provisions
of a final site condominium development plan which are approved by the Planning
Commission, as provided by this section, shall be incorporated by reference in
the master deed for the site condominium project. Further, all major changes to
a development shall be incorporated by reference in the master deed. A copy of
the master deed, as recorded with the County Register of Deeds, shall be
provided to the city within ten days after recording.
      (9)   Commencement of construction. Construction of an approved site
condominium development shall commence within two years after final site
condominium development approval and be diligently pursued to completion in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the approval. The two-year period
may be extended by the Planning Commission, at its discretion, for additional
time periods as determined appropriate by the planning commission. Any
extension shall be applied for, in writing, by the applicant prior to the
expiration of the initial two-year period.
      (10)   Variances. Upon application, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
permit a variance or variances which are reasonable and within the general
policies and purposes of this section. A variance may be granted if the
applicant demonstrates that literal enforcement of any of the provisions of
this section is impractical or will impose practical difficulties in the use of
the land because of special or peculiar conditions pertaining to the land. The
ZBA may recommend, and may attach, conditions to the variance.
   (C)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).
      (1)   ADUs are subject to all applicable regulations of the zoning
district in which they are located unless otherwise expressly stated in this
section. ADUs are considered an accessory building and shall fit within the
standards of §
153.116(A) and (B) which covers both attached and detached ADUs. All ADUs are
required to obtain a zoning permit prior to construction.
      (2)   In districts that allow ADUs, they may be allowed on any legal
parcel of record as of January 1, 2019, and there shall be an existing
principal residential use on the parcel.
      (3)   At least one of the units on the parcel shall be occupied by a
long-term renter or an owner with at least 50% interest in the subject
property. The owner or renter shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit
or the ADU as their permanent residence. An ADU shall not be sold independently
of the primary dwelling on the parcel.
      (4)   Dimensional requirement modifications. Under some circumstances,
certain dimensional requirements modifications may be granted by a special land
use permit after a site plan review by the Planning Commission. Application for
modifications may be applied for new construction or pre-existing structures
built prior to 2019 that are located within the required setbacks of the
district. In order to grant a special land use permit for any modifications,
all of the following must be met:
         (a)   That any walls within the setback areas comply with applicable
building and fire codes.
         (b)   That a setback requirement of a minimum of five feet from the
side and rear property lines shall be required.
         (c)   The location and design of the ADU maintains a compatible
relationship to adjacent properties and does not significantly impact the
privacy, light, air, or parking of adjacent properties.
         (d)   Windows on the ADU that impact the privacy of the neighboring
side or rear yards have been minimized or screened.
   (D)   Boarding/rooming house. There shall be not more than four rooms
occupied by tenants, subject to the following:
      (1)   Parking meets the requirements of §
153.187.
      (2)   Occupancy by tenants shall be for expected durations longer than 30
days.
      (3)   Individual rooms shall not contain independent cooking facilities.
This requirement shall not prohibit the serving of meals to tenants or the use
of a single kitchen by tenants.
      (4)   Rooming and boarding houses shall be owner occupied and serve as
the principal residence of the owner or a designated caretaker shall be one of
the occupants.
   (E)   Single-family attached and single multiple-family buildings.
      (1)   Single-family attached buildings, home conversions and single
multiple-family buildings are subject to all applicable regulations of the
zoning district in which they are located unless otherwise expressly stated in
this section.
      (2)   The main entrance is located in the building façade of the
principal frontage.
      (3)   A maximum of two entrances per building façade.
      (4)   Parking is located in the rear or on the side of the building and
meets the requirements of §
153.187.
      (5)   Parking access is from the alley where available, otherwise access
may be from the side or front lot line.
      (6)   The principal building façade shall have a minimum of 20% glazing
(windows). There shall be a minimum of two six-square-foot windows per non-
street facing building façade.
      (7)   Roofline/pitch, siding, other architectural elements maintain
single family character.
      (8)   Access to any second-floor dwelling unit is provided from the
interior of the structure.
      (9)   All units will have construction code-approved egress.
   (F)   Short-term rentals. Short-term rentals shall be regulated as provided
in
Chapter 114 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5.47) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018;
Ord. 802, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 805, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 835, passed 1-2-
2023; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023; Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 153.118 LODGING, DINING AND ENTERTAINMENT USES.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses.
      (1)   Intent. In the development and execution of these zoning
regulations, it is recognized that some uses, because of their very nature, may
have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when
several of those uses are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby
causing a detrimental effect upon the adjacent areas. The proximity of adult-
regulated uses to certain other uses considered particularly susceptible to the
negative impacts of a concentration of adult-regulated uses has been shown to
erode the quality of life, adversely affect property values, disrupt business
investment, encourage residents and businesses to move or avoid the community,
increase crime and contribute to a blighting effect on the surrounding area.
There is convincing documented evidence of the negative effect that adult-
regulated uses have on both existing businesses around them and the surrounding
residential areas to which they are adjacent. Therefore, the following intents
are served by these regulations.
         (a)   This division (A) describes the uses regulated and the specific
standards necessary to ensure that the adverse effects of these uses will not
contribute to the deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood, to prevent
undesirable concentration of these uses, and to require sufficient spacing from
uses considered most susceptible to negative impacts.
         (b)   These provisions are not intended to impose, nor shall they have
the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials including, but not limited to, sexually oriented
materials that are protected by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution.
         (c)   Additionally, it is not the intent of the provisions of this
division (A) to restrict or deny, nor shall it have the effect of restricting
or denying, access by adults to sexually oriented materials that are protected
by the federal and state constitutions.
         (d)   Further, it is not the intent of these provisions to deny, nor
shall they have the effect of denying, access by the distributors and
exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their target market.
         (e)   These regulations shall not be interpreted as intending to
legitimize any activities that are prohibited by federal or state law, or by
any other ordinance of the city.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any use of land devoted to displaying or
exhibiting printed, recorded or electronic material or live entertainment, a
significant portion of which depicts, describes or presents specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas including, but not limited to: adult
arcade; adult bookstore; adult novelty store; adult video store; adult cabaret;
adult motel; adult motion picture theater; adult theater; escort agency; nude
modeling studio; sexual encounter center; or massage parlor. The term
“significant”, as used above and as follows, is defined as greater than 20% of
the total material displayed or exhibited for sale or entertainment. Adult-
regulated uses, activities and related definitions include, but are not limited
to the following.
            1.   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration
an electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machine, projector, video or disc player, or other image-producing
device is maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any
one time, and where the image is so displayed, distinguished or characterized
by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
            2.   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A
commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for
sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
               a.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, discs or other video
reproduction, slides or other visual representations which are distinguished or
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
               b.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
            3.   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
               a.   Persons who appear live in a state of nudity or semi-
nudity;
               b.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
               c.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or discs, slides or
other video or photographic reproductions which are distinguished or
characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
            4.   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
               a.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way;
               b.   Regularly offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time that is less than ten hours; or
               c.   Regularly allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
            5.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videos, slides or
other similar photographic reproduction are regularly shown which are
consistently distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
            6.   MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment offering or providing
massages, body rubs, physical stimulation or other similar treatments where the
person either receiving or providing the service exposes specified anatomical
areas or which involves real or simulated specified sexual activities. The
following uses are not included as part of this definition:
               a.   Services by a licensed physician, chiropractor or
osteopath, a licensed or certified physical or massage therapist, a licensed
practical nurse or any other similarly licensed medical professional;
               b.   Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of
electrolysis equipment;
               c.   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical
offices; and
               d.   Barber shops or beauty parlors, health spas and/or salons
offering massage to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders only.
         SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The graphic depiction, whether real or
simulated, of less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
areola and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
         SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The graphic depiction, whether real or
simulated, of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, acts
of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy and fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
      (3)   Locational requirements.
         (a)   Sexually oriented business are not permitted in any zoning
district except the Industrial (I) Zone.
         (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted in a location
in which a principal building or accessory structure, including signs, is
within 300 feet of any principal building or accessory structure of another
sexually oriented business.
         (c)   No sexually oriented business shall be established on a parcel
within 300 feet of any parcel in a residential district or any parcel used as a
dwelling, public park, school, child care facility, church or similar place of
worship, public library, city hall, police department or fire department, youth
center or commercially operated school attended by children such as dance
schools, gymnastic centers and the like. The distance between a proposed
sexually oriented business and any such zoned area or existing use shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest property line upon which the
proposed sexually oriented business is to be located to the nearest property
line of that zoned area or existing use.
      (4)   Procedures.
         (a)   Special use. Review of any request for establishment of a
sexually oriented business shall be in accordance with the special land use
provisions of §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public
hearing, in accordance with the timing and notification requirements of §
153.251(B) and shall approve, deny or approve with conditions the special land
use request based on the requirements of this subchapter and the general
standards of §
153.253.
         (b)   Conditions of approval. Prior to granting approval for the
establishment of any sexually oriented business, the Planning Commission may
impose conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance or operation of the use as authorized by §
153.252. Any evidence, bond or other performance guarantee may be required as
proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.
      (5)   Regulated uses. The following uses are regulated by this division
(A):
         (a)   Adult arcade;
         (b)   Adult book store;
         (c)   Adult cabaret;
         (d)   Adult motel;
         (e)   Adult motion picture theater; and
         (f)   Massage parlor.
      (6)   Conditions and operating requirements.
         (a)   Any sign must comply with the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   The entrances to the proposed sexually oriented business at both
the exterior and interior walls, in a location visible to those entering and
exiting the business, must be clearly marked with lettering at least two inches
in height stating:
            1.   “Persons under the age of 18 are not permitted to enter the
premises”; and
            2.   “No alcoholic beverages of any type are permitted within the
premises”.
         (c)   No product or service for sale or gift, or any picture or other
representation of any product or service for sale or gift, shall be displayed
so as to be visible by a person of normal visual acuity from the nearest
adjoining roadway or neighboring property.
         (d)   Hours of operation shall not exceed 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
         (e)   All off-street and on-site parking areas shall comply with this
chapter based on the primary use (i.e., retail, theater and the like) and shall
additionally be illuminated at all times.
         (f)   Any booth, room or cubical available in any sexually oriented
business that is used by patrons for the viewing of any entertainment shall:
            1.   Be unobstructed by any door, lock or other entrance and exit
control device;
            2.   Have at least one side totally open to a public, lighted aisle
so that there is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining aisle of
any occupant;
            3.   Be illuminated such that a person of normal visual acuity
looking into the booth, room or cubical from its entrance adjoining the public
lighted aisle can clearly determine the number of people within; and
            4.   Have no holes or openings in any side or rear wall not
relating to utility, ventilation or temperature control services or otherwise
required by any governmental code or authority.
         (g)   No person operating a sexually oriented business shall permit
any person under the age of 18 to be on the premises of the business as an
employee, customer or otherwise.
   (B)   Restaurant with drive-through.
      (1)   (a)   Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through facility
shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into a private or
public right-of-way, with a minimum of seven stacking spaces.
         (b)   Stacking spaces shall be located so as not to interfere with
vehicular circulation, access to parking spaces and egress from the property by
vehicles not using the drive-through facility.
      (2)   (a)   In addition to parking space requirements of §§
153.185 through
153.190 of this chapter, at least two parking or waiting spaces shall be
provided, in close proximity to the exit of the drive-through portion of the
operation, to allow for customers waiting for delivery of orders.
         (b)   The waiting spaces shall be designed to allow maneuvering
without being blocked by another vehicle and shall not impede traffic flow on
the site.
      (3)   Public access to the site shall be located at least 100 feet from
any intersection as measured from the nearest right-of-way line to the nearest
edge of the access.
      (4)   The parking and maneuvering areas of the site shall be fenced and
screened from the view of any abutting residential district or use by a
decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent.
      (5)   The intensity level of sounds leaving the site shall not exceed 55
decibels (dBA) at any lot line bordering residential uses.
      (6)   Outdoor menu boards shall be located behind the front building
line.
   (C)   Restaurant with outdoor seating.
      (1)   Restaurants providing outdoor seating within an at-grade deck or
patio or a roof top deck, must first acquire a zoning and building permit from
the city and Charlevoix County Building Department.
      (2)   All structures would be subject to review by the Zoning
Administrator and shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Restaurant outdoor seating shall be allowed only during normal
operating hours of the establishment.
      (4)   If alcoholic beverages are to be served, the current Liquor Control
Commission rules and regulations shall apply.
      (5)   Any music or sound that would violate the city's noise ordinances
and restrictions is prohibited.
      (6)   Lighting shall be shielded and pointed downward and shall not be a
nuisance to adjacent properties subject to §
153.172.
      (7)   Outdoor seating space is subject to the requirements of Off-Street
Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation.
   (D)   Roof top decks. The following provisions are intended to regulate roof
top deck use, permanent or temporary, in allowed districts to reduce safety
concerns, noise and other nuisances, and visual impact on neighboring
properties and on the community generally. The use of roof top decks is subject
to the following restrictions:
      (1)   A zoning and building permit for any roof top deck must be first
obtained from the City Zoning Administrator and Charlevoix County Building
Department and is subject to construction of and maintenance of guardrails and
other protective features as required by the Charlevoix County Building Code.
      (2)   Any request for a City of Charlevoix zoning permit that includes a
roof top deck must undergo site plan review and receive approval by the
Planning Commission prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
      (3)   Parapet walls and perimeter guardrails shall extend around the
perimeter of the roof top deck and incorporate exterior building materials
consistent with the architectural style of the underlying structure subject to
§
153.170.
      (4)   Any structure on a deck or patio must be permitted under the Zoning
Code. Portable appurtenances are prohibited. Temporary appurtenances and
structures are subject to site plan review to assure public safety.
      (5)   Except within the CBD, Central Business District, amplified musical
instruments or sounds are prohibited. Any other music or sound that would
violate the city's noise ordinances and restrictions is prohibited.
      (6)   All commercial food preparation shall take place inside the
establishment.
      (7)   No open flames are allowed.
      (8)   Lighting shall be shielded and pointed downward and shall not be a
nuisance to adjacent properties subject to §
153.172. Unshielded string lights are prohibited.
      (9)   Roof top deck space is subject to the requirements of §§
153.185 et seq., Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation.
(Prior Code, § 5.48) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018;
Ord. 821, passed 10- 19-2020; Ord. 864, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 153.119 RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE USES.
   (A)   Recreation facility, outdoor.
      (1)   The minimum site area shall be one acre.
      (2)   No building or spectator seating facility shall be located within
100 feet of a lot line adjoining property in a residential district.
      (3)   All buildings, courts and playfields shall be set back a minimum of
50 feet from all front, side and rear lot lines. The setback shall apply to
open recreation areas, such as football, soccer and baseball/softball fields
and shall be measured from the edge of the fields.
      (4)   The minimum parking lot setback shall be 20 feet for any lot line.
Ground cover and landscaping shall be provided within the setback.
      (5)   Activities that produce mechanical noise, such as go-carts, are
prohibited.
      (6)   Accessory commercial activities shall be limited to those necessary
to serve only the patrons of the facility.
      (7)   Central loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited.
      (8)   No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle shall be located
within 100 feet of an existing dwelling.
      (9)   Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided as needed throughout
the site.
      (10)   Operating hours for all uses shall be determined by the Planning
Commission based on the nature of the use and the nuisance potential to
adjoining property owners.
   (B)   Other.
(Prior Code, § 5.49)
§ 153.120 RETAIL USE; GROSS LEASABLE AREA GREATER THAN 20,000 SQUARE FEET.
   (A)   A single retail business shall not occupy a gross leasable area
greater than 20,000 square feet. This shall not be construed to limit the total
size of a multi-tenant building, such as a shopping center.
   (B)   In addition to the special land use standards of §
153.253 of this chapter, the following criteria shall be considered. The
proposed use:
      (1)   Will be designed, constructed and operated in a manner that will
complement the immediate surroundings and the community as a whole;
      (2)   Will not generate excessive traffic beyond the capacity of the
adjacent street network or create peak hour congestion;
      (3)   Will not operate during hours or days of the week that will create
a nuisance for surrounding properties and residents; and
      (4)   Will not impose demands on public services such as, but not limited
to: police, fire, water or sewer, beyond the city’s capacity to provide those
services.
(Prior Code, § 5.50)
§ 153.121 OFFICE AND SERVICE USES.
   (A)   Day care center/nursery.
      (1)   Adequate space for drop off and pick up of children shall be
provided near the door to the facility, so children are not required to cross
parking lots or street traffic unattended.
      (2)   A minimum of two drop-off spaces shall be provided per 20 children
or major fraction thereof, based on licensed capacity.
      (3)   A fenced outdoor play area shall be provided, in accordance with
state requirements.
   (B)   Kennel, commercial.
      (1)   Runs, exercise areas and accessory buildings where animals are kept
shall be set back at least 75 feet from any lot line abutting a residential
use.
      (2)   Runs and/or exercise areas and buildings where the animals are kept
shall only be located in a rear yard.
      (3)   A kennel shall be operated in conformance with all applicable
county, state and federal regulations.
      (4)   The main kennel building used to house animals shall be sound
insulated to minimize animal noise.
      (5)   Animals shall not be permitted in outdoor exercise yards or pens
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (6)   Animals shall be confined and shall not freely roam the property,
except during supervised training.
      (7)   A run and/or exercise area shall be enclosed by a sufficiently tall
chain link fence or completely covered on the sides and top to prevent animals
from escaping.
      (8)   The waste disposal system shall be adequate and approved by the
county’s Health Department.
   (C)   Veterinary clinic or hospital.
      (1)   An animal holding area shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of a
height sufficient to contain animals on the premises.
      (2)   Kennels, pens, animal holding areas and/or stalls shall be at least
at least 100 feet from a front property line and 30 feet from a side or rear
line; however, if a side or rear yard abuts property in a residential district,
the minimum setback shall be 50 feet.
(Prior Code, § 5.51)
§ 153.122 MEDICAL MARIJUANA RELATED USES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. As a result of the enactment of the state’s
Medical Marijuana Act (hereinafter referred to as the “MMMA”), Initiated Law 1
of 2008, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26423, et seq., and its administrative rules, R
333.101 et seq., the city intends to provide reasonable land use regulations
associated with the medical use of marijuana in accordance with the MMMA to:
      (1)   Protect public, health, safety and welfare;
      (2)   Provide adequate separation of primary care giver facilities from
schools, churches and any areas where children congregate including, but not
limited to, day care facilities, public beaches and athletic fields;
      (3)   Mitigate negative impacts associated with medical marijuana use in
residential areas; and
      (4)   Require adequate separation between primary care giver facilities
to prevent clustering of grow operations in one area.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY. That term as defined in § 3 of Initiated Law 1
of 2008, as amended (Michigan Medical Marijuana Act), being M.C.L.A. §
333.26423.
      MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA. That term as defined in § 7106 of Public Act 368
of 1978, as amended (Michigan Public Health Code), being M.C.L.A. § 333.7106.
      MEDICAL USE. That term as defined in § 3 of Initiated Law 1 of 2008, as
amended (Michigan Medical Marijuana Act), being M.C.L.A. § 333.26423.
      PRIMARY CARE GIVER. That term as defined in § 3 of Initiated Law 1 of
2008, as amended (Michigan Medical Marijuana Act), being M.C.L.A. § 333.26423,
who has registered with the Bureau of Health Professions, the state’s
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs or any successor agency under
the state’s Medical Marijuana Act.
      PRIMARY CARE GIVER FACILITY. A structure in which the activities of a
primary care giver are conducted.
      QUALIFYING PATIENT. That term as defined in § 3 of Initiated Law 1 of
2008, as amended (Michigan Medical Marijuana Act), being M.C.L.A. § 333.26423,
who has registered with the Bureau of Health Professions, the state’s
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs or any successor agency under
the state’s Medical Marijuana Act, and includes the parents or legal guardians
of a qualifying patient under the age of 18 who are serving as the primary care
giver as required by the state’s Medical Marijuana Act exclusively for that
qualifying patient under the age of 18.
   (C)   Regulations for qualifying patients. The medical use of marijuana by a
qualifying patient in that qualifying patient’s dwelling or an accessory
structure is hereby recognized as an accessory use to the principal residential
use of the property and can be established without a zoning permit in any
zoning district, but shall be subject to the following regulations.
      (1)   The qualifying patient must be issued and at all times must
maintain a valid registry identification card, or appropriate documentation,
from the Bureau of Health Professions, the state’s Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs or any successor agency under the provisions of the MMMA.
      (2)   All marijuana plants or products must be contained within the
dwelling or accessory structure in an enclosed, locked facility that permits
access only by the qualifying patient.
      (3)   If a room with windows within the dwelling or accessory structure
is utilized to grow marijuana for medical use, any artificial lighting shall be
shielded to prevent glare, must not be visible from neighboring properties and
must not be visible from adjacent streets or public ways.
   (D)   Regulations for primary care givers. The medical use of marijuana by a
primary care giver is hereby authorized as a use by right within a dwelling or
an accessory structure in the R1 and R2 Zoning Districts only; provided that,
all of the following regulations are met.
      (1)   The primary care giver must be issued and at all times must
maintain a valid registry identification card, or appropriate documentation,
from the Bureau of Health Professions, the state’s Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs or any successor agency under the provisions of the MMMA.
      (2)   The primary caregiver must obtain a zoning permit under §
153.021 of this chapter.
      (3)   Except when being transported as provided in division (D)(9) below,
all marijuana plants or products must be contained within the dwelling or
accessory structure in an enclosed and locked facility where the marijuana
plants and products are labeled for each qualifying patient and access is
permitted only to the primary care giver.
      (4)   If a room with windows within the dwelling or accessory structure
is utilized to grow marijuana for medical use, any artificial lighting shall be
shielded to prevent glare, must not be visible from neighboring properties and
must not be visible from adjacent streets or public ways.
      (5)   Except as provided herein, no more than one primary care giver
shall be permitted to provide primary care giver services to qualifying
patients within a single dwelling or accessory structure.
      (6)   Except for any qualifying patients who reside with the primary care
giver at the dwelling, no more than five qualifying patients may be present at
the same time at a dwelling or accessory structure in which a primary care
giver of medical marijuana is providing primary care giver services to
qualifying patients for any purpose directly related to primary care giver
services. This division (D)(6), however, shall not be construed to prohibit the
presence of qualifying patients at a dwelling or accessory structure in which a
primary care giver of medical marijuana is providing primary care giver
services for purposes unrelated to primary care giver services.
      (7)   Qualifying patient visits to a dwelling or accessory structure in
which a primary care giver is providing primary care giver services to
qualifying patients shall be restricted to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., except when the qualifying patient resides with the primary care
giver at the dwelling and except when the qualifying patient visits are for
purposes unrelated to primary care giver services.
      (8)   No qualifying patients under the age of 18 shall be permitted at
any time at a dwelling or accessory structure in which a primary care giver is
providing primary care giver services to qualifying patients, except in the
presence of his or her parent or guardian, except when the qualifying patient
resides with the primary care giver at the dwelling, and except when the
qualifying patient visits are for purposes unrelated to primary care giver
services.
      (9)    No marijuana for medical use shall be dispensed by the primary
care giver to qualifying patients at the dwelling or accessory structure in
which a primary care giver is providing primary care giver services to
qualifying patients, except to a qualifying patient who resides with the
primary care giver at the dwelling. Except as provided herein, the primary care
giver shall deliver all marijuana for the medical use of such qualifying
patient, and such delivery shall take place on private property away from
public view. Any such delivery vehicle shall be unmarked. In addition, all
marijuana for medical use delivered to a qualifying patient shall be packaged
so the public cannot see or smell the marijuana.
      (10)   No marijuana for medical use shall be consumed, smoked or ingested
by a qualifying patient by any method at a dwelling or accessory structure in
which a primary care giver is providing primary care giver services to
qualifying patients, except by a qualifying patient who resides with the
primary care giver at the dwelling.
      (11)   A dwelling or an accessory structure in which a primary care giver
is providing primary care giver services to qualifying patients shall display
indoors and in a manner legible and visible to his or her qualifying patients:
         (a)   A notice that qualifying patients under the age of 18 are not
allowed at the dwelling or accessory structure in which a primary care giver is
providing primary care giver services to qualifying patients, except in the
presence of his or her parent or guardian, except when the qualifying patient
resides with the primary care giver at the dwelling, or except when the
qualifying patient visits are for purposes unrelated to primary care giver
services; and
         (b)   A notice that no dispensing or consumption of marijuana for
medical use shall occur at the dwelling or accessory structure in which a
primary care giver is providing primary care giver services to qualifying
patients, except to or by a qualifying patient who resides with the primary
care giver at the dwelling.
      (12)   A dwelling or an accessory structure in which a primary care giver
is providing primary care giver services to qualifying patients shall not have
any signage.
      (13)   (a)   No primary care giver facility shall be located in violation
of any of the following spacing requirements:
            1.   One thousand feet from any public or private school;
            2.   Three hundred feet from any church or place of worship and its
accessory structures;
            3.   Five hundred feet from the Charlevoix Public Library; and
            4.   Five hundred feet from the B.A.S.E.S Teen Center.
         (b)   The above spacing requirements shall be from lot line to lot
line. The Medical Marijuana Reference Maps below illustrate the parcels where a
primary care giver facility may be established. To the extent there is a
conflict between the Medical Marijuana Reference Map and the application of the
spacing requirements provided herein, the application of the spacing
requirements shall control.
      (14)   The portion of the dwelling or accessory structure in which a
primary care giver is providing primary care giver services to qualifying
patients, including any room or area utilized to grow marijuana for medical
use, shall contain electrical service and wiring, certified by an electrician
licensed in the state, meeting the applicable requirements of the electrical
code in effect in the county.
      (15)   All primary care givers must notify the Zoning Administrator on a
yearly basis if the primary care giver facility is still in operation.
Notification shall be in writing and shall be submitted no less than one month
before and not after the month and day of the issuance of the original permit.
(Example: If the original permit is issued on 2-10-2012, notification to the
Zoning Administrator must be between 1-10-2013 and 2-10-2013.)
      (16)   Any primary care giver with a valid zoning permit who chooses to
cease operations at any point in time shall notify the Zoning Administrator in
writing within seven days. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to
inspect the facility for compliance.
   (E)   Medical marijuana reference maps.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1552.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1554.jpg]
 
(Prior Code, § 5.52) (Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 153.123 VEHICLE RELATED USES.
   (A)   Vehicle repair, major.
      (1)   All main and accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 75
feet from any residential district.
      (2)   Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential
district. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement upon a
determination that there is no reasonable alternative and the poor visual
impact will be diminished through use of building materials, architectural
features and landscaping.
      (3)   Where applicable, vehicle stacking space shall be provided in front
of each service bay for at least two vehicles.
      (4)   All maintenance and repair work shall be conducted completely
within an enclosed building.
      (5)   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components
and parts, materials, commodities for sale, supplies or equipment.
      (6)   Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled or other derelict vehicles
or overnight parking of any vehicle, except a tow truck, shall be permitted up
to 30 days in a designated area. Such area shall be located in a rear or side
yard and screened from public view in accordance with the screening
requirements of §
153.171(I)(5) of this chapter.
      (7)   If the use includes installation of oil or other automotive fluids
except for fuel, the applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection
Plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent ground water
contamination caused by accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other
hazardous materials, such as special check valves, drain back catch basins and
automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire Department.
   (B)   Vehicle repair, minor.
      (1)   A building or structure shall be located at least 30 feet from any
side or rear lot line abutting a residential district.
      (2)   Equipment, including hydraulic hoists, pits, and lubrication,
greasing and other automobile repairing equipment shall be located entirely
within an enclosed building. Outdoor storage or display of merchandise, such as
tires, lubricants and other accessory equipment is not permitted.
      (3)   All activities shall occur inside a building. No vehicle may be
stored on the property for more than 14 days.
      (4)   Storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other
flammable liquids or gas above ground shall not be permitted.
      (5)   Floor drains shall not connect to the sanitary sewer system.
      (6)   If the use includes installation of oil or other automotive fluids,
except for fuel, the applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection
Plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent ground water
contamination caused by accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other
hazardous materials, such as special check valves, drain back catch basins and
automatic shut off valves, as approved by the fire department.
      (7)   If the use includes fuel sales, the requirements for a vehicle
service station shall also be met.
   (C)   Vehicle service station.
      (1)   The site shall be located with frontage on and direct access to at
least one arterial street.
      (2)   Minimum setback from the right-of-way shall be 30 feet for
buildings and canopy structures. The setback for a canopy or similar shelter,
if provided, shall be measured to the leading edge of the canopy fascia.
      (3)   Gasoline pumps, air and water hose stands and other appurtenances
shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way.
      (4)   Prohibited activities include outdoor storage or parking of rental
or disabled or wrecked vehicles for more than seven consecutive calendar days
and major vehicle repair.
   (D)   Vehicle wash establishment.
      (1)   All washing activities must occur inside a building.
      (2)   Required stacking spaces for waiting vehicles shall not be located
within a public or private right-of-way and shall not conflict with maneuvering
areas, parking spaces and other activities. Stacking lanes shall be designed to
prevent vehicle queues from extending beyond the property.
      (3)   Wastewater must be recycled, filtered or otherwise cleansed to
minimize discharge of soap, wax and solid matter into public sewers.
      (4)   Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street, unless the
Planning Commission determines additional driveways will be necessary to ensure
safe and efficient access to the site.
      (5)   For automated drive-through wash facilities, a by-pass lane is
required that allows by-passing waiting vehicles.
      (6)   Overhead doors shall not face a street, except if approved by the
Planning Commission in these circumstances:
         (a)   When the doors of a through-garage are located at the front and
rear of a building;
         (b)   When a garage is located on a corner or through lot; or
         (c)   When determined that a rear garage door would negatively affect
an abutting residential use or district.
      (7)   The property owner or operator must comply with all applicable
noise regulations. Air handling equipment shall be located on a roof, be
equipped with intervening noise reduction baffles, be in proper working
condition and comply with this provision.
(Prior Code, § 5.53)
§ 153.124 INDUSTRIAL AND STORAGE USES.
   (A)   Self-storage facility.
      (1)   Minimum separation between self-storage buildings shall be 24 feet.
      (2)   Internal drive aisles shall be at least 20 feet wide; however,
drives located between self-storage buildings and the property line may be one-
way (and shall be marked as such) and 12 feet in width.
      (3)   All buildings shall be one story and shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
      (4)   An individual storage building shall not exceed 7,500 square feet.
      (5)   Except for recreational vehicles, motor homes and travel trailers,
which may be stored outdoors, all other items shall be stored in an enclosed
building. An outdoor storage area must be paved and completely screened from
view from all adjacent residential districts and uses.
      (6)   Limited sales of products and supplies incidental to the principal
use, such as packing materials, identification labels, rope, locks, tape and
the like are permitted. Other uses such as auctions (except those authorized by
the county for abandoned or garnished assets), sales or businesses of any other
type are prohibited. The storage of combustible or flammable liquids,
combustible fibers or explosive materials, as defined in the fire protection
code, or toxic materials is also prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 5.54)
§ 153.125 OTHER USES.
   (A)   Athletic courts.
      (1)   Full sized regulation athletic courts, including basketball, tennis
and pickle ball courts shall be allowed in the Private Club Residential (PC),
High Density Residential (R4), Scenic Reserve (SR), and Public Facilities (P)
zones. These courts may be enclosed by fencing not to exceed 15 feet tall and
shall not be lit at night unless the court is in use.
      (2)   Athletic courts are permitted in the Low Density Single-family
Residential (R1) and Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) districts;
provided that, they meet the following requirements.
         (a)   No athletic court shall be located in any front or side yard,
nor shall any athletic court be located closer than five feet from any property
line.
         (b)   No athletic court shall exceed 1,500 square feet in area.
         (c)   Athletic courts shall not be lighted.
         (d)   Fencing for athletic courts shall meet the requirements of §
153.145 of this chapter for fences.
         (e)   Athletic courts shall be included in calculating lot coverage
for the underlying district.
   (B)   Mineral extraction operations.
      (1)   A special use approval shall be required for mineral extraction
operations, including removal of soil, sand or gravel, where more than 600
cubic yards will be removed. The special use permit shall be subject to
approval by the Planning Commission following a public hearing. Once issued,
the special use may be reviewed annually by the Planning Commission to ensure
that the operation conforms to all plans, progress, conditions and sureties.
Removal operations shall not begin until the special use is approved and a
zoning compliance permit is issued.
      (2)   Application. In addition to the submittals for a special use
outlined in §
153.251 of this chapter, an application for a mineral extraction permit shall
be accompanied by the following:
         (a)   A topographic map with two-foot contour intervals including the
locations of all streets, buildings and existing drainage facilities within 300
feet of the property;
         (b)   A topographic map with two-foot contour intervals showing final
elevations, including the proposed locations of access drives, parking areas
and equipment;
         (c)   An estimated schedule for removal and an agreement conforming to
all provisions of this section;
         (d)   A traffic control plan showing proposed truck routes to and from
the site;
         (e)   A written description of proposed post-removal use of the
property;
         (f)   A reclamation plan showing final grading of the site with two-
foot contours, vegetation, roadways and other features to be installed; and
         (g)   A fee, determined by the City Manager, with input from staff to
defray review, administration and inspection costs.
      (3)   Requirements. A special use permit shall not be issued unless
activities comply with all the following requirements and the Planning
Commission finds that there will be no serious consequences to the immediate
area or community at large. A special use permit may be revoked if the use is
found in violation of any part of this section.
         (a)   Activities shall comply with applicable soil erosion and
sedimentation control regulations.
         (b)   Final grades shall not exceed 5% and shall meet existing
elevations at all property lines. Grades in excess of 5% may be permitted by
the Planning Commission if the applicant demonstrates that an increase is
essential to implement a plan for future use.
         (c)   The limits of the excavation shall be at least 50 feet from any
adjoining property line and 100 feet from any street right-of-way or private
street easement line.
         (d)   Mineral extraction shall not create permanent depressions that
may fill with water. All storm runoff must discharge into existing drainage
systems.
         (e)   Since artificial lakes and water bodies can present threats of
ground water pollution and stagnant water, thereby adversely affecting the
public health, safety and welfare, they shall not be created as part of removal
operations unless the applicant demonstrates:
            1.   Engineering and geological studies find there will be a
positive source of unpolluted underground or stream-fed water in adequate
amounts to produce positive water flow at all times;
            2.   Plans for the proposed artificial lake or water body have
received all state approvals and conform to all federal, state, county and
municipal standards;
            3.   A site plan of the proposed future development has been
approved by the city; and
            4.   In an artificial lake or water body, a channel or lagoon shall
not project beyond the main body of water greater than two times the width of
the channel or lagoon.
      (4)   Conditions. Conditions may be imposed pursuant to the special land
use provisions of §
153.252 of this chapter. Such conditions may include the reasonable regulation
of hours of operation, blasting hours, noise levels, dust control measures and
traffic unless prohibited by the state’s Zoning Enabling Act or other
applicable law. All conditions shall be reasonable in accommodating customary
mining operations.
      (5)   Financial guarantee. The city may require a financial guarantee in
accordance with §
153.239 of this chapter to ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance and any
conditions of approval.
   (C)   Similar uses.
      (1)   Applications for a use not specifically authorized in a zoning
district, but similar to others that are identified, shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for review and a decision, based on the following.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall first find that the proposed use
is not listed as a permitted or special land use in any other district.
         (b)   If the use is not permitted elsewhere, the Planning Commission
shall review the district purpose, permitted uses and special land uses in the
zoning district to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the
district purpose and is similar to other allowed uses relative to its
character, scale and overall compatibility.
         (c)   The use would not be more appropriate within a different zoning
district.
      (2)   If a proposed use is determined to be similar to other uses listed
within the district, it shall comply with all the standards or requirements
associated with the similar listed use(s). If the listed use(s) is a special
land use, the similar use shall only be approved according to the requirements
of §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter.
      (3)   The determination of whether a proposed use is similar to another
listed use shall be considered as an interpretation of the use regulations and
not a use variance. Once a use has been determined to be similar, it shall be
deemed to be included in the list of uses, as regulated.
   (D)   Wireless telecommunications towers.
      (1)   Required approvals. The placement of communication facilities shall
meet the following approval requirements.
         (a)   Installation of a new antenna. The installation of a new antenna
(s) on an existing tower, including a legal non-conforming tower, and existing
alternative structure (such as a water tower, building or church steeple) may
be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator, provided all the
requirements of this subsection are met; however, such an installation on a
city-owned or other municipal-owned structure must first be approved by the
City Council. A new antenna that adds either 10% or 25 feet, whichever is less,
to the highest point of an existing tower or alternative structure is subject
to the provisions of this section for the installation of a new tower as
described by divisions (D)(6) and (D)(7) below.
         (b)   Installation of a new tower. The installation of a new tower(s)
requires approval of a special land use permit according to §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter.
         (c)   Installation of a new accessory structure. The installation of a
new accessory structure(s), such as an equipment building, to support the
installation of an additional antenna on an existing tower or alternative
structure may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator;
provided that, adequate space exists on the tower site.
      (2)   Removal. A tower that is unused or abandoned for 12 consecutive
months shall be removed by the property owner at their expense.
      (3)   Interference with public safety facilities. A new
telecommunications facility shall not interfere with public safety
telecommunications.
      (4)   Required documentation for all facilities. In addition to the
requirements provided in §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter for special land use and/or for land use permit
submittals, an application for a new tower, new antenna and new related
facilities shall include the following. Where an alternative structure is used,
comparable information for that structure shall be provided.
         (a)   Engineer’s report. A report from a professional engineer
licensed in the state that:
            1.   Describes the height and design of a new tower and/or antenna
including a cross-section, latitude, longitude and elevation;
            2.   Describes or updates (in the case of new antennas) the tower’s
capacity, including the type and number of antennas it can accommodate;
            3.   Certifies that construction specifications comply with all
applicable requirements of the building codes adopted by the city, including,
but not limited to, tower foundation, guy wire anchors (if used), collocation
and strength requirements for natural forces (ice, wind, earth movements and
the like);
            4.   Certifies the facility will not interfere with established
public safety telecommunications; and
            5.   Includes an engineer’s seal and registration number.
         (b)   Proof of compliance. Copies of required approvals from the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and all other appropriate state and federal agencies.
         (c)   Removal affidavit. A letter committing all parties, including
the property owner and their successors, to remove the tower and all related
accessory structures, fences and equipment if the tower is abandoned. The
removal affidavit shall be recorded in the county’s Register of Deeds, with a
copy of the recorded affidavit provided to the Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Determination of new tower need. A new telecommunications tower may
only be approved if the applicant has submitted verification from a
professional engineer licensed in the state that the antenna(s) planned for the
proposed new tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
other structure within a two-mile radius of the proposed tower location due to
one or more of the following:
         (a)   Inadequate structural capacity. The antenna(s) would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or other structure;
         (b)   Interference. The antenna would cause interference, impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower site;
         (c)   Inadequate height. The existing or approved towers or structures
within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at the
necessary height; and
         (d)   Land availability. Additional land area is not available.
      (6)   Design requirements for new towers and related facilities. All
telecommunications facilities shall meet the following design requirements.
         (a)   Lighting. Tower lighting shall only be as required for safety or
security reasons or as required by the FAA or other federal or state authority.
All ground level security lighting shall be full sharp cut-off fixtures
(shielded down lights).
         (b)   Collocation. All telecommunication towers shall be designed, and
engineered structurally, electrically and in all other respects to accommodate
both the applicant’s equipment and at least one additional user for every 50
feet, or fraction thereof, in total tower height in excess of 75 feet.
         (c)   Assumption. Each additional user shall be assumed to have an
antenna loading equal to that of the initial user.
         (d)   Rearrangement. Towers must be designed to allow for
rearrangement of antennas and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
         (e)   Height. All towers and antennas shall conform with all FAA tall
structure requirements. The maximum height of all accessory structures shall be
14 feet.
         (f)   Signs. Signs for all telecommunications facilities shall be
permitted up to a total of four square feet per user, mounted on the associated
equipment building. Signs required for technical and safety information shall
be exempt from this requirement.
      (7)   Site requirements for new towers and related facilities. All new
telecommunications facilities shall meet the following site requirements.
         (a)   Vehicular access. Vehicle access drives may be gravel or paved
and shall be located within an access easement that is at least 20 feet wide.
Any portion of the entrance located in a public right-of-way shall meet the
applicable public street or road design, construction and pavement
requirements.
         (b)   Site area. A tower shall be located on a lot (or lease area)
that is sufficiently large to accommodate the use and all anticipated accessory
structures for future antenna users.
            1.   The arrangement of the tower and site topography shall be
considered when determining if the site area is sufficient.
            2.   All tower support and stabilizing wires shall be located
within the site area.
         (c)   Setback. The minimum required setbacks for the tower and related
facilities shall be as follows:
            1.   Minimum side and rear setback: 50 feet from all property
lines;
            2.   Front yard setback: as specified for the zoning district in
which the tower is located; and
            3.   Additional setback from residential districts: a tower and
related facilities shall not be closer than a distance equal to the total
height of the tower plus antennas to a property within a residential district,
and no closer than one-half the height of the tower plus antennas to a property
line in any other district.
         (d)   Encroachment. No part of any telecommunications facility nor
associated lines, cables, equipment, wires or braces shall at any time extend
across or over any part of a public right-of-way, sidewalk or property line.
         (e)   Fencing. An eight-foot high security fence shall completely
surround the tower and accessory equipment building site. Sharpened or
electrified fencing is not permitted. An area ten feet in width shall remain
outside of the fence for the purpose of providing the landscape screening
described below.
         (f)   Landscape screening. Evergreen buffer plantings shall be located
and maintained around the outermost perimeter of the security fence of all
communication facilities. The landscape plan shall show all plantings and shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, as applicable,
as part of the review and approval process.
            1.   Evergreen trees shall be planted around the perimeter of the
security fence, every ten feet apart on center.
            2.   If evergreen hedges are used, they shall be planted a maximum
of five feet apart on center.
   (E)   Small wireless communications facilities deployment ordinance.
      (1)   This division shall be known and may be cited as the "small
wireless communications facilities deployment ordinance."
      (2)   Definitions. For the purposes of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
         ACT. The small wireless communications facilities deployment act,
Public Act 365 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 460.1301 et seq., as the same may be
amended from time to time.
         ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
         APPLICANT. A wireless provider or wireless infrastructure provider
that submits an application described in this division.
         AUTHORITY. The City of Charlevoix, to the extent authorized by law to
make legislative, quasi-judicial, or administrative decisions concerning an
application described in this division. AUTHORITY does not include any of the
following:
         1.   A municipally owned electric utility.
         2.   An investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the
Michigan Public Service Commission.
         3.   A state court having jurisdiction over an authority.
         AUTHORITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by an authority and
located in the ROW.
         COLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole. COLLOCATION has a corresponding meaning. COLOCATE does not
include make-ready work or the installation of a new utility pole or new
wireless support structure.
         FEE. An authority one-time per small cell site charge for application
processing.
         HISTORIC DISTRICT. An officially designated historic district.
         MAKE-READY WORK. Work necessary to enable an authority pole or utility
pole to support collocation, which may include modification or replacement of
utility poles or modification of lines.
         MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small cell wireless facility that is not
more than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and
that does not have an exterior antenna more than 11 inches in length.
         PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or utility easement
dedicated for compatible uses. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include any of the
following:
         1.   A private right-of-way.
         2.   A limited access highway.
         3.   Land owned or controlled by a railroad as defined in § 109 of the
Railroad Code of 1993, Public Act 354 of 1993, being M.C.L.A. § 462.109.
         4.   Railroad infrastructure.
         RATE. An authority annual charge per site.
         SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of
the following requirements:
         1.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements would fit within an imaginary
enclosure of not more than six cubic feet.
         2.   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
         UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is or may be used to
support small cell wireless facilities. UTILITY POLE does not include a sign
pole less than 15 feet in height above ground.
         WIRELESS FACILITY. Wireless equipment at a fixed location that enables
the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a communications
network, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial
or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration. WIRELESS FACILITY
includes a small cell wireless facility. WIRELESS FACILITY does not include any
of the following:
         1.   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is colocated.
         2.   A wireline backhaul facility.
         3.   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between utility poles or wireless
support structures or that otherwise is not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with a particular antenna.
         WIRELESS PROVIDER. A regulated provider of telecommunications services
and a WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER is an installer of wireless equipment at
small cell sites and, both terms are interchangeable terms for purposes of this
division. WIRELESS PROVIDER does not include an investor-owned utility whose
rates are regulated by the MPSC.
         WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services, provided using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile.
         WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure designed to
support or capable of supporting small cell wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
         WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used to transport services by
wire or fiber-optic cable from a wireless facility to a network.
      (3)   Scope of authority.
         (a)   Except as provided in this division or the Act, the authority
shall not prohibit, regulate, or charge for the collocation of small cell
wireless facilities.
         (b)   The approval of a small cell wireless facility under this
division authorizes only the collocation of a small cell wireless facility and
does not authorize either of the following:
            1.   The provision of any services.
            2.   The installation, placement, modification, maintenance, or
operation of a wireline in the ROW.
         (c)   The terms of this division do not permit the wireless provider
to operate a cable system or to provide cable service, as those terms are
defined by § 602 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended (47
U.S.C. § 522), or install any wires or facilities that are required to be
permitted under the METRO Act, Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. § 484.310,
including any part of a small cell wireless facility constituting wireline
telecommunication facilities.
      (4)   Small cell ROW access; permitted use; height; underground,
downtown, residential and historic districts.
         (a)   This division applies only to activities of a wireless provider
within the public right-of-way for the deployment of small cell wireless
facilities and associated new or modified utility poles.
         (b)   The authority shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with
any person for use of the ROW for the construction, operation, or maintenance
of utility poles or the collocation of small cell wireless facilities.
         (c)   1.   The authority shall not charge a wireless provider an
annual rate more than:
               a.   $20 annually, unless division b. below applies.
               b.   $125 annually, if a new utility pole or wireless support
structure was erected at a new site by or on behalf of the wireless provider on
or after the effective date of this division. This division does not apply to
the replacement of an existing utility pole that was not designed to support
small cell wireless facilities.
            2.   Every five years after the effective date of the Act, the
maximum rates are increased by 10% and rounded to the nearest dollar.
         (d)   All greater rates and fees in current agreements shall be
modified within 90 days of application receipt, so as not to exceed the fees
provided here, except for new small cell dedicated utility poles installed and
operational in the ROW before the effective date of this division or related
agreements, which shall remain in effect for the duration of the division or
agreement.
         (e)   Except as set forth in §§
153.125(F)(5) or (6), and as limited by this division, a wireless provider may
colocate small cell wireless facilities and construct, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace utility poles in, along, across, upon, and under the ROW as
a permitted use not subject to zoning regulation if it complies with all other
sections of this division and if:
            1.   A utility pole in the ROW installed or modified on or after
the effective date of this division shall not exceed 40 feet above ground
level, unless a taller height is agreed to by the authority.
            2.   A small cell wireless facility in the ROW installed or
modified after the effective date of this division shall not extend more than
five feet above a utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small
cell wireless facility is colocated.
            3.   Such structures and facilities shall be constructed and
maintained so as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on
the ROW or obstruct the legal use of the authority's ROW or uses of the ROW by
other utilities and communications service providers.
         (f)   A proposed utility pole or other support structure that exceeds
the height limits under §
153.125(F)(4)(e), is subject to zoning review.
         (g)   Undergrounding. A wireless provider shall comply with reasonable
and nondiscriminatory requirements including concealment measures that prohibit
communications service providers from installing structures on or above ground
in the ROW in an area designated solely for underground or buried cable and
utility facilities, if:
            1.   The authority has required all cable and utility facilities,
other than authority poles, along with any attachments, or poles used for
street lights, traffic signals, or other attachments necessary for public
safety, to be placed underground by a date that is not less than 90 days before
the submission of the application; and
            2.   The authority does not prohibit replacement of authority poles
by a wireless provider in the designated area.
            3.   A wireless provider may apply for a waiver of the
undergrounding requirements.
         (h)   Historic, downtown and residential districts. A wireless
provider shall comply with written, objective requirements for reasonable,
technically feasible, nondiscriminatory, and technologically neutral designs or
concealment measures in a historic district, downtown district, or residential
zoning district. Such requirement shall not have the effect of prohibiting any
wireless provider's technology. Any such design or concealment measures are not
included in size restrictions in the definition of small wireless facility in
this division.
         (i)   Aesthetic requirements. Wireless providers shall install,
modify, collocate or otherwise provide all wireless facilities, equipment,
poles, support structures and all other related wireless objects in a manner,
size and appearance that is consistent and in conformity with the existing
requirements and existing practices in fact, pertaining to such districts as
defined by the applicable ordinances, rules and codes of this community and the
applicable rules and laws of this state, in such fashion as to create the least
negative impact on the district as possible. Such accommodations may include
use of similar height, materials, color, design, number and appearance of other
similar structures utilized by other occupiers of the ROW and public spaces.
            1.   Collocation including replacement of existing poles or support
structures is strongly encouraged over the installation of additional new poles
or support structures in the ROW.
            2.   Placement of all equipment inside the pole or support
structure is favored over placement outside the pole, including ground
mountings.
            3.   Smallest equipment, antennas and poles and support structures
feasible is preferred.
            4.   Camouflaging, stealth or concealment elements are preferred.
            5.   Installations generally are favored in the following zoning
districts, in the following order of preference:
               a.   1st Preference: Industrial
               b.   2nd Preference: Commercial
               c.   3rd Preference: Residential
               d.   4th Preference: Historic
               e.   5th Preference: Environmentally sensitive areas including
nature and wetland preservation sites
            6.   Disagreements between the provider and authority on specific
aesthetics issues shall be addressed by the City Council upon timely written
request of the provider. Staff and City Council may consider incentives
favoring installations in preferred districts.
         (j)   All wireless providers shall repair all damage to the ROW caused
by the activities of the wireless provider while occupying, constructing,
installing, mounting, maintaining, modifying, operating, or replacing small
cell wireless facilities, utility poles, or wireless support structures in the
ROW and, to return the ROW to its original condition. Following 60 days'
written notice, the authority may make those repairs and charge the wireless
provider the cost of the repairs.
      (5)   Provider and authority responsibilities; application information;
shot clocks; tolling; deemed approved; basis for denial; resubmittal; batch
applications; application fees; micro wireless facility exemption; alternative
siting; decommissioning sites.
         (a)   This division applies to activities of a wireless provider
within the public right-of-way.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or the Act, a
wireless provider shall seek an authority ROW access permit to colocate a small
cell wireless facility or install, modify, or replace a utility pole on which a
small cell wireless facility will be colocated as required of all ROW users.
The processing of an application for an authority ROW access permit is subject
to all of the following:
            1.   Unless physically or technically infeasible, all small
wireless facilities shall be constructed to accommodate two or more users. Any
wireless provider must openly allow another provider to colocate upon its
wireless facility under rates and conditions that are acceptable within the
industry to promote collocation. Collocation of small cell wireless facilities
is strongly encouraged.
            2.   In-kind contributions to the authority are not permitted in
lieu of rates and fees described above unless all parties voluntarily agree in
furtherance of the interests of both.
            3.   The applicant shall provide all the information and
documentation required by the authority to enable the authority to make an
informed decision with regard to its criteria for authorizing ROW access
including the following:
               a.   A certificate of compliance with FCC rules related to radio
frequency emissions from a small cell wireless facility;
               b.   Proof of notification to every other affected authority and
all necessary permits, permit applications, or easements to ensure all
necessary permissions for the proposed activity are obtained;
               c.   An attestation that the small cell wireless facilities will
be operational for use by a wireless services provider within one year after
the permit issuance date. Failure to abide by this term shall result in
termination of any permit issued in reliance on such attestation.
            4.   Within 25 days after receiving an initial application, the
authority shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is
complete. If incomplete, the notice will delineate all missing documents or
information. The notice tolls the running of the time for approving or denying
an application under §
153.125(F)(5)(b)6.
            5.   If the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response
to the authority's notice of incompleteness, the authority will so notify the
applicant in writing within ten days, delineating the previously requested and
missing documents or information. The time period for approval or denial is
tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices under the procedures
identified in §
153.125(F)(5)(b)4.
            6.   The authority shall approve or deny the application and notify
the applicant in writing within the following period of time after the
application is received:
               a.   Collocation shot clock. For an application for the
collocation of small cell wireless facilities on a utility pole, 60 days,
subject to the following adjustments:
                  (i)   Add 15 days if an application from another wireless
provider was received within one week of the application in question.
                  (ii)   Add 15 days if the authority notifies the applicant in
writing that an extension is needed and the reasons for the extension before
the otherwise applicable 60-day or 75-day time period under this division
elapses.
               b.   New or replacement 40-foot pole and limited equipment. For
an application for a new or replacement utility pole that meets the height
requirements of §
153.125(F)(4)(e) and associated small cell facility, 90 days, subject to the
following adjustments:
                  (i)   Add 15 days if an application from another wireless
provider was received within one week of the application in question.
                  (ii)   Add 15 days if, a timely extension is requested.
                  (iii)   Deemed approved. A completed application is
considered to be approved if not timely acted upon by the authority and,
subject to the condition that the applicant provide the authority not less than
seven days' advance written notice that the applicant will be proceeding with
the work pursuant to this automatic approval.
            7.   Basis for denial. The authority may deny a completed
application for a proposed collocation of a small cell wireless facility or
installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole that meets the
height requirements in §
153.125(F)(4)(e) if the proposed activity would do any of the following:
               a.   Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic
control equipment;
               b.   Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation or pedestrians;
               c.   Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, Public Law 101-336, or similar federal, state,
or local standards regarding pedestrian access or movement.
               d.   Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed
use of public utility infrastructure under the jurisdiction of an authority.
               e.   With respect to drainage infrastructure under the
jurisdiction of an authority, either of the following:
                  (i)   Materially interfere with maintenance or full
unobstructed use of the drainage infrastructure as it was originally designed.
                  (ii)   Not be located a reasonable distance from the drainage
infrastructure to ensure maintenance under the Drain Code of 1956, Public Act
40 of 1956, being M.C.L.A. §§ 280.1 through 280.630, and access to the drainage
infrastructure.
               f.   Fail to comply with reasonable, nondiscriminatory, written
spacing requirements of general applicability adopted by ordinance or otherwise
that apply to the location of ground-mounted equipment and new utility poles
and that do not prevent a wireless provider from serving any location.
               g.   Fail to comply with all other applicable codes.
               h.   Fail to comply with §§
153.125(F)(4)(g) or (h) relating to Undergrounding and Historic, Downtown, and
Residential Districts.
               i.   Fail to meet reasonable, objective, written stealth or
concealment criteria for small cell wireless facilities applicable in a
historic district or other designated area, as specified in an ordinance or
otherwise and non-discriminatorily applied to all other occupants of the ROW,
including electric utilities, incumbent or competitive local exchange carriers,
fiber providers, cable television operators, and the authority.
            8.   Reasons for denial; resubmission and 30-day shot clock. If the
completed application is denied, the notice shall explain the reasons for the
denial and, if applicable, cite the specific provisions of applicable codes on
which the denial is based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified
by the authority and resubmit the application within 30 days after the denial
without paying an additional application fee. The authority shall approve or
deny the revised application within 30 days. The authority shall limit its
review of the revised application to the deficiencies cited in the denial.
            9.   Batch applications. An applicant may file an application and
receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 20 substantially similar
small cell wireless installations. The authority may approve or deny one or
more small cell wireless facilities included in such consolidated application.
            10.   Approval of an application authorizes the wireless provider
to undertake the installation, collocation and maintenance of such facilities.
            11.   The authority shall not institute a moratorium on filing,
receiving, or processing applications or issuing permits for the collocation of
small cell wireless facilities or the installation, modification, or
replacement of utility poles on which small cell wireless facilities will be
colocated.
            12.   The authority and an applicant may extend a time period under
this division by mutual agreement.
         (c)   1.   Application fee for a permit under §
153.125(F)(5)(b) shall not exceed the lesser of the following:
                  a.   $200 for each small cell wireless facility alone.
                  b.   $300 for each small cell wireless facility and a new
utility pole to which it will be attached.
            2.   Every five years after the effective date of the Act, the
maximum fees are increased by 10% and rounded to the nearest dollar.
         (d)   The authority may revoke a permit, upon 30 days' notice and an
opportunity to cure, if the permitted small cell wireless facilities and any
associated utility pole fail to meet the requirements of §
153.125(F)(5)(b)7.
         (e)   Micro wireless facility exempt. The authority shall not require
a permit or any other approval or require fees or rates for ordinance compliant
replacement, maintenance or operation of a small cell wireless facility or
ordinance compliant installation, replacement, maintenance or operation of a
micro wireless facility that is suspended on cables strung between utility
poles or wireless support structures in compliance with applicable codes.
         (f)   Alternate siting. Upon receipt of an application to place a new
utility pole, the authority may propose an alternate location within the ROW or
on property or structures owned or controlled by the authority within 75 feet
of the proposed location to either place the new utility pole or colocate on an
existing structure. The applicant shall use the alternate location if, as
determined by the applicant, the applicant has the right to do so on reasonable
terms and conditions and the alternate location does not impose unreasonable
technical limits or significant additional costs.
         (g)   Decommissioning sites. A wireless provider shall notify the
authority in writing before discontinuing use of a small cell wireless
facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure. The notice shall specify
when and how the wireless provider intends to remove the small cell wireless
facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure. The wireless provider
shall return the property to its pre-installation condition. If the wireless
provider does not complete the removal within 45 days after the discontinuance
of use, the authority may complete the removal and assess the costs of removal
against the wireless provider. A permit under this division for a small cell
wireless facility expires upon removal of the small cell wireless facility.
         (h)   A wireless provider shall obtain a permit for any work that will
affect traffic patterns or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the ROW.
      (6)   Zoning review for non-permitted uses.
         (a)   This division applies to zoning reviews for the following
activities that are subject to zoning review and approval, that are not a
permitted use under §
153.125(F)(4)(e), and that take place within or outside the public right-of-
way:
            1.   The modification of existing or installation of new small cell
wireless facilities.
            2.   The modification of existing or installation of new wireless
support structures used for such small cell wireless facilities.
         (b)   The processing of an application for a zoning approval is
subject to all of the following requirements:
            1.   Within 30 days after receiving an application under this
division, the authority shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
application is complete. If the application is incomplete, the notice shall
clearly and specifically delineate all missing documents or information. The
notice tolls the running of the 30-day period.
            2.   The running of the time period tolled under §
153.125(F)(6)(b)1 resumes when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in
response to the authority's notice of incompleteness. If the applicant makes a
supplemental submission in response to the authority's notice of
incompleteness, the authority will so notify the applicant in writing within
ten days, delineating the previously requested and missing documents or
information. The time period may be tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices under the procedures identified in division §
153.125(F)(6)(b)1. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not
specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the
original notice of incompleteness.
            3.   Modification of support structure or collocation or
installation of wireless facilities shot clock 90 days - new support structure
shot clock 150 days; modification by agreement; deemed approved. The authority
shall approve or deny the application and notify the applicant in writing
within 90 days after an application for a modification of a wireless support
structure or installation of a small cell wireless facility is received or 150
days after an application for a new wireless support structure is received.
               a.   The time period for approval may be extended by mutual
agreement between the applicant and authority.
               b.   If the authority fails to comply with this division, the
application is considered to be approved subject to the condition that the
applicant provide the authority not less than 15 days' advance written notice
that the applicant will be proceeding with the work pursuant to this automatic
approval.
            4.   The authority may deny an application if all of the following
apply:
               a.   The denial is supported by substantial evidence contained
in a written record that is publicly released contemporaneously.
               b.   There is a reasonable basis for the denial.
               c.   The denial would not discriminate against the applicant
with respect to the placement of the facilities of other wireless providers.
         (c)   The authority's review of an application for a zoning approval
is subject to all of the following requirements:
            1.   Applicant presumed reasonable. An applicant's business
decision on the type and location of small cell wireless facilities, wireless
support structures, or technology to be used is presumed to be reasonable. This
presumption does not apply with respect to the height of wireless facilities or
wireless support structures. The authority may consider the height of such
structures in its zoning review, but shall not discriminate between the
applicant and other communications service providers.
            2.   The authority shall not evaluate or require an applicant to
submit information about an applicant's business decisions with respect to any
of the following:
               a.   The need for a wireless support structure or small cell
wireless facilities.
               b.   The applicant's service, customer demand for the service,
or the quality of service.
            3.   Any requirements regarding the appearance of facilities,
including those relating to materials used or arranging, screening, or
landscaping, shall be reasonable.
            4.   Any spacing, setback, or fall zone requirement shall be
substantially similar to a spacing, setback, or fall zone requirement imposed
on other types of commercial structures of a similar height.
         (d)   Application fees:
            1.   $1,000 for a new wireless support structure or modification of
an existing wireless support structure.
            2.   $500 for a new small cell wireless facility or modification of
an existing small cell wireless facility.
         (e)   All zoning approval is void if the wireless provider fails to
commence construction within one year of the grant of same, unless the
authority and the applicant agree to extend this period or the delay is caused
by a lack of commercial power or communications facilities at the site. The
wireless provider may reapply for a zoning approval.
         (f)   A wireless provider may voluntarily request that a zoning
approval be terminated.
         (g)   The authority shall not institute a moratorium on either of the
following:
            1.   Filing, receiving, or processing applications for zoning
approval.
            2.   Issuing approvals for installations that are not a permitted
use.
         (h)   The authority may revoke a zoning approval, upon 30 days' notice
and an opportunity to cure, if the permitted small cell wireless facilities and
any associated wireless support structure fail to meet the requirements of the
approval, applicable codes, or applicable zoning requirements.
      (7)   Authority owned poles; rates; terms.
         (a)   The authority shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with
any person for the right to attach to authority poles. A person who purchases,
controls, or otherwise acquires an authority pole is subject to the
requirements of this division.
         (b)   Rate. The rate for the collocation of small cell wireless
facilities on authority poles shall be nondiscriminatory regardless of the
services provided by the colocating person. The rate shall not exceed $30 per
year per authority pole. Every five years after the effective date of the Act,
the maximum rate then authorized under this division is increased by 10% and
rounded to the nearest dollar. This rate for the collocation of small cell
wireless facilities on authority poles is in addition to any rate charged for
the use of the ROW under §
153.125(F)(4).
         (c)   All greater rates and fees in current agreements shall be
modified within 90 days of application receipt, so as not to exceed the fees
provided here, except with respect to wireless facilities on authority poles
installed and operational before the effective date of this division or any
related agreement, which shall remain in effect for the duration of the
division or agreement.
         (d)   Within 90 days after receiving the first request to colocate a
small cell wireless facility on an authority pole, the authority shall make
available, through ordinance or otherwise, the rates, fees, and terms for the
collocation of small cell wireless facilities on the authority poles. The
rates, fees, and terms shall comply with all of the following:
            1.   The rates, fees, and terms shall be nondiscriminatory,
competitively neutral, and commercially reasonable and shall comply with the
Act.
            2.   The authority shall provide a good-faith estimate for any
make-ready work within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-
ready work shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good-
faith estimate by the applicant.
            3.   The person owning or controlling the authority pole shall not
require more make-ready work than required to comply with law or industry
standards.
            4.   Fees for make-ready work shall not do any of the following:
               a.   Include costs related to preexisting or prior damage or
noncompliance unless the damage or noncompliance was caused by the applicant.
               b.   Include any unreasonable consultant fees or expenses.
               c.   Exceed actual costs imposed on a nondiscriminatory basis.
         (e)   This division does not require the authority to install or
maintain any specific authority pole or to continue to install or maintain
authority poles in any location if the authority makes a nondiscriminatory
decision to eliminate aboveground poles of a particular type generally, such as
electric utility poles, in a designated area of its geographic jurisdiction.
For authority poles with colocated small cell wireless facilities in place when
an authority makes a decision to eliminate aboveground poles of a particular
type, the authority shall do one of the following:
            1.   Continue to maintain the authority pole.
            2.   Install and maintain a reasonable alternative pole or wireless
support structure for the collocation of the small cell wireless facility.
            3.   Offer to sell the pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost.
            4.   Allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so
it can maintain service from that location.
            5.   Proceed as provided by an agreement between the authority and
the wireless provider.
      (8)   No provider requirement of service. This division does not require
wireless facility deployment or regulate wireless services.
      (9)   Appeals. The applicant may appeal any authority determinations
related to this division to the highest elected body of the authority or, the
Charlevoix County Circuit Court.
      (10)   Defense, indemnity and insurance. All applicant wireless providers
shall:
         (a)   Defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the authority and its
officers, agents, and employees against any claims, demands, damages, lawsuits,
judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees resulting from the
installation, construction, repair, replacement, operation, or maintenance of
any wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles to the
extent caused by the applicant, its contractors, its subcontractors, and the
officers, employees, or agents of any of these.
         (b)   Obtain insurance naming the authority and its officers, agents,
and employees as additional insureds against any claims, demands, damages,
lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees. A
wireless provider may meet all or a portion of the authority's insurance
coverage and limit requirements by self-insurance. To the extent a wireless
provider elects to self-insure, the wireless provider shall provide to the
authority evidence demonstrating, to the authority's satisfaction, the wireless
provider's financial ability to meet the authority's insurance coverage and
limit requirements.
      (11)   Bonding.
         (a)   As a condition of a permit described in this act, the wireless
provider shall provide a $1,000 bond per small cell wireless facility, for the
purpose of providing for the removal of abandoned or improperly maintained
small cell wireless facilities, including those that an authority determines
should be removed to protect public health, safety, or welfare, to repair the
ROW as provided under §
153.125(F)(4)(b) and, to recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a
wireless provider in more than 12 months, if the wireless provider has received
60-day advance notice from the authority of the noncompliance.
         (b)   The authority shall not require a cash bond, unless the wireless
provider has failed to obtain or maintain a bond required under this division
or the surety has defaulted or failed to perform on a bond given to the
authority on behalf of a wireless provider.
      (12)   Labeling. A small cell wireless facility for which a permit is
issued shall be labeled with the name of the wireless provider, emergency
contact telephone number, and information that identifies the small cell
wireless facility and its location.
      (13)   Electric costs. A wireless provider is responsible for arranging
and paying for the electricity used to operate a small cell wireless facility.
      (14)   Investor owned utilities.
         (a)   This division does not add to, replace, or supersede any law
regarding poles or conduits, similar structures, or equipment of any type owned
or controlled by an investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the
MPSC, an affiliated transmission company, or an independent transmission
company.
         (b)   This division does not impose or otherwise affect any rights,
controls, or contractual obligations of an investor-owned utility whose rates
are regulated by the MPSC, an affiliated transmission company, or an
independent transmission company with respect to its poles or conduits, similar
structures, or equipment of any type.
         (c)   Except for purposes of a wireless provider obtaining a permit to
occupy a right-of-way, this division does not affect an investor-owned utility
whose rates are regulated by the MPSC. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this division, pursuant to and consistent with § 6g of Public Act 470 of 1980,
being M.C.L.A. § 460.6g, the MPSC has sole jurisdiction over attachment of
wireless facilities on the poles, conduits, and similar structures or equipment
of any type or kind owned or controlled by an investor-owned utility whose
rates are regulated by the MPSC.
(Prior Code, § 5.55) (Ord. 784, passed 10-16-2017; Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018;
Ord. 820, passed 6-1- 2020; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023)
PROVISIONS GENERALLY APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS
§ 153.140 ACCESS.
   (A)   All lots shall have frontage on a dedicated public or private street.
   (B)   A copy of an approved driveway permit from the city, the county or
MDOT, as applicable, shall be required.
   (C)   Multiple-family, commercial, office or industrial developments
consisting of multiple buildings need not front each structure within the
development upon publicly dedicated streets.
(Prior Code, § 5.60) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.141 BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Conformity required. Buildings or structures shall not be erected,
constructed, used, reconstructed, altered or maintained; and any lot or land
shall not be used or maintained; and a new use shall not be made of any
building, structure or land, except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Unlawful building. Any building that is used, erected, occupied or
altered contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful
structure and a nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated
by any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has been made to
conform to the provisions of this chapter. Public expenditures toward abating
such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land.
   (C)   Required space. Any space used for a required setback, open space or
lot area for a building may not be counted or calculated to meet the same
requirements for any other building.
   (D)   Frontage. No principal building shall be erected on a lot, unless that
lot fronts, as required by §
153.140, upon an improved street or access road. Multiple-family, commercial,
office, industrial, or other developments may be exempt from this requirement,
as provided in §
153.140.
   (E)   One lot, one building. A lot or parcel shall not be devoted to more
than one principal use, or contain more than one principal building, except for
properties in the CBD District and groups of multiple-family dwellings,
commercial buildings or industrial buildings determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be a principal use collectively, based on meeting all of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Individual buildings share common parking areas, signs, access and
similar features;
      (2)   Buildings are under single ownership;
      (3)   Individual activities support one another (such as vehicle sales/
vehicle repair or gas station/restaurant/ convenience store); and
      (4)   Buildings are architecturally unified and compatible.
(Prior Code, § 5.61) (Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.142 CORNER CLEARANCE (CLEAR VISION TRIANGLE).
   (A)   Fences, walls, structures or plantings shall not be erected,
established or maintained on any lot that will obstruct the view of drivers in
vehicles approaching the intersection adjacent to a corner lot or a driveway on
any lot.
   (B)   Fences, walls, structures or plantings located in the clear vision
triangle, as depicted below, shall not be permitted to exceed a height of 36
inches above the lowest point of the intersecting street(s). The unobstructed
triangular area is described as follows:
      (1)   The area formed at the corner intersection of two street right-of-
way or easement lines, the two sides of the triangular area being 25 feet in
length measured along abutting public right-of-way lines and third side being a
line connecting these two sides; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1556.jpg]
 
      (2)   The area formed at the corner intersection of a street right-of-
way, easement or alley and a driveway, the two sides of the triangular area
being 15 feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the
driveway, and the third side being a line connecting these two sides.
(Prior Code, § 5.62) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.143 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Essential services shall be permitted as authorized under any
franchise in effect within the city, subject to regulation as provided in any
law of the state or in any ordinance of the city.
   (B)   It is the intent of this section to ensure conformity of all
structures and uses to the requirements of this chapter wherever such
conformity shall be practicable and not in conflict with the specific
requirements of such franchise, legislation or other city ordinance. In the
absence of such conflict, the zoning ordinance shall prevail.
   (C)   Wireless communication facilities are not considered essential
services and shall be subject to the requirements of §
153.125(D) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.63) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.144 GRADING.
   (A)   Elevations for any site with a building located on it shall have a
grade sloping away from the walls of the building to permit the flow of surface
water. However, sunken or terraced areas may be permitted if they are
constructed to prevent run-off surface water from flowing onto adjacent
properties.
   (B)   Grading and/or filling of materials prior to, or after, application
for zoning permits to elevate the grade for a taller structure is prohibited.
   (C)   No premises shall be filled or graded so as to discharge surface
runoff on abutting premises in such a manner that will cause damage to adjacent
properties.
(Prior Code, § 5.64) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.145 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   All fences, walls and other similar structures shall be located on
private property and must not obstruct the sight distance of motorists from
driveways, roads and, intersections. Fences or walls in all districts, except
Industrial, shall not exceed six feet in height above grade when located in any
portion of the rear or side yard. Fences located in the front yard are
permitted; provided, they are open wrought iron, picket, split rail and similar
decorative fences, have a maximum opacity of 50% and do not exceed 48 inches
above grade.
   (B)   Fence and wall materials may include treated wood, painted/stained
wood, treated split rail, ornamental wrought iron, brick, stone, masonry block,
molded vinyl, or chain link. Scrap lumber, plywood, woven wire, sheet metal,
plastic or fiberglass sheets are specifically prohibited.
   (C)   All fences shall be constructed with the finished side exposed to the
neighboring properties. Support posts shall be placed on the inside. The fence
shall be properly maintained and its appearance shall be harmonious with the
surrounding properties and neighborhood. Fence posts and decorative caps shall
not extend greater than six inches above the maximum allowed height.
   (D)   Fences or walls in industrial districts shall not exceed nine feet in
height above grade in the side and rear yards. All other relevant provisions of
this section shall apply.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a fence, wall or other
similar structure equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes, razor wire or
similar devices, or any electrical charge or current sufficient to cause shock.
In industrial districts, however, a security fence may be installed with one
foot of barbed wire; provided, the barbed wire is at least eight feet above the
adjacent grade.
   (F)   Fences in the front yard shall have a minimum setback of 12 inches
from the front property line.
   (G)   Fences shall not be allowed to be located directly over property
lines, unless two or more adjoining property owners submit a joint application
to the Zoning Administrator for approval.
   (H)   Posts, cement, wood and any other fence materials shall not encroach
onto adjoining properties, unless such encroachments are authorized under a
joint application.
   (I)   An artificial berm with a fence placed on top of it is considered part
of the fence, with the combination being subject to the height limits for
fences established in division (A) above.
   (J)   The required fence height shall be maintained through the entire
length on sloping properties. Grading and/or filling of materials to elevate
the grade for a higher fence is prohibited.
   (K)   Walls constructed of stone, brick or similar materials shall be
permitted in the front yard; provided, they do not exceed three feet in height.
The height limits in the side and rear yards shall not exceed six feet. Walls
shall be set back a minimum of two feet from all property lines and must be
constructed and maintained in the future as to not create safety concerns for
adjoining property owners or the general public. The Planning Commission may
approve walls not to exceed six feet in height in the front yard for
developments in the R4 Zone. This section shall not apply to retaining walls,
as defined by this chapter or screening walls under §
153.171 of this chapter.
   (L)   Retaining walls in residential districts are subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   Retaining walls in the front yard(s), or yard(s) facing the public
right-of-way, may be no taller than three feet in height, and must be set back
from the front property line, or property lines fronting the public right-of-
way, a minimum of one foot.
      (2)   In cases where the height or slope of the grade in the front yard
(s), or yard(s) facing the public right-of-way, needing to be retained is
greater than three feet, multiple tiers may be used. The horizontal distance
between tiers must be a minimum of five feet.
      (3)   Retaining walls in side or rear yards that do not face a public
right-of-way may be greater than three feet tall, but are required to be
designed and sealed by a licensed engineer to ensure the safety of adjoining
property.
      (4)   Retaining walls must be constructed of stone, brick, treated lumber
or similar materials. Plain cement block and untreated wood are not acceptable
materials.
      (5)   The fill behind retaining walls must consist of dirt, drain stone
or similar materials.
      (6)   Retaining walls must be maintained in such a condition as to not
present a threat to adjacent properties, or people or objects in the public
right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1558.jpg]
 
(Prior Code, § 5.65) (Ord. 791, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.146 STRUCTURE HEIGHT CALCULATIONS AND HEIGHT LIMITS.
   Structure height calculations:
   (A)   The vertical distance measured to the highest point of the building’s
roof for flat roofs; to the deck line for mansard roofs; and to the mean height
level between eaves and peak for gable, hip and gambrel roofs, from the
existing grade.
   (B)   On lots with less than 1% change in grade, building height shall be
measured from the existing grade surrounding the building site.
   (C)   On lots having an average sloping grade of between 1% and 5%, building
height shall be measured from the front of the building line of the proposed
structure.
   (D)   On lots having an average sloping grade of more than 5%, building
height shall be measured from the average elevation between front and rear
building lines or between side building lines, whichever dimension reflects the
greater degree of slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1560.jpg]
 
   (E)   Height limits specified elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Churches, schools, hospitals and public buildings including, but
not limited to, libraries, museums, art galleries, fire stations or public
buildings owned or used by a public entity; or
      (2)   Unoccupied barns, silos, or other buildings or structures on farms;
church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; and windmills. These
unoccupied structures shall be limited to 100 feet in height in any case,
unless otherwise permitted in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.66) (Ord. 835, passed 1-2-2023) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.147 ILLEGAL DWELLINGS.
   No structure shall be used for dwelling purposes that do not comply with the
requirements of this or any other city ordinance. Garages or other accessory
buildings, trailer coaches, basements, partial or temporary structures, whether
of fixed or portable construction, shall not be erected or moved onto a lot and
used for any dwelling purposes, unless authorized by the issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Administrator and satisfying all of the conditions
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5.67) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.148 KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The keeping of household pets, including dogs, cats, fish, birds,
hamsters and other animals generally regarded as household pets is permitted as
an accessory use in any residential district.
   (B)   Any area where household pets are kept shall be maintained in a safe
and sanitary condition.
   (C)   The keeping of animals not normally considered household pets,
including, but not limited to, horses, pigs, sheep, cattle, poultry and
poisonous reptiles is prohibited in all zoning districts.
(Prior Code, § 5.68) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.149 PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.
   (A)   Certain architectural features, such as eaves, cornices, bay windows
(or windows without foundations), gutters, chimneys, pilasters and similar
features may project no further than three feet into any required yard.
   (B)   (1)   A patio, terrace, deck, balcony or window awning may project no
further than ten feet into a required front yard; no further than 15 feet into
a required rear yard; and shall not project into any required side yard.
      (2)   In no case shall a patio, terrace, deck, balcony or awning be
placed closer than five feet to any front or rear lot line with the exception
of the CBD district where a porch, terrace, deck, balcony or awning may extend
to the property line.
   (C)   Any porch, terrace, deck or balcony which is enclosed or covered shall
meet the minimum setback requirements of the principal building or accessory
building to which it is attached.
(Prior Code, § 5.69) (Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018; Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.150 SITE EXCAVATION.
   The construction, maintenance or existence within the city of any
unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells,
which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, constitute or are likely to
constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety or welfare is hereby
prohibited; provided, this section shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any excavation for which a building permit or a temporary permit has
been issued by the county’s Department of Building Safety and which is properly
protected and warning signs posted;
   (B)   Any mineral extraction site for which a special use has been approved,
in accordance with §§
153.250 through
153.257 of this chapter; and
   (C)   Streams, natural bodies of water or ditches, reservoirs and other such
bodies of water created or existing by authority of the city or other
governmental agency.
(Prior Code, § 5.70) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.151 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Front setback on corner lots. A corner lot shall have two front lot
lines: a principal front lot line and a secondary front lot line which is
considered a street side setback.
      (1)   The required front setback shall apply to the principal and street
side front lot line on a corner lot.
      (2)   The required setback for the street side front yard shall be the
lesser of the required front setback or the established setback for the
principal building on the abutting lot that faces the same street as the street
front lot line.
      (3)   The remaining setbacks shall be side setbacks.
   (B)   Average front setback. The minimum front setback requirements for a
principal building in any residential district may be reduced in accordance
with the following: where two or more lots, entirely or partially within 200
feet of a subject lot, on the same side of the street and on the same block,
are occupied by principal buildings of which the existing front setback is less
than required by the zoning district, the average of the established setbacks
for those buildings shall be the minimum required front setback for the subject
lot.
   (C)   Setback from bodies of water. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
subchapter, all principal uses located in the R1 and R4 Districts shall have a
setback of 50 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Lake Michigan, Lake
Charlevoix and Round Lake, as well as the Pine River Channel.
   (D)   Fences. Fences are exempt from the setback requirements of this
section.
   (E)   Intrusions below grade. No portion of any building below grade
containing usable space shall project into any front, side or rear yard.
(Prior Code, § 5.71) (Ord. 791, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018;
Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.152 LOT COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot coverage requirements in all zones shall be calculated by dividing
the total area of the lot into the total square footage of all impervious
surfaces.
   (B)   Use of materials such as gravel or stone, pavers and similar permeable
surfaces shall not count or be calculated in lot coverage, however; the use of
permeable surfaces shall not exceed 25% of the requirements of
Table 153.072(b), Maximum Lot Coverage %.
(Prior Code, § 5.72) (Ord. 835, passed 1-2-2023; Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.153 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   (A)    Inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles shall not be kept, parked or
stored in any residential district, except within a completely enclosed
building. The purpose of this provision is to prevent the accumulation of junk
motor vehicles and, therefore, it shall not apply to any motor vehicle
ordinarily used, but temporarily out of running condition. If the motor vehicle
is being kept for actual use, but is temporarily unlicensed, the Zoning
Administrator may grant the owner a reasonable time, not to exceed two months,
to procure a license.
   (B)   Likewise, old, rusty and unsightly machinery, machines not suited for
use upon the premises or quantities of used building materials not fit to be
used to improve the premises shall not be kept or stored outside a building;
provided, however, that, building materials fit to be used to improve the
premises may be kept on-site for one year if they are piled off the ground so
as not to become a harbor for vermin.
   (C)   Recreational equipment and vehicle storage. The standards of this
section apply to all zone districts with the exception of the industrial
district.
      (1)   All recreational equipment and vehicles that are stored outside of
a structure shall be maintained in good condition, shall be operable and shall
have a current license and/or registration.
      (2)   Recreational equipment and vehicles parked or stored outside shall
not be connected to electricity, water, gas or sanitary facilities for living
or lodging purposes other than allowed for in §
153.153(C)(8). Electricity may be used during times of active use including
cleaning refrigeration of supplies and preparing for trips.
      (3)   The parking and/or storage of recreational equipment and vehicles
in excess of 25 feet in length is prohibited.
      (4)   Outdoor parking or storage of not more than two recreational
equipment or vehicles shall be permitted on any parcel of property. An
unlimited number of small vehicles including floats, rafts, canoes, and kayaks
may be stored in an organized, safe manner on a single property.
      (5)   Storage of recreational equipment and vehicles shall be parked
completely in an enclosed structure or within the side or rear yards, except
that they may not be closer than five feet from any lot line, unless otherwise
provided by this section. Property owners who can demonstrate that a property
does not reasonably allow storage in the side or rear yards may store the
recreational vehicle(s) in other areas with application to the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will use criteria from §
153.038(F)(2)(a-e) for approval.
      (6)   Such recreational equipment and vehicles shall be placed or parked
on a lot with a principal building, structure or use unless it is a lot which
is attached to an occupied lot under the same ownership.
      (7)   Active use parking of recreational equipment and vehicles may be
parked on one front yard driveway, provided that public streets, sidewalks and
right-of-way are not blocked to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Driveway means
vehicle access provided between a street or road and a parking area including
if the driveway is in the setback but shall not include any additional parking
aisle.
      (8)   Recreational equipment and vehicles may be used for living or
lodging purposes on a parcel with a principal building for no more than 14 days
within any 60-day period with a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
      (9)   The open (non-active) parking or storage of any recreational
vehicle not owned by a resident or owner of the property on which it is located
shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Outdoor storage areas. Where permitted, outdoor storage areas shall be
screened to the public by buildings, structures or a continuous buffer. The
buffer area shall include:
      (1)   A six-foot tall screen wall or fence or any combination of the
following to provide an effective screen, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator:
         (a)   Berms;
         (b)   Canopy, evergreen and ornamental trees; and/or
         (c)   Shrubs.
(Prior Code, § 5.73) (Ord. 806, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 850, passed 7-1-2024)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.154 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES AND SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Construction buildings and structures, including trailers, incidental
to construction work on a lot, may be placed on the lot, subject to the
following restrictions.
      (1)   Construction buildings and structures may be used only for the
storage of construction materials, tools, supplies and equipment, for
construction management and supervision offices, and for temporary on-site
sanitation facilities related to construction activity on the same lot. An
enclosed structure for temporary sanitation facilities shall be required on all
construction sites.
      (2)   No construction building or structure shall be used as a dwelling
unit.
      (3)   Construction buildings and structures shall be removed from the lot
within 30 days after an occupancy permit is issued for the permanent structure
on the lot.
   (B)   Sales offices or model homes may be placed on a lot, subject to the
following conditions: a permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator
prior to installation of construction. The permit shall specify the location of
the office and shall be valid for a period of one year. A temporary permit may
be renewed by the Zoning Administrator for up to two successive one year
periods or less, at the same location if the office is still incidental and
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5.74) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.155 THROUGH LOTS.
   (A)   In all districts, both yards abutting a street on a through lot shall
be considered front yards.
   (B)   Through lots are prohibited in any new developments, except where one
frontage is a private road.
(Prior Code, § 5.75) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.156 VOTING PLACE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed in any manner that
would interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a municipal, school or other public election.
(Prior Code, § 5.76)
§ 153.157 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Every building erected, altered or moved upon any premises within the
city shall be served with a safe and sanitary water supply system and with a
means for collecting and disposing of all human and commercial, industrial and
other wastes.
   (B)   For those areas of the city not served by public water and/or sanitary
sewer, a permit from the district health department for on-site water and/or
waste disposal facilities, as applicable, shall be obtained and submitted with
an application for a zoning permit prior to commencing construction.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to structures that do not require water
or waste systems.
(Prior Code, § 5.77) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.158 RENTING OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
   Renting of residential properties, including, but not limited to, homes,
condos, apartments, townhouses, and duplexes, as short or long term rentals,
regardless of the underlying zoning district, shall comply with the following
standards.
   (A)   Short and long-term renting of part of, or entire residential
structures is permitted in any zoning district providing all rentals comply
with any applicable requirements of city ordinances. Short-term rentals shall
be regulated as provided in
Chapter 114 of this code.
   (B)   Signage shall be subject to the requirements of §§
153.205 through
153.219.
(Prior Code, § 5.78) (Ord. 795, passed 11-5-2018; Ord. 801, passed 4-15-2019;
Ord. 823, passed 1-4-2021; Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.159 LANDSCAPING FEATURES AND PORTABLE STORAGE BINS.
   Landscaping features including, but not limited to, arbors, gates, pergolas,
trellises, latticework, permanent benches/seating, or portable storage closets
or bins are not considered structures and are, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter regarding structures.
(Prior Code, § 5.79)
§ 153.160 RESIDENTIAL RAISED DECKS.
   Decks that are above the ground floor shall be fully screened from
neighboring residential properties that are in the R1 and R2 Districts.
Screening could include mature vegetation, fencing, walls, or a combination of
them to allow maximum privacy for adjacent properties. All lighting on raised
decks will meet §
153.172 Lighting of the city zoning ordinance. No decks will be allowed above
the second-floor interior floor elevation of the home.
(Ord. 864, passed 1-19-2026)
§ 153.161 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING REGULATIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2138.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been ADDED by new
legislation (Ord. 866-2026, adopted 1-19-2026). The text of the amendment will
be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
 
GENERAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.170 BUILDING APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide quality exterior
architectural building styles and material standards to enhance the visual
environment of the main corridor entries to the city, thereby improving
property values and stimulating investment in the business districts. The
provisions of this section are intended to promote quality architecture to
ensure that buildings retain their value, protect the investment of adjacent
landowners, blend harmoniously into the streetscape and create a positive image
for business and the city.
   (B)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all new construction in the
General Commercial (GC), Professional Office (PO) and Commercial Mixed Use (CM)
Districts on lots fronting U.S. 31 (Bridge Street and Michigan Avenue) and M-
66. This section shall not apply to single-family detached and two-family
residential structures. Architecture shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, as applicable, as a part of site plan
review under the requirements of §§
153.230 through
153.243 of this chapter.
   (C)   All exterior materials shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Design standards. Buildings shall have architectural variety, but
enhance the overall cohesive community character. At a minimum, the following
standards shall be met.
         (a)   Buildings shall provide architectural features, details and
ornaments such as archways, colonnades, cornices, peaked roof lines, hip
returns, operable window shutters, transoms, gas lights or towers to accent and
add interest.
         (b)   Repair of existing structures may utilize the existing roof
pitch and roof design at the time of application.
         (c)   Plazas, strip malls or similar types of commercial or office
developments where multiple businesses are located within the same building
shall provide at least one dormer, archway or similar feature per business or
store front.
         (d)   Building walls over 100 feet long shall be broken up with
varying building lines, vertical architectural features, windows, architectural
accents and trees.
         (e)   Building entrances shall utilize windows, canopies and awnings;
provide unity of scale, texture and color; and clearly identify the entry.
         (f)   Building-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened.
   (D)   Site elements. Signs and other site features shall be designed and
located so they are aesthetically consistent and harmonious with the overall
development. Sign bases shall be constructed of material which is compatible
with the principal building. Mechanical equipment shall be screened.
(Prior Code, § 5.80) (Ord. 823, passed 1-4-2021) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.171 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Intent. This section promotes the public health, safety and welfare by
establishing minimum standards for the design, installation and maintenance of
landscaping. Landscaping and landscaped buffers help protect and enhance land
uses and the visual image of the community. They further preserve natural
features, improve property values and can alleviate the impacts of noise,
traffic and visual distractions. Landscaped buffers protect less intense uses
from noise, lighting and other impacts associated with more intensive land
uses. Specifically, the intent of these provisions is to:
      (1)   Improve the appearance of off-street parking and storage areas and
property abutting public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of the
neighborhoods, which abut non-residential areas, parking lots and other
potentially obtrusive uses;
      (3)   Reduce soil erosion and depletion;
      (4)   Increase soil water retention, thereby helping to prevent flooding,
erosion and sedimentation and enhancing ground water recharge;
      (5)   Remove air pollutants and reduce, eliminate or control glare,
reflection and heat island effects; and
      (6)   Assist in directing safe and efficient traffic flow and prevent
vehicular and pedestrian circulation conflicts.
   (B)   General requirements. These regulations apply to all new uses and the
expansion of existing uses requiring site plan approval.
      (1)   Landscaping shall be installed before occupancy, unless the Zoning
Administrator authorizes occupancy prior to complete landscape installation,
due to unforeseen weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the
applicant's control. In such a case, a performance guarantee, per §
153.239 of this chapter, shall be provided to ensure completion of the project
as required. All landscaping shall be completed within one full growing season.
      (2)   All landscaping shall be maintained after planting and regularly
watered, fertilized, pruned and kept free from disease. The owner or
controlling party shall be responsible for maintenance.
      (3)   The landscaping shown on the approved landscape, screening and
buffering plan shall be maintained according to division (B)(2) above. Any
plants in the approved plan that die shall be replaced within a reasonable
time, but in no case shall such time exceed six months. The replacement plants
shall meet the purpose of the original specifications of an approved landscape,
screening and buffering plan.
      (4)   All plants shall be hardy per climatic conditions in the city.
         (a)   The use of native vegetation species with deep roots in rain
gardens, bioswales, buffer areas, and other forms of naturalized landscaping to
accomplish the goal of stormwater retention and filtration is encouraged.
         (b)   Prohibited species. Species deemed invasive or restricted by the
State of Michigan or Michigan State University will be rejected during
landscape plan review.
      (5)   All landscaped areas shall be mulched and those not containing
trees and shrubs must be planted with ground cover. Mulch of any type is not
considered groundcover, nor is it a substitute for ground cover. Areas of lot
coverage that are not paved or occupied by building footprint must be
landscaped with living grass lawn, living plant ground covers, perennial/shrub
beds, or a combination thereof.
      (6)   The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 25% of any
one plant species. Ground covers other than living plants (e.g. stone chips,
rocks, mulch) must be arranged in a deliberate manner and may not exceed more
than 25% of the site landscape area. All ground covers must be controlled on
site and not allowed to freely migrate or spill onto the public sidewalk,
public rights-of-way, or into storm drains.
      (7)   Trees and shrubs shall not be placed closer than a distance of 40%
of the spread at maturity to a fence, wall or property line.
      (8)   For a corner lot or a lot with more than one frontage where
landscaping is required, all frontages shall be landscaped.
      (9)   Berms shall be designed to vary in height and shape to create a
more natural appearance. An unbroken earth mound of uniform height shall be
avoided. The maximum slope for a berm shall be one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal, unless otherwise allowed by the Planning Commission.
      (10)   Landscaping shall not obstruct sight distance, per §
153.142 of this chapter.
      (11)   Landscaping plans are subject to Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator review and approval.
      (12)   The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may allow a
deviation from the requirements of this section under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   Existing vegetation or topographic features make compliance with
requirements unnecessary or difficult to achieve;
         (b)   The application of requirements will result in a significant
loss of existing vegetation, or natural or cultural features;
         (c)   Modification of requirements will clearly result in a superior
design that could not be otherwise achieved;
         (d)   Where the required landscaping may interfere with view
corridors, such as developments along water bodies, the Planning Commission may
require planting of specific species in locations where the height or canopy
will not compromise view corridors.
      (13)   The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may impose
conditions on landscaping as part of site plan review.
      (14)   Where a development is proposed in phases, each phase shall comply
with all applicable landscaping requirements.
      (15)   Where landscaping requirements are based on a distance measured
along a property line and result in a fractional requirement, the required
landscaping for just that area shall be multiplied by the fraction. For
example, when a fractional area is equal to 30% of the required distance the
number of required plants shall be multiplied by 0.30. A fraction less than 25%
may be disregarded.
      (16)   To ensure that all landscaping is installed, as a condition of
approval a letter of credit or some other performance guarantee may be required
in accordance with §
153.239 of this chapter.
   (C)   Buffer areas.
      (1)   A buffer area may be required where any use in a business or
industrial district is adjacent to residentially zoned land and where multiple-
family residential land uses are adjacent to land in the R1, R2 and R4
Districts. A landscaped buffer shall be provided between the subject property
and all adjacent residentially zoned or used properties if the subject building
(s) of the site plan is within 25 feet of the adjoining property line and if
existing landscaping, tree cover, or fencing/screening does not exist.
      (2)   A buffer area is not required if the qualifying adjacent zoning
districts are separated by a public right-of-way.
      (3)   A buffer area shall be parallel to and follow the property line
tangent to the qualifying zoning district.
      (4)   A buffer area shall be required even when the adjacent property is
undeveloped.
      (5)   Except for access drives or private streets determined by the
Planning Commission to be necessary to provide safe access to a property, a
building, structure or parking lot shall not encroach within a required buffer
area.
      (6)   When adjacent to a PUD containing a residential land use, a use in
a non-residential or multiple-family residential district shall provide a
buffer area along the property line adjacent to the residential use. The
Planning Commission, however, may waive or modify the required buffer if the
setbacks and perimeter landscaping provided within the PUD meet the intent of
division (A) above.
      (7)   Landscape buffers will include at least one tree for each 25 linear
feet, or fraction of buffer area.
         (a)   Landscape buffers shall consist of evergreen shrubs, evergreen
trees, fencing/screen walls (75% or more opaque), or any combination thereof
that forms a continuous visual buffer.
         (b)   At least 40% of the overall adjoining property line must be
covered by plant materials at the time of planting.
         (c)   The Planning Commission may allow a consistent 75% or more
opaque, six-foot tall screen wall or fence for the entire length of the
adjoining property line to provide buffering that meets the intent of this
section. If a screen wall or fence is used for all of the buffer area, the
overall landscape buffer width may be eliminated except for the trees required
in this section.
         (d)   Where the distance between a building, parking area or use is
more than 200 feet from a side or rear lot line, the Planning Commission may
reduce the buffer area requirements along the applicable lot line(s) by 50%;
         (e)   Where a screen wall or fence is not otherwise required, the
Zoning Administrator may require an opaque screening within the buffer area, to
block views and contain materials. Screening shall be provided in the form of a
six-foot tall ornamental fence or wall, capable of keeping paper and other
debris from blowing off the premises.
      (8)   Buffer area alternatives.
         (a)   Plants may either be arranged formally, or be informally
clustered for a more random, natural effect.
         (b)   Berms may be constructed in a buffer area to supplement
landscaping and add interest. Minimum landscaping requirements shall be reduced
by 50% where a berm at least three feet tall is constructed for at least 85% of
the length of the buffer area.
         (c)   Berms shall be designed to vary in height and shape to create a
more natural appearance. An unbroken earth mound of uniform height shall be
avoided. The maximum slope for a berm shall be one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal, unless otherwise allowed by the Planning Commission.
         (d)   A screen wall or fence, located within a buffer area, may be
used in lieu of some landscaping.
            1.   A screen wall or fence shall be a maximum of six feet tall and
constructed of architectural block, brick, wood, vinyl or textured concrete.
            2.   To maximize the effectiveness of screening, openings shall not
exceed 20% of the surface of a wall or fence.
            3.   Landscaping requirements may be reduced by 50% when a screen
wall is constructed in a buffer area.
   (D)   Minimum plant requirements.
      (1)   The minimum plant size at the time of installation shall comply
with Table 153.171(a):
 
Table 153.171(a): Minimum Plant Size at Installation
Plant Material  Minimum Caliper Minimum Height Minimum Spread
Canopy tree     2.5"
Ornamental tree 1-3/4"
Evergreen tree                  6'
Shrubs                                         24"
 
      (2)   Existing healthy and desirable trees to be preserved may satisfy
the landscaping regulations of this section. Each credit may be applied toward
fulfilling the requirements set forth in this section (i.e., one credit equal
to one equivalent tree).
Table 153.171(d): Credit for Existing Landscaping
Tree Material Minimum Caliper Minimum Height Credits
Table 153.171(d): Credit for Existing Landscaping
Tree Material   Minimum Caliper       Minimum Height       Credits
Canopy tree     4 to 8 inches                              1
                Greater than 8 inches                      2
Ornamental tree                       6 to 10 feet         1
                                      Greater than 10 feet 2
Evergreen tree                        6 to 12 feet         1
                                      Greater than 12 feet 2
 
   (E)   Residential development.
      (1)   For each dwelling unit in a residential subdivision, land division
or site condominium.
         (a)   One canopy tree shall be planted between the right-of-way line
and the street per Shade Tree and Park Commission rules
Chapter 152 Trees.
         (b)   Trees shall meet Residential Guidelines except where site
conditions warrant otherwise.
      (2)   For a multiple-family development, one canopy and ornamental tree
shall be provided for every 7,000 square feet of gross lot area.
      (3)   For a residential development abutting an arterial street, one
evergreen tree and one canopy tree for every 50 feet of development frontage on
the arterial street.
      (4)   Berms may also be used to buffer lots or dwellings from an abutting
arterial street. Minimum landscaping requirements shall be reduced by 50% where
a berm at least three feet tall is constructed for at least 85% of the length
of the street frontage.
      (5)   In the R4 Zone, the Planning Commission may require berms, fencing
or vegetative screening (or any combination thereof) along property lines for
reasons including, but not limited to, protection of public safety,
preservation of neighborhood character or the creation of privacy buffers for
single-family zones.
   (F)   Non-residential and mixed-use districts and non-residential uses in
residential districts.
      (1)   For non-residential uses in any zoning district except the CBD
District, for every 100 feet of lot frontage as measured along a public right-
of-way, the following front yard landscaping requirements apply.
         (a)   Two canopy trees or three ornamental trees shall be provided.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may allow landscaping anywhere within
the front yard, except where a parking area is located along the lot frontage.
In such instances landscaping shall be placed between the parking lot and the
public right-of-way.
      (2)   Berms may be constructed in a front yard to supplement landscaping
and enhance buffering of parking lots. Minimum front yard landscaping
requirements shall be reduced by 50% where a berm at least three feet tall is
constructed between a parking lot located along a street frontage and the
public right-of-way. A berm may also be used to meet the screening requirement
for parking lots as required in division (I) below.
      (3)   Non-residential right-of-way and front setback planting.
         (a)   Street yard landscaping within the public rights-of-way.
            1.   Public rights-of-way shall be planted with grass. Trees,
shrubs, or other ground covers may be planted within the right-of-way with
permission from the City Forester and the City Engineer, or their assigns.
            2.   Rights-of-way yards abutting activity corridor street types
may incorporate decorative paving and streetscape elements if such elements
exist on adjoining parcels. Plant materials shall be located in tree wells,
bioswales, and above ground planters, and shall be approved by the Department
of Public Service.
         (b)   Between sidewalk and parking.
            1.   There shall be a landscaping setback area of eight feet
between the edge of sidewalk and parking lot edge, which shall consist of grass
lawn and landscape planting beds.
            2.   Landscape planting beds shall be a minimum of 25% of the
landscape setback area.
            3.   Setback areas greater than 20 feet in depth must plant at
least one deciduous tree for every 25 feet of frontage or part thereof and a
minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each ten linear feet of frontage, or
portion thereof.
            4.   These landscape requirements are in addition to other
screening or buffer requirements as indicated in the applicable zoning district
section.
            5.   Landscape planting beds shall be a minimum of 50% of the
front, side, and rear landscaping setback areas for all special land use 'off-
street parking surface lots' in addition to trees required.
         (c)   Between sidewalk and building.
            1.   Non-residential setback landscaping between the edge of
sidewalk and building face shall consist of lawn, landscape planting beds, and
paved pedestrian areas.
            2.   Landscape planting beds shall be a minimum of 25% of the
landscape setback area. This may be reduced to 0% in areas where the public
sidewalk is immediately adjacent to the building face.
   (H)   Outdoor storage areas. Where permitted, outdoor storage areas shall be
completely screened by buildings, structures or a continuous buffer at least
five feet wide. The buffer area shall meet §
153.153 Outdoor Storage.
   (I)   Parking lot landscaping.
      (1)   A parking lot containing more than ten spaces shall be screened as
follows:
         (a)    Along any right-of-way or residential property line by a
continuous two and one-half to three-foot tall screen; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1570.jpg]
 
         (b)    The screen shall consist of landscaping, berms, a screen wall
or any combination of these elements.
      (2)   To provide shade and to break up the visual appearance of large,
paved areas, parking lots with more than ten spaces shall be landscaped based
on the following requirements.
         (a)    One canopy tree for every 12 parking spaces shall be provided
within a parking lot island or peninsula.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1568.jpg]
 
         (b)    Parking lot islands and peninsulas shall meet the following
requirements:
            1.   All islands and peninsulas shall be protected by raised curbs;
dub-downs non-raised curbs are permitted to facilitate drainage, except in
instances where the grading and drainage plan demonstrates storm water runoff
can be managed without the use of raised curbs.
            2.   Each tree shall be provided with an open land area of not less
than 75 square feet to provide area for infiltration and with a minimum
diameter of nine feet at the trunk of the tree for protection. Tree plantings
shall also be protected from automobiles with curbing or other suitable device
that incorporate curb cuts or other openings, and grading to capture
stormwater.
            3.   Trees shall be planted centered on islands.
            4.   Landscaping shall not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants or
sight distance within the parking lot and at driveway entrances, in accordance
with §
153.142 of this chapter.
   (J)   Fencing, screening and walls.
      (1)   Screening shall be required around all trash dumpsters in all
zoning districts, except as may be provided elsewhere in this section.
      (2)   Solid waste dumpsters may be located in required buffers; provided,
they are screened in accordance with this division (J).
      (3)   Screening shall be required even if the surrounding area or
adjacent properties are not developed.
      (4)   When a property changes to a more intense land use, a special land
use or when site plan approval is required, screening shall be provided in
accordance with this section.
      (5)   (a)   Unless otherwise permitted in accordance with this section, a
screen shall consist of a solid, sight-obscuring fence or wall that meets §
153.173 of this chapter. Additionally, the screen must meet the following:
            1.   A minimum height to completely obscure the sight of the
container. Walls must be no greater than eight feet high.
            2.   Enclosed on all sides and does not contain any openings other
than an access gate, which shall be closed at all times when not being used. A
screen around staging or loading/unloading areas may provide an opening that
does not contain an access gate;
            3.   Constructed of masonry, treated wood or other materials
approved by the Planning Commission and must be durable, weather-resistant,
rust-proof and easily maintained; and
            4.   A trash dumpster enclosure and gates shall be protected by
bollards or other means to prevent vehicle damage.
         (b)   If approved by the Planning Commission, a screen may consist of
berms or landscaping either in combination or as a substitute for a fence or
wall. It must be determined that the alternate design shall either provide the
same degree, or enhanced screening as required by this section.
      (6)   (a)   Placement cannot interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
         (b)   Walls must be maintained and kept in good condition by the
property owner.
   (K)   Landscape site plan requirements.
      (1)   An approved landscape, screening and buffering plan that meets the
requirements of this section is required prior to approval of a site plan for
activities listed in §
153.230 of this chapter.
      (2)   Planting plan specifications.
         (a)   A planting plan shall be provided to include the following.
         (b)   Minimum scale of one-inch equals 50 feet.
         (c)   Existing and proposed contours with contour interval not to
exceed two feet.
         (d)   The planting plan shall indicate, to scale, the location,
spacing and starting size for all proposed landscape material within the
required buffer or landscaped area.
         (e)   The planting plan shall indicate all existing trees (four-inch
caliper or greater) located in portions of the site that will be built upon or
otherwise altered. Trees shall be labeled "To Be Removed" or "To Be Saved" on
the site plan. The plan will include all existing or proposed utilities and
easements.
         (f)   Typical straight cross section including slope, height and width
of berms and type of ground cover or height and type of construction for all
proposed walls, including footings.
         (g)   Significant construction details to resolve specific site
conditions, e.g., green infrastructure, tree wells to preserve existing trees,
culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns.
         (h)   Planting plans shall show all landscaped areas and plants listed
in a table by common and botanic name and show quantities, size at planting and
anticipated mature height and spread. Anticipated mature height and spread
shall be shown with circles indicating anticipated plant size at maturity.
         (i)   A tree survey identifying the location and species of existing
trees 12 inches or greater in caliper, measured at 12 inches off the ground,
and identifying which trees are to be preserved. The Zoning Administrator may
require an evaluation of the quality of the trees for purposes of determining
which trees should be removed or preserved.
      (3)   Landscaping plans are subject to Planning Commission review and
approval in all districts other than R1 and R2. The Zoning Administrator will
review any required landscape plans in R1 and R2.
   (L)   Treatment of existing plant material. The following regulations shall
apply to existing plants.
      (1)   Destruction or removal of healthy trees. In the event healthy
plants that are intended to meet the requirements of this section are cut down,
damaged or destroyed during construction, they shall be replaced in accordance
with Shade Tree and Park Commission requirements.
(Ord. 865, passed 1-19-2026) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.172 LIGHTING.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this Code to
balance the goals of the City of Charlevoix's Master Plan to maintain its
small-town character with the need to provide for safe lighting practices and
to minimize light pollution for the enjoyment of Charlevoix's citizens and
visitors.
      (1)   The use of outdoor lighting is often necessary for adequate
nighttime safety and utility, but common lighting practices can also interfere
with other legitimate public concerns. Principles among these concerns are:
         (a)   The degradation of the nighttime visual environment by
production of unsightly and dangerous glare;
         (b)   Lighting practices that interfere with the health and safety of
Charlevoix's citizens and visitors;
         (c)   Unnecessary waste of energy and resources in the production of
too much light or wasted light; and
         (d)   Interference in the use or enjoyment of property which is not
intended to be illuminated at night, and the loss of the scenic view of the
night sky due to increased urban sky-glow.
      (2)   The concerns of safety, utility and aesthetic appearance need not
compete. Good modern lighting practices can provide adequate light for safety
and utility without excessive glare or light pollution. In nearly all cases,
careful attention to when, where and how much nighttime lighting is needed will
lead to better lighting practices.
      (3)   The topography and atmospheric conditions in northern Michigan are
uniquely suited for commercial and private astronomical observation in the
area. Unnecessary or excessive uses of outdoor nighttime lighting have an
adverse impact on astronomical observation even at relatively distant
observatories.
      (4)   Accordingly, it is the intent of this Code to require lighting
practices and systems which will minimize light pollution, glare, light
trespass, and conserve energy while maintaining nighttime safety, utility,
security and productivity.
   (B)   Outdoor lighting. This definition includes the following terms and
definitions:
      (1)   CLASS 1 LIGHTING. All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited
to, outdoor sales or eating areas, assembly or repair areas, advertising and
other signs, recreational facilities and other similar applications where color
rendition is important to preserve the effectiveness of the activity.
      (2)   CLASS 2 LIGHTING. All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited
to, illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots and
outdoor security where general illumination for safety and/or security of the
grounds is the primary concern.
      (3)   CLASS 3 LIGHTING. Any outdoor lighting used for decorative effects
including, but not limited to, architectural illumination, flag and monument
lighting, and illumination of trees, bushes, and similar things.
      (4)   DIRECT ILLUMINATION. Illumination resulting from light emitted
directly from a lamp, luminary, or reflector and is not light diffused through
translucent signs or reflected from other surfaces such as the ground or
building faces.
      (5)   DISPLAY LOT OR AREA. Outdoor areas where active nighttime sales
activity occurs and where accurate color perception of merchandise by customers
is required. To qualify as a display lot, one of the following specific uses
must occur: automobile sales, boat sales, tractor sales, building supply sales,
gardening or nursery sales, and assembly lots. Uses not on this list may be
approved as display lot uses by the Zoning Administrator.
      (6)   FOOT-CANDLE. One lumen per square foot. Unit of illuminance. It is
the luminous flux per unit area in the Imperial system. One foot-candle equals
approximately 0.1 (0.093) lux.
      (7)   FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture that is shielded in
such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the
lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane
running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted (see
Figure 153.172)
   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/2b52dbeb34d1ad61af1f3b9af14ea54d5dc82bb1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2202.png]
   Figure 153.172 Example of Fully Shielded Light Fixtures
      (8)   GLARE. The sensation produced by a bright source within the visual
field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are
adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and
visibility; blinding light. The magnitude of glare depends on such factors as
the size, position, and brightness of the source, and on the brightness level
to which the eyes are adapted.
      (9)   INSTALLED. A light fixture attached or fixed in place, whether or
not connected to a power source, of any outdoor light fixture.
      (10)   LIGHT POLLUTION. Any adverse effect of man-made light.
      (11)   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light spill falling over property lines.
      (12)   LUMEN. A unit used to measure the actual amount of visible light
which is produced by a lamp as specified by the manufacture r.
      (13)   LUMINARY. The complete lighting assembly, less the support
assembly.
      (14)   MOTION SENSING SECURITY LIGHTING. Any fixture designed, and
properly adjusted, to illuminate an area around a residence or other building
by means of switching on a lamp when motion is detected inside the area or
perimeter and switching the lamp off when the detected motion ceases.
      (15)   MULTI-CLASS LIGHTING. Any outdoor lighting used for more than one
purpose, for example security and decoration, such that its use falls under the
definition of two or more classes as defined for Class 1, 2 and 3 lighting.
      (16)   NET ACREAGE. The remaining ground area of a parcel after deleting
all portions for proposed and existing public rights-of-way and undeveloped
area.
      (17)   OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE. An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor
lighting or reflective surface, lamp or similar device, permanently installed
or portable, used for illumination, decoration, or advertisement. Such devices
shall include, but are not limited to, lights used for:
         (a)   Buildings and structures;
         (b)   Recreational areas;
         (c)   Parking lot lighting;
         (d)   Landscape lighting;
         (e)   Architectural lighting;
         (f)   Signs (advertising or other);
         (g)   Street lighting;
         (h)   Product display area lighting;
         (i)   Building overhangs and open canopies; or
         (j)   Security lighting.
      (18)   OUTDOOR RECREATION FACILITY. An area designed for active
recreation, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to,
parks, baseball diamonds, soccer and football fields, golf courses, tennis
courts, and swimming pools.
      (19)   PARTIALLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A fixture shielded in such a
manner that no more than 10% of the light emitted directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the fixture is projected at an angle above the horizontal, as
determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. Luminaries
mounted under canopies or other structures such that the surrounding structure
effectively shields the light in the same manner are also considered partially
shielded for the purposes of this Code.
      (20)   SECURITY LIGHTING. Lighting designed to illuminate a property or
grounds for the purpose of visual security.
      (21)   UNSHIELDED FIXTURE. Any fixture that allows light to be emitted
above the horizontal directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture or a
reflector.
      (22)   WATT. The unit used to measure the electrical power consumption
(not the light output) of a lamp.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   New uses, buildings and major additions or modifications. If the
total cumulative increase in floor area is greater than 33% for single-family
residential or greater than 25% for all other uses, then all outdoor lighting
fixtures shall meet the requirements of this Code for the entire site,
including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative
modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting 25% or more of the
permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting
already on a nonconforming site, shall constitute a major addition for purposes
of this section.
      (2)   Minor additions. If the total cumulative increase in the floor area
is 33% or less for single family residential or 25% or less for all other uses,
then full conformance of the existing portion of the building or structure is
not required. However, such projects shall require the submission of a complete
inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor
lighting.
      (3)   New lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the
requirements of this Code with regard to shielding and lamp type; the total
outdoor light output after the modifications are complete shall not exceed that
on the site before the modification, or that permitted by this Code, whichever
is larger.
      (4)   Resumption of use after abandonment. If a property or use with
nonconforming lighting is abandoned as defined in § 153.293, Nonconforming
Buildings or Structures, then all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and
brought into compliance with this Code before the use is resumed.
      (5)   Public roadways. In general, this Code does not apply to city and
state rights-of-way. However, the goal of the city is to have all such street
lights fully shielded.
   (D)   Outdoor lighting standards.
      (1)   Light Emitting Diode Lighting (LED). Due to their high energy
efficiency, long life and spectral characteristics, (LED) lamps are the
preferred illumination source throughout the city. Their use is to be
encouraged, when not required, for outdoor illumination whenever its use would
not be detrimental to the use of the property.
         (a)   Class 1 Lighting. Light emitting diode (LED) lamps are not
required. Businesses who choose to use LED as their primary lamps are eligible
to apply for an additional 10% increase in the lumens per acre allowed for
their site.
         (b)   Class 2 Lighting. Light emitting diode (LED) lamps are required.
Up to 10% of the total lumens per acre allowed may be white light.
      (2)   Light trespass standard.
         (a)   All light fixtures, including security lighting, shall be aimed
and shielded so that the direct illumination shall be confined to the property
boundaries of the source.
         (b)   Particular care is to be taken to ensure that the direct
illumination does not fall onto or across any public or private street or road.
Motion sensing light fixtures shall be fully shielded and properly adjusted,
according to the manufacturer's instructions, to turn off when detected motion
ceases.
      (3)   Lamp and shielding. All light fixtures are required to be fully
shielded and shall be installed in such a manner that the shielding complies
with the definition of fully shielded light fixtures for all uses, including
single-family and multi-family residential uses, except as provided below.
         (a)   All lamp types above 2,000 lumens shall be fully shielded.
         (b)   Partially shielded light fixtures may be permitted subject to
the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Partially shielded light fixtures are limited to a maximum of
5,500 lumens per net acre and shall not exceed 2,000 per lamp (see subsection
(4) of this section).
      (4)   Total outdoor light output standards - nonresidential and multi-
family uses.
         (a)   Total outdoor light output shall not exceed an average of .4356
lumens per net foot for all development except single-family residential uses.
This cap is not intended to be achieved in all cases or as a design goal.
Instead, design goals should be the lowest levels of lumens necessary to meet
the lighting requirements of the site. Partially shielded light fixtures are
limited to an average maximum of 7.92 lumens per net foot and are counted
towards the 100,000 lumens per net acre cap.
         (b)   Seasonal decorations, permitted between November 15 and January
15, are not counted toward these limits. Lighting used for external
illumination of signs is counted.
      (5)   Total outdoor light output standards - single-family residential
uses.
         (a)   Outdoor lighting for single-family residential uses is not
subject to a lumens per net acre cap.
         (b)   Outdoor lighting for single-family residential uses is subject
to the lamp fixture and shielding requirements.
      (6)   Parking lot standards. Parking lots shall be considered Class 2
lighting. Parking lot lighting poles shall be sized in such a manner that the
top of any luminary does not exceed 12 feet above adjacent grade.
      (7)   Lighting time limitations.
         (a)   Class 1 lighting, including but not limited to sales, service,
commercial, assembly, repair, maintenance, and industrial areas, may only
continue in operation until 11:00 p.m. or for as long as the area is in active
use but once off remain off during non-business hours.
         (b)   Class 2 lighting shall have no time restrictions except as
specified by any conditions of approval. Uses that do not require all-night
illumination are encouraged to turn off their outdoor lighting during night
hours whenever possible.
         (c)   Class 3 lighting, except for flagpole lighting and low-wattage
holiday decorations must be extinguished after 11:00 p.m. or when the business
closes, whichever is later.
         (d)   Multi-class lighting, except for security lighting, must conform
to the time limitations of the strictest class.
      (8)   Multi-class lighting standard. Multi-class lighting must conform to
the shielding and timing restrictions, if any, that apply to the most
restrictive included class.
      (9)   Class 3 lighting standards.
         (a)   All Class 3 lighting must be selected, designed, installed, and
aimed so that there is a minimum amount of spill beyond the area intended to be
lighted.
         (b)   Permanent exposed string lighting is not permitted except where
permitted in the Central Business District.
         (c)   All Class 3 lighting must comply with the light trespass
standards as described in division (D)(2) of this section.
         (d)   All Class 3 lighting shall comply with the lamp and shielding
standards as described in division (D)(3) of this section.
         (e)   1.   Subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator,
uplighting or ground-mounted lighting may be allowed to accent unique features
of a building and/or surrounding landscaping (such as outstanding architectural
features, specimen trees with dense year-round foliage or large native shrub
masses). Uplighting or ground-mounted lighting shall be designed and installed
in such a manner as to minimize glare with special consideration in areas where
there is vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
            2.   All lighting which is directed upwards shall be placed in such
a manner that the angle of the lamp shall not be greater than 45 degrees
measured from a horizontal plane to a line projected through the center of the
lamp, and fixtures shall be fully shielded to contain and direct the light onto
the feature to be lit.
      (10)   Searchlights, floodlights, laser source lights, strobe or flashing
lights, illusion lights or any similar high intensity light shall not be
permitted except in emergencies by police and fire personnel at their
direction. Spot lights are permitted and must be directed downward 45 degrees
from any neighboring property.
      (11)   On projects where an engineer or architect is required, the
developer shall verify in writing to the city that all outdoor lighting was
installed in accordance with the approved plans.
   (E)   Special uses.
      (1)   Recreational facilities.
         (a)   Lighting for outdoor athletic fields, courts or tracks shall be
considered Class 1.
         (b)   Lighting allowed in this section shall be subject to Planning
Commission approval. When the proposed lumens per acre exceed the lumens per
net acre limits, the installation shall be designed to achieve no greater than
the minimum illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
         (c)   Every such lighting system design shall be certified by a
Michigan registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of
this Code.
         (d)   Such lighting shall not include any light trespass as determined
by the Zoning Administrator.
         (e)   All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity and
lights turned off by 10:00 p.m.
         (f)   Fully shielded lighting shall be required for fields designed
for amateur, recreational or nonprofessional sports activity. For professional
level sports facilities where fully, shielded fixtures are not utilized,
acceptable luminaries shall include those which:
            1.   Are provided with internal or external glare control louvers,
or both, and installed so as to minimize uplight and off-site light trespass as
determined by the Zoning Administrator; and
            2.   Are installed and maintained with aiming angles that permit no
greater than 2% of the light emitted by each fixture to project above the
horizontal.
      (2)   Outdoor display lots. Light for outdoor display lots shall be
considered Class 1, and shall conform to the lumens per net acre limits except
as follows:
         (a)   All such lighting shall utilize fully shielded luminaries that
are installed in a fashion that maintains the fully shielded characteristics.
         (b)   When the proposed lumens exceed the per acre limits, the
installation shall be designed to achieve no greater than the minimum
illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
         (c)   Such lighting shall not include any light trespass as determined
by a Michigan registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions
of this Code.
         (d)   Lighting time limitations. Outdoor display lot lighting shall
conform to the hours of operation as established under Class 1 lighting
standards. Any lighting on after the time limitations shall be considered Class
2 lighting and shall conform to all restrictions of this Code applicable to
this class.
      (3)   Service station canopies.
         (a)   Class 2. Lighting for service station canopies shall be
considered Class 2 lighting.
         (b)   Shielding. All luminaries shall be flush with the lower surface
of canopies and utilize flat glass or plastic covers.
         (c)   Total under-canopy output. The total light output used for
illuminating service station canopies, defined as the sum of under-canopy
initial bare-lamp outputs in lumens, shall not exceed 40 lumens per square foot
of canopy. All lighting mounted under the canopy, except internally illuminated
signs, shall be included in the total. Fifty percent (50%) of the total lumen
output of all lamps mounted within or under a canopy shall be included in the
lumen per acre cap.
      (4)   Other lighting on parcels with special uses. All site lighting not
directly associated with the special uses as permitted shall conform to all
lighting standards described in this Code.
   (F)   Plan submittal and evidence of compliance.
      (1)   Plan submittal. Whenever a person is required to obtain a permit
for outdoor lighting or signage, a conditional use permit, subdivision approval
or any development plan approved by the city, including all city projects, or
whenever a person requests a rezoning, the applicant shall, as part of the
application process, submit sufficient information to enable the Zoning
Administrator to determine whether proposed lighting complies with this Code.
All applications may be subject to review and action by the Planning and Zoning
Commission at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Applications. All applications shall include the following:
         (a)   A site plan indicating the location of all lighting fixtures,
both proposed and any already existing on the site.
         (b)   A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp,
support and shield, both proposed and existing. The description shall include,
but is not limited to, manufacturer's catalog cuts and illustrations (including
sections where required); lamp types, wattages and initial lumen outputs.
         (c)   Such other information that the Zoning Administrator may
determine is necessary to ensure compliance with this Code.
      (3)   Plan approval. If the Zoning Administrator determines that any
proposed lighting does not comply with this Code, the permit shall not be
issued, nor the plan approved.
      (4)   Lamp or fixture substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture or
the type of light source therein be changed after the permit has been issued, a
change request must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval,
together with adequate information to assure compliance with this Code, which
must be received prior to substitution.
      (5)   Certification of installation. For all projects, commercial and
multi-family, certification that the lighting, as installed, conforms to the
approved plans shall be provided by a certified engineer before final approval
by the city. Until this certification is submitted in writing, the city will
ask that the Certificate of Occupancy be revoked or not be issued for the
project.
   (G)   Approved materials and methods of construction or installation/
operation - approval of alternatives. The provisions of this Code are not
intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation
or operation not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such
alternate has been approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator may approve any such proposed alternate providing that it:
      (1)   Provides at least approximate equivalence to that applicable
specific requirement of this Code.
      (2)   Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this
Code.
   (H)   Exemptions and nonconforming lights.
      (1)   All nonconforming outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed prior
to and operable on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code
are exempt from all requirements of this Code. However, there shall be no
change in use or lamp type, or any replacement (except for same type and same-
output lamp replacement) or structural alteration made, without conforming to
all applicable requirements of this Code.
      (2)   In the event that an outdoor lighting fixture is abandoned or is
damaged to the point of requiring repairs for safe operation, the repaired or
replacement fixture shall comply with the provisions of this Code.
      (3)   Emergency lighting, used by police, firefighting, or medical
personnel, or at their direction, is exempt from all requirements of this Code
for as long as the emergency exists.
      (4)   Swimming pool and decorative. Underwater lighting used for the
illumination of swimming pools is exempt from the lamp type.
      (5)   Ornamental lighting that is incorporated into an architectural
design, such as colored tubes, lighting of fountains, statuary or other outdoor
art and other building elements (other than signs), provided that the light
source is shielded to direct light onto the lighted element.
      (6)   Lighting for temporary events, such as fairs, carnivals and similar
temporary outdoor uses.
(Prior Code, § 5.82) (Ord. 854, passed 12-16-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.173 TRASH RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   Trash receptacle enclosures shall be required for all uses, except
single-family detached and two-family dwellings, where an outdoor trash
receptacle is stored. Trash receptacle enclosure locations and construction
details meeting the requirements of this section shall be shown on site plans.
      (1)   Location. Trash receptacle enclosures shall be located in the rear
yard or non-required side yard, unless otherwise approved by the site plan
reviewing authority. Trash receptacle enclosures for commercial and industrial
sites shall be as far as practical from an adjoining residential district
boundary.
      (2)   Access. Access to the trash receptacles by refuse vehicles shall be
designed to prevent damage to automobiles in designated parking spaces;
provided, the enclosure doors shall not be highly visible from traffic entering
the site from a public road.
      (3)   Base. The trash receptacle base shall be at least nine feet by nine
feet, constructed of six inches of reinforced concrete pavement. The base shall
extend six feet beyond the dumpster pad or gate to support the front axle of a
refuse vehicle. Where grease disposal receptacles are used, curbing shall be
provided around the enclosure base to contain any spillage.
      (4)   Screening. Trash receptacles shall have a lid or cover and be
enclosed by a wall on three sides with a wood gate on the fourth side. The
enclosure shall be constructed of wood, plastic, vinyl, brick or split face
block that matches the building color with a height of six feet or at least one
foot higher than the dumpster, whichever is greater. Other decorative masonry
material may be approved if it matches the material used on the principal
building. Poured concrete with false brick design or plain concrete slag blocks
are not permitted.
   (B)   The site plan reviewing authority may waive the requirement for a
trash receptacle enclosure for businesses, such as banks, that store all waste
material indoors or other uses that provide alternate means of handling waste
disposal.
(Prior Code, § 5.83) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.174 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   Ground-, building- and roof-mounted mechanical equipment and utility
structures including, but not limited to, heating units, cooling units, air
handling units, refrigeration units, blowers, ventilating fans, water and gas
meters, elevator housing, tanks, generators and utility transformers are
subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   Ground- and building-mounted equipment.
      (1)   Mechanical equipment and utilities visible to the public and
located on or around any non-residential building shall be screened by
landscaping or by decorative walls compatible with the material used on the
building.
      (2)   Mechanical equipment may not be located within the required front
yard setback area or within five feet of any side property line, except as may
otherwise be permitted by this chapter. However, in a non-residential district,
ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located under any
circumstances within 20 feet of a residential district boundary.
   (B)   Roof-mounted equipment.
      (1)   All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened by parapet walls or a
pitched roof integrated into the architectural design of the building of
sufficient height to screen the rooftop equipment and provide sound
attenuation. The location, height and screening methods shall be shown on the
site plan.
      (2)   All roof-mounted mechanical units must be set back a minimum of 20
feet from the front of the building and any side of the building facing an
adjacent residential district.
(Prior Code, § 5.84) Penalty, see §
153.999
OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
§ 153.185 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to prescribe regulations for off-
street parking of motor vehicles in residential and non-residential zoning
districts, to ensure that adequate parking and access are provided in a safe
and convenient manner and to afford reasonable protection for adjacent land
uses from light, glare, noise, air pollution and other effects of parking
concentrations.
   (B)   It is the further intent of these regulations to:
      (1)   Implement the goals and policies of the city’s Master Plan;
      (2)   Reduce the impacts associated with parking lots through minimum and
maximum parking requirements; and
      (3)   Accommodate shared parking to limit the extent of paved and
impervious surfaces.
(Prior Code, § 5.90)
§ 153.186 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   For all buildings and uses established after the effective date of
this chapter, off-street parking shall be provided as required by this section,
except in the CBD Central Business District. Parking spaces provided in this
manner shall be unreserved and generally available to the public.
   (B)   If the intensity of the use of any building or site is increased by
adding floor area, increasing seating capacity or employees, or by any other
means, additional off-street parking shall be provided to the extent required
by this subchapter.
   (C)   For off-street parking facilities that exist on the effective date of
this chapter, their capacity shall not be reduced below the requirements of
this subchapter, nor shall the capacity of non-conforming parking facilities be
further reduced or made more non-conforming.
   (D)   Required off-street parking shall not be changed to another use unless
equal facilities are provided elsewhere, in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (E)   Changes in use or new uses of existing buildings or floor area shall
require parking in accordance with this subchapter, except in the CBD Central
Business District the requirement for additional parking due to a legal
commercial use change shall be waived.
(Prior Code, § 5.91) (Ord. 807, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 153.187 PARKING REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Off-street parking shall only be used for temporary vehicle parking
related to the activities on the premise. The storage of merchandise, motor
vehicles for sale, recreational vehicles, limousines, trucks and trailers is
prohibited, except under the conditions of §
153.153 of this chapter. Use of off-street parking to store or park wrecked or
junked cars, or to repair vehicles is prohibited.
   (B)   When calculations for required parking spaces result in a fraction
over one-half, one full parking space shall be required.
   (C)   For a use not specifically included in Table 153.187, off-street
parking requirements shall be in accordance with a use determined by the Zoning
Administrator to have comparable parking characteristics. For any use
determined as not having a comparable parking requirement, it shall be
determined by the Planning Commission based on recent and published parking
research, or by accepting the findings of a parking study provided by the
applicant in accordance with §
153.188(B)(6) of this chapter.
   (D)   For benches, pews or similar seating, each 24 inches shall be counted
as one seat unless plans filed with the city specify a maximum seating
capacity, which shall then be used to determine parking requirements.
   (E)   Unless otherwise indicated, floor area shall refer to usable floor
area (UFA).
   (F)   Where parking requirements are established by maximum building seating
or occupancy, capacity shall be based on the building and/or fire code,
whichever is more restrictive.
   (G)   Minimum parking space requirements shall not be exceeded unless
approved by the Planning Commission based on documented evidence that
additional spaces are required to accommodate parking demand on a typical day.
The Planning Commission may require any additional spaces to be constructed
using alternate paving materials, such as pervious pavers or concrete. A
required or requested use of alternative paving materials shall include a
maintenance plan and agreement from the property owner deemed satisfactory to
the Planning Commission.
   (H)   The minimum required number of off-street parking spaces shall be
determined based on the requirements listed in Table 153.187.
Table 153.187: Parking and Access Requirements by Use
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Table 153.187: Parking and Access Requirements by Use
Use                                                                              Number of Parking Spaces
RESIDENTIAL USES
Bed and breakfast                                                                See §
                                                                                 153.116(D)(7)
Boarding or rooming house                                                        1 space per 2 beds, plus 1 additional space for owner or employee use
Dwellings above first floor businesses                                           1 space per dwelling unit
Multiple-family residential dwellings                                            1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
                                                                                 0.5 space per unit, and 1 space per employee. Should units revert to general
Senior apartments and senior independent living                                  occupancy, the requirements for multiple-family residential dwellings shall
                                                                                 apply
Single-family and two-family dwellings                                           2 spaces per dwelling unit
INSTITUTIONAL USES
Auditoriums, assembly halls, meeting rooms, theaters and similar places of       1 space per 4 seats, based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of
assembly                                                                         assembly, as established by the city’s Fire and Building Codes
Day care facility, nursery school, child care center, family day care home,      1 per 700 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per employee. Sufficient area shall be
group day care home                                                              designated for drop-off of children or adults in a safe manner that will not
                                                                                 result in traffic disruptions
Elementary and middle schools                                                    1 per teacher, employee and administrator
Convalescent or nursing home                                                     1 per 6 beds or occupants and 1 space per staff member or employee on the
                                                                                 largest shift
Hospitals and similar facilities for human care                                  1 per 5 beds, plus 1 per employee on the largest shift
Churches and customary related uses                                              1 for every 5 seats in the main place of assembly
High schools; colleges and universities; business, trade, technical, vocational  1 per teacher, employee and administrator, and 1 for every 10 students
or industrial schools; performing and fine arts schools
RETAIL USES
Retail stores, except as otherwise specified                                     1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 500 sq. ft. of UFA
Multi-tenant shopping centers
   With 60,000 sq. ft. or less of retail                                      1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 350 sq. ft. of retail
                                                                                 UFA
   With over 60,000 sq. ft. of retail                                         1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 300 sq. ft. of retail
                                                                                 UFA
                                                                                 If more than 20% of the shopping center’s floor area is occupied by
   With restaurants                                                           restaurants or entertainment uses, parking requirements for these uses shall
                                                                                 be calculated separately. Where the amount of restaurant space is unknown,
                                                                                 it shall be calculated at 20%
Agricultural sales, greenhouses and nurseries or roadside stands                 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 350 sq. ft. of permanent or
                                                                                 temporary area devoted primarily to sales
Animal grooming, training, day care and boarding                                 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 1,000 sq. ft. of UFA
Furniture and appliance, household equipment, show-room of a plumber, decorator, 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 1,000 sq. ft. of net
electrician, hardware, wholesale and repair shop or other similar uses           UFA, plus 1 additional space per employee
Grocery store/supermarket                                                        1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 500 sq. ft. of UFA
Home improvement centers                                                         1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 1,000 sq. ft. of UFA
Open air businesses, except as otherwise specified                               1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 500 sq. ft. of lot
                                                                                 area for retail sales, uses and services
Vehicle dealerships, including automobiles, RVs, motorcycles, snowmobiles, ATVs  1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
and boats                                                                        space of sales room
SERVICE USES
                                                                                 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 500 sq. ft. of UFA for the
Banks and other financial institutions                                           public. Drive-up windows/drive-up ATMs shall be provided with 2 stacking
                                                                                 spaces per window or drive-up ATM
Beauty parlor or barber shop                                                     1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 parking space per chair/station
Dry cleaners                                                                     1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 500 sq. ft. of UFA
Laundromats                                                                      1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 4 combinations of washer-
                                                                                 dryer machines, plus 1 space per employee
Mortuary, funeral home                                                           1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 3 patron seats at largest
                                                                                 capacity
                                                                                 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 0.5 space per unit. In addition,
Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishment                           spaces required for ancillary uses such as lounges, restaurants or places of
                                                                                 assembly shall be provided and determined on the basis of the individual
                                                                                 requirements for that use
                                                                                 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus additional parking required for
Motor vehicle service stations (gas stations and truck stops)                    other uses within an automobile service station, such as the retail floor
                                                                                 area, restaurants or vehicle repair stalls
Vehicle repair establishment, major or minor                                     1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per service stall
Vehicle wash
   Self-service (coin operated)                                               4 spaces, plus 2 stacking spaces for every washing stall
   Full-service                                                               1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 4 spaces and 3 stacking spaces for
                                                                                 every washing stall or line
Restaurants, bars and clubs
   Standard sit-down restaurants with liquor license                          1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of UFA
   Carry-out restaurant (with limited or no seating for eating on premises)   1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 4 per service or counter station
   Open front restaurant/ice cream stand                                      1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 5 spaces and 1 per 6 seats
   Drive-through restaurant                                                   1 for every 2 employees, plus 1 for every 6 seats intended for patrons
                                                                                 within the building, plus 4 stacking spaces per food pickup window
   Bars, lounges, taverns, nightclubs (majority of sales consist of alcoholic 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. of UFA
beverages)
                                                                                 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 6 persons allowed
   Private clubs, lodge halls or banquet halls                                within the maximum occupancy load as established by the city’s Fire and
                                                                                 Building Codes
RECREATION
Athletic clubs, exercise establishments, health studios, sauna baths, martial    1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 4 persons allowed within the
art schools and other similar uses                                               maximum occupancy load as established by city’s Fire and Building Codes
                                                                                 1 per 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by
Billiard parlors                                                                 city’s Building and Fire Codes, or 1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area,
                                                                                 whichever is greater
Bowling alleys                                                                   4 per bowling lane plus additional for accessory uses such as bars
Indoor recreation establishments including gymnasiums, tennis courts and         1 space for every 6 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
handball, roller or ice-skating rinks, exhibition halls, dance halls and banquet established by the city’s Fire and Building Codes
halls
Miniature or “par-3" courses                                                   1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 2 holes
Commercial marinas                                                               0.25 space for every boat slip based on the permitted slips by the state’s
                                                                                 Department of Natural Resources
OFFICES
Business offices, post offices or professional offices of lawyers, architects or 1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 300 sq. ft. of UFA,
similar professionals                                                            but no less than 5 parking spaces
Medical offices of doctors, dentists, veterinarians or similar professions       1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 300 sq. ft. of UFA
INDUSTRIAL USES
Industrial establishments, including manufacturing, research and testing
laboratories, creameries, bottling works, printing, plumbing or electrical       1 for every 2 employees or 700 sq. ft. of UFA, whichever is greater
workshops
Warehouses and storage buildings                                                 1 per employee on the largest shift
Mini warehouses/self-storage                                                     Unobstructed parking area equal to 1 for every 10 door openings, plus
                                                                                 parking for other uses on site such as truck rental
Truck terminal                                                                   1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 2 truck spaces of 10 x 70 ft. per
                                                                                 truck berth or docking space
Air freight forwarders/distribution facilities                                   1 per employee on the largest shift
 
(Prior Code, § 5.92) (Ord. 802, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 807, passed 9-3-2019;
Ord. 839, passed 6-19-2023)
§ 153.188 PARKING ALTERNATIVES.
   (A)    Shared/common parking. Shared parking, or an arrangement in which two
or more nonresidential uses with different peak parking demands (hours of
operation) uses the same off-street parking spaces to meet their off-street
parking requirements, may be allowed.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator may approve an adjustment to the parking
requirements allowing shared parking arrangements for nonresidential uses with
different hours of operation.
      (2)   Applicant must provide that there is no substantial conflict in the
principle operating hours of the uses for which the shared parking is proposed.
      (3)   Shared parking must be within 50 feet walking distance, measured
from the entrance of the use to the nearest parking space in the shared lot.
      (4)   An agreement providing for the shared use of the parking, executed
by the parties involved, must be filed with the Zoning Administrator, in a form
approved by the Zoning Administrator upon consultation with the city attorney.
   (B)   Modification of parking requirements. The Planning Commission may
reduce the parking space requirements of this section for any use, based upon
one or more of the following.
      (1)   Shared parking by multiple uses is expected due to the likelihood
of numerous multipurpose visits, or if uses have peak parking demands during
different times of the day or days of the week; subject to the following.
         (a)   Sidewalks shall be maintained or established between the uses.
         (b)   Pedestrian connections, both within and to the site, shall
provide safe and convenient access to building entrances.
         (c)   For separate properties, shared parking lots shall be within 300
feet to one another with vehicular and pedestrian access.
         (d)   Unless the multiple uses are all under single ownership and
within a unified business or shopping center, office park or industrial park,
shared parking agreements shall be filed with the City Clerk after approval by
the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Convenient municipal off-street parking facilities or on-street
spaces are located no further than 600 feet from the subject properties.
      (3)   An expectation of walk-in trade is reasonable due to the proximity
of residential neighborhoods, downtown or employment areas that are
interconnected with sidewalks.
      (4)   Other forms of travel such as bicycle or transit are available and
are reasonable alternatives.
      (5)   The Planning Commission may require a parking study to document
that the above divisions (B)(1)(a) through (B)(1)(d) have been addressed.
      (6)   Where the applicant has provided a parking study, it shall
demonstrate that a standard other than that required by this subchapter would
be more appropriate based on the number of employees, expected level of
customer traffic, or actual counts at a similar establishment. Parking studies
shall be prepared by a qualified expert, such as a professional transportation
engineer or professional transportation planner, based upon standards, manuals
and research published by professional organizations, such as the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, the Transportation Research Board or Urban Land
Institute. The Planning Commission may require parking studies of comparable
uses in the general area as part of the study.
   (C)   Deferred parking.
      (1)   Where a reduction in parking spaces is not warranted, but an
applicant can demonstrate the parking requirements for a proposed use may be
excessive given the particular circumstances of the use and property, the
Planning Commission may defer some of the required parking. The site plan shall
designate an area to accommodate its future construction, if and when it is
needed, meeting the design standards and dimensional requirements of this
subchapter. In the interim, the deferred parking area shall be landscaped and
maintained and shall not occupy required setbacks, buffers or landscaped areas
or be used for any other purpose.
      (2)   Construction of the deferred parking spaces may be initiated by the
owner or required by the city based on conditions affecting on-site parking
needs or observations, and shall require administrative approval of an amended
site plan.
   (D)   Downtown parking. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces
required by this section shall be waived for all buildings fronting Bridge
Street between the Pine River Channel and Antrim Street.
   (E)   Proposed developments. The Planning Commission may require parking in
the side or rear of a building where possible, if a proposed development fronts
a public street. In these instances the Planning Commission may waive or reduce
landscaping or screening requirements in §
153.171 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.93) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 807, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 153.189 OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY DESIGN.
   (A)   Off-street parking location and setbacks.
      (1)   Side and rear yard limitation. Off-street parking lots shall meet
the side setback requirements as specified in the zoning district and shall not
be closer than 15 feet from the rear property line.
      (2)   Front yard limitation. In the CBD, GC, PO and CM Districts and
single multi-family buildings in the R1 or R2 Districts, the required front
yard setback shall not be used for off-street parking, loading, or unloading
and shall remain open, unoccupied and unobstructed, except for landscaping or
vehicle access drives.
      (3)   Proximity. Required off-street parking facilities for all uses,
other than residential dwellings, shall be located on the same lot as the use,
or within 300 feet of the building(s) or use they are intended to serve.
Distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the building to the
nearest point of the off-street parking lot.
         (a)   Required off-street parking facilities for residential dwellings
shall be located on the same property as the premises they are intended to
serve and shall consist of a driveway, a parking apron and/or a garage. Parking
for single multifamily structures shall be located at the rear or on the side
of the building.
         (b)   In the CBD District, parking facilities shall be located within
600 feet of the building or use to be served. Distance shall be measured from
the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street
parking lot.
         (c)   Parking access shall be from the alley or front side where
available, otherwise access may be from the front lot line.
   (B)   Parking construction and development. The construction of a parking
lot shall require an approved site plan, in accordance with §§
153.230 through
153.243  of this chapter. Construction shall be completed and approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Pavement. Unless alternative materials are specifically permitted as
provided in this division (C), all parking lots and vehicle and equipment
storage areas shall be hard-surfaced using asphalt, concrete or concrete or
brick pavers and shall be appropriately graded and drained. The Planning
Commission may approve permeable paving for all or part of a parking lot. For
storage areas, a substitute for hard surface paving may be allowed if the
Planning Commission finds adjoining properties will not be adversely affected.
   (D)   Curbs. A parking lot shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb,
except for driveway openings, sidewalk dub-downs and approved drainage systems,
to protect landscaped or pedestrian areas, buildings or adjacent property from
potential vehicle encroachment. The Planning Commission may approve an
alternative to a fully curbed parking facility as long as the intent of this
division (D) is achieved. To avoid conflicts with swinging car doors and
overhanging bumpers, in such circumstances all plants shall be set back at
least two feet from the edge of pavement.
   (E)   Dimensions. 
Table 153.189 specifies applicable parking space and aisle dimension
requirements.
      (1)   Angled parking between the specified ranges shall be to the nearest
degree.
      (2)   The length of a parking stall may be reduced by up to two feet if
the parked vehicle can overhang an unobstructed landscaped area or sidewalk by
not less than two feet. In such instances a sidewalk shall be at least seven
feet wide.
      (3)   At least seven feet shall be maintained between a parking lot and
building.
      (4)   All parking lots shall be striped and maintained showing individual
parking bays in accordance with the following dimensions:
 
Table 153.189: Dimensional Requirements (Feet)
                Parking Space                                   Total Bay (2
Parking Pattern               Maneuvering Lane Total 1 Row of   Rows of Parking
(Degree)        Width Length  Width            Parking and      and Maneuvering
                                               Maneuvering Lane Lane)

0 degree        8     23      12               20               28
(parallel)
30 to 53        9     20      12               32               52
54 to 74        9     20      15               36.5             58
75 to 90        9     18      24               42               60
 
   (F)   Stacking spaces. Waiting/stacking spaces for a drive-through use (such
as a bank, restaurant, car wash, pharmacy, dry cleaner or oil change
establishment) shall be at least 24 feet long and ten feet wide and shall not
block off-street parking spaces. Where the waiting/stacking lane is a single
lane accommodating five or more vehicles, an escape lane shall be provided for
vehicles wishing to by-pass the drive-up window.
   (G)   Ingress and egress. Clearly defined and limited driveways shall
provide adequate vehicular access to a parking lot. Interior access and
circulation aisles for all parking spaces shall be provided. A public street
shall not be used as a maneuvering space for a vehicle to get into or out of an
off-street parking space. Access drives serving a parking lot in a non-
residential zoning district shall not cross a residential district, except when
access is provided by means of an alley that forms a boundary between a
residential and non-residential district.
   (H)   Landscaping. Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements of §
153.171(H) of this chapter.
   (I)   Fire lanes. All fire lanes shall be designated on a site and posted
with signs prior to occupancy.
   (J)   Barrier free parking. Signed and marked barrier free parking spaces
shall be provided at convenient locations in a parking lot in accordance with
the state barrier free parking requirements. Barrier free spaces shall be
located as close as possible to building entrances.
   (K)   Maintenance. All parking lots and structures shall be maintained free
of trash and debris and all surfaces, curbs, light fixtures and signs shall be
maintained in good condition.
(Prior Code, § 5.94) (Ord. 807, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 848, passed 4-1-2024)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.190 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Uses requiring loading area. To avoid interference with the use of
public streets, alleys and parking spaces, adequate space for standing, loading
and unloading shall be provided and maintained on the same lot as the premises.
   (B)   Loading area requirements. A loading and unloading space shall be
paved, and unless otherwise provided, shall be ten feet by 40 feet, with a 15-
foot height clearance, according to Table 153.190:
 
Table 153.190: Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Building Net GFA          Minimum Truck Loading Spaces
0 - 1,400 sq. ft.         None
1,401 - 20,000 sq. ft.    1 space
20,001 - 100,000 sq. ft.  1 space, plus 1 space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in
                          excess of 20,000 sq. ft.
100,001 - 500,000 sq. ft. 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in
                          excess of 100,000 sq. ft.
 
   (C)   Orientation of overhead doors. Overhead doors for a truck loading area
shall not face a public right-of-way and shall be screened so they are not
visible from a public street or an adjacent residential district.
(Prior Code, § 5.95) Penalty, see §
153.999
SIGNS
§ 153.205 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate signs designed to be visible to
the public in a manner which does not restrict the content thereof while:
   (A)   Recognizing the mass communications needs of both businesses and other
parties;
   (B)   Protecting property values and neighborhood character;
   (C)   Creating a more attractive business climate;
   (D)   Promoting pedestrian and traffic safety by reducing sign distractions,
obstructions and other hazards;
   (E)   Promoting pleasing community environmental aesthetics; and
   (F)   Discouraging visual competition among businesses.
(Prior Code, § 5.100) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.206 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited signs. The following signs shall not be allowed in any
zoning district:
      (1)   Signs that are not consistent with the standards of this chapter;
      (2)   Signs that are not clean (i.e., are covered with materials that
obscure the message, in whole or in part); signs that are not in good repair
(i.e., having broken foundation, base or support structures, lighting fixtures
and the like) and/or having a faded appearance;
      (3)   Signs that are structurally unsafe and/or dangerous (i.e., in a
state of disrepair or being designed and/or constructed so as to pose a likely
threat of total or partial collapse) (see division (E) below);
      (4)   Signs that are not securely affixed to a substantial structure that
will hold the sign in a fixed position under normal weather conditions;
      (5)   Signs that are attached to any natural growth, such as trees,
shrubs or other natural foliage;
      (6)   Signs other than official utility company signs affixed to power
utility poles or other utility structures or fixtures;
      (7)   Signs located so as to interfere with the view necessary for
motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from
public streets or private roads (see §
153.142 of this chapter);
      (8)   Signs in public rights-of-way other than those allowed by the
state’s TODS program;
      (9)   External neon signs other than in the GC, CBD or CH Districts;
      (10)   All types of pennants, streamers and airborne devices attached to
the ground or buildings;
      (11)   Billboards;
      (12)   Internally lighted signs;
      (13)   Off-premises signs;
      (14)   Roof signs; and
      (15)   Signs containing an electronic sign face other than allowed by §
153.209(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs authorized without a sign permit. The following signs are
authorized in any district without a sign permit and are not included towards
the maximum number of signs allowed on a parcel, but shall conform to the
applicable requirements of this chapter and the applicable building codes:
      (1)   Signs posted on private property less than or equal to two square
foot in sign face area;
      (2)   Signs erected by, on behalf of a governmental body for purposes of
protecting the public health, safety and welfare;
      (3)   Official signs erected by public utilities;
      (4)   Flags or insignia;
      (5)   Any sign located wholly within a building and not visible from
outside the building;
      (6)   Window signs located on the interior of a building. Window signs
located on the exterior of a building are considered wall signs and are subject
to all applicable regulations; and
      (7)   Public signs or signs sanctioned by a public body on public land
are not subject to this chapter.
   (C)   Permit required for signs.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign may be
constructed, erected, moved, enlarged, illuminated or otherwise altered unless
a sign permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Repainting or changing the message of a sign is not in and of itself
considered an alteration.
      (2)   Application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on appropriate forms supplied by her or his office. Said
application shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         (b)   Written permission of property owner on whose property the sign
will be located (if the applicant is not the property owner);
         (c)   Type of sign as defined by this chapter;
         (d)   Scaled drawing showing sign size, height, type of support (if
applicable), zoning district in which the sign will be located, location of
sign on property including front and side yard setback distances and any other
information required herein;
         (e)   Street address of the property upon which the sign will be
located; and
         (f)   The name of the sign contractor, who shall erect the sign and/or
sign structure.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued for the erection of any sign or signs
until such sign(s) have been reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator
and without first having paid a permit fee as established by the City Council.
      (4)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator may
appeal that decision to the zoning board of appeals.
   (D)   Signs in public rights-of-way. All signs in the U.S. 31 and M 66
Highway rights-of-way are jointly regulated by the city and the state’s
Department of Transportation (MDOT) at locations approved by and installed in
accord with the state’s TODS program.
   (E)   Unsafe signs.
      (1)   No person, corporation, business organization or other legal entity
shall own or maintain any sign or advertising device that is structurally
unsafe. For purposes of this section, the term STRUCTURALLY UNSAFE shall mean
being in a state of disrepair or being designed and/or constructed so as to
pose a likely threat of a total or partial collapse.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator and/or other officials designated by the
Zoning Administrator shall have the right to inspect signs and advertising
devices to determine whether they are structurally unsafe. The Zoning
Administrator and/or other officials designated by the Zoning Administrator may
exercise this right of inspection by consent of the owner of the sign or
advertising device and the owner of the property on which the sign or
advertising device is located or by administrative search warrant.
      (3)   If the Zoning Administrator finds that a sign or advertising device
is structurally unsafe, he or she shall serve on the owner of the sign or
advertising device and the owner of the property on which the sign or
advertising device is located a written notice, which specifies all of the
following:
         (a)   The location of the sign or advertising device that is
structurally unsafe;
         (b)   The nature of the unsafe condition;
         (c)   The date, no less than 20 days after the written notice was
served, before which the owner of the sign or advertising device or the owner
of the property on which the sign or advertising device is located shall remedy
the unsafe condition;
         (d)   A statement that if the owner of the sign or advertising device
or the owner of the property on which the sign or advertising device is located
fails to remedy the unsafe condition within the time specified in the written
notice, the city may enter onto the property to remedy the unsafe condition and
charge the costs of such action, including reasonable attorney fees, to the
owner of the sign or advertising device and/or the owner of the property on
which the sign or advertising device is located;
         (e)   A statement that the owner of the sign or advertising device and
the owner of the property on which the sign or advertising device is located
has the right before the expiration of the deadline contained in the written
notice to request a hearing before the City Council regarding whether the sign
or advertising device is structurally unsafe;
         (f)   The service required by this subsection shall be personal
service or service by certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt
requested. For purposes of this section, the phrase REMEDY THE UNSAFE CONDITION
shall mean repairing the sign or advertising device so that it does not pose a
serious threat of a total or partial collapse or removing the sign or
advertising device from the property;
         (g)   If the owner of the sign or advertising device or the owner of
the property on which the sign or advertising device is located requests a
hearing before the City Council as provided in this section, the city shall
take no action to remedy the unsafe condition until, after notice and hearing,
the City Council finds that the sign or advertising device is structurally
unsafe. A notice of the time, date and place of the hearing before the City
Council shall be served on the owner of the sign or advertising device and on
the owner of the property on which the sign or advertising device is located no
less than 14 days before the scheduled hearing. The service of this notice may
be made by first class mail. The owner of the sign or advertising device or the
owner of the property on which the sign or advertising device is located may
appeal an adverse decision by City Council to the circuit court as provided by
law; and
         (h)   In exercising its right under this section to remedy the unsafe
condition, either with or without a hearing before the City Council, the city
shall remove the sign or advertising device from the property if the unsafe
sign is in imminent danger of collapse causing injury or damage to persons or
property. The costs of remedying and/or removing the unsafe condition shall be
collected by the city from the owner of the sign or advertising device or the
owner of the property on which the sign or advertising device is located.
   (F)   Non-conforming signs.
      (1)   Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, non-
conforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, repaired and maintained as is necessary to keep in a
sound condition.
      (2)   No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the
extent of non-conformity of a non-conforming sign. In addition, no person may
add illumination.
      (3)   A non-conforming sign may not be moved or replaced, except to bring
the sign into greater conformity with this chapter.
      (4)   If a non-conforming sign is destroyed to the extent it is
impractical to be restored using a majority of its existing major components,
it may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed or replaced except in
conformity with all the provisions of this chapter, and the remnants of the
former sign structure shall be cleared from the land.
      (5)   The message of a non-conforming sign may be changed so long as this
does not create any new non-conformity.
(Prior Code, § 5.101) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.207 SIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (A)   Number and placement requirements.
      (1)   A number of small signs with organized elements or cohesive design
may be construed as a single sign. Where graphic material is displayed in a
random manner without an organized relationship of elements, each element may
be considered a single sign.
      (2)   No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof
surface, except that for purposes of this chapter, roof surfaces constructed at
an angle of 75 degrees or more from horizontal shall be regarded as wall space.
   (B)   Computation of sign face area.
      (1)   The sign face area of a sign shall be computed by including the
entire area within a single, continuous perimeter of a circle, triangle,
rectangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework or bracing that is clearly
incidental to the display itself.
      (2)   If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all of the
area, including that between sections or modules, shall be included in the
computation of the sign face area.
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of §
153.208(B) of this chapter, the sign face area of two-sided, multi-sided or
three-dimensional signs shall be computed by including the total of all sides
designed to attract attention or communicate information.
   (C)   Sign height. The height of a sign shall be measured vertically from
the ground level to the top of the sign, unless otherwise specified.
   (D)   Illumination and lighting.
      (1)   Externally lit signs shall be illuminated only with steady,
stationary, shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign without
causing glare, no unshielded lights, or lights directed upward or horizontally
at sign faces, flashing lights, scrolling or moving electronic lights, or other
distractive devices may be used in conjunction with any sign or business.
      (2)   Light bulbs or lighting tubes used for illuminating a sign shall
not be visible from adjacent public rights-of-way or residential properties.
Illumination by bare bulbs or flames is prohibited.
      (3)   External illumination for signs shall conform to all provisions of
outdoor lighting. Such lighting shall be treated as Class 1 lighting and shall
conform to the lamp and shielding restrictions and lumen caps.
      (4)   The fixtures used to illuminate signs shall not be directed toward
nearby residential properties.
      (5)   Internally illuminated signs are permitted in certain circumstances
as follows:
         (a)   Individual back-lit letters which are silhouetted against a
softly illuminated wall.
         (b)   Individual letters with translucent faces, containing soft
lighting elements inside each letter.
         (c)   Metal-faced box signs with cut-out letters and soft-glow
fluorescent tubes.
      (6)   Fluorescent lights shall be allowed for indirect illumination when
placed in such a manner that the light tubes are not exposed to view from the
public right-of-way or sidewalk.
      (7)   A sign may be illuminated during the hours of operation of the
facility being identified or advertised or until 11:00 p.m., whichever is
later.
      (8)   Such signs shall provide an automatic timer to comply with the
intent of this section.
      (9)   Illumination of off-premises signs is prohibited, except in the
case of off-premises kiosks which are subject to the provisions of this Code.
      (10)   (a)   Ground-mounted sign lighting is not permitted for
freestanding signs on poles, where open space is visible from the bottom of the
sign to the ground. The Zoning Administrator may approve ground mounted
lighting for freestanding signs which are constructed in such a way that no
open space is visible from the bottom of sign to the ground (such as solid
base, landscaping).
         (b)   All ground-mounted lights shall be placed in such a manner that
the angle of the lamp shall not be greater than 45 degrees measured from a
horizontal plane to a line projected through the center of the lamp, and
fixtures shall be fully shielded to contain and direct the light onto the sign
only. All upward-directed sign lighting is prohibited.
      (11)   Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs
that are not attached to a building.
   (E)   Sign materials.
      (1)   Signs shall be constructed of durable materials.
      (2)   Natural or natural-like materials are encouraged. Earth tone colors
are to be encouraged.
      (3)   It is recommended that the sign be constructed of materials
compatible with the existing structure.
(Prior Code, § 5.102) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 801, passed 4-15-2019;
Ord. 854, passed 12-16-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.208 SIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGNS.
   (A)   Ground signs.
      (1)   No part of a ground sign may exceed a height of 16 feet, measured
from ground level.
      (2)   No part of a ground sign may be closer than four feet to the right-
of-way line.
   (B)   Two-sided signs. A two-sided or multi-sided sign shall be regarded as
one sign so long as the interior angle of a “V” type sign does not exceed 30
degrees and the two side are at no point separated by a distance that exceeds
five feet; and the distance between the backs of each face of a double-faced
(back-to-back) sign does not exceed three feet.
   (C)   Wall signs. No wall sign attached to a building may project more than
12 inches from the building wall. In those instances where a wall sign is
affixed to the wall of the structure which lies on a right-of-way line, the
bottom of the wall sign may be no closer than eight feet from the ground. In
all other instances, see §
153.219 of this chapter for height requirements.
   (D)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   Projecting signs located above a public right-of-way shall be
located at least nine feet from ground level, measured vertically from ground
level to the bottom of the sign.
      (2)   Projecting signs located above an alley shall be located at least
16 feet above ground level, measured vertically from ground level to the bottom
of the sign.
      (3)   No part of a projecting sign may extend more than eight feet over
private property or a public right-of-way.
   (E)   Awning, canopy, marquee signs. Except for awning, canopy and marquee
signs hanging entirely over private property, no part of an awning sign may be
closer than eight feet from ground level.
   (F)   Temporary banner signs. Temporary banners in conjunction with a one-
time event are only allowed in two specific locations within the city, adjacent
to the city golf course and near the intersection of M 66 and U.S. 31.
Temporary banners require a sign permit. Temporary banners may be erected not
more than two weeks before the event and must be removed within two days after
the event.
   (G)   Flags. Flags shall be a maximum of 15 square feet and shall be located
so as to not interfere with pedestrian activity.
   (H)   Sandwich board signs.
      (1)   Shall be not more than 48 inches in height and 30 inches in width,
and cannot exceed six square feet in sign face area;
      (2)   Shall be located on private property;
      (3)   Shall not block pedestrian access;
      (4)   Shall be constructed of durable materials and be clearly portable
in terms of size, weight and placement;
      (5)   Shall only be displayed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00
a.m.;
      (6)   Shall use chalkboards or whiteboards for their signage area; and
      (7)   Shall not utilize changeable lettering for their messaging
(Prior Code, § 5.103) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.209 SIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USE; SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Automobile gasoline service stations.
         (a)   In addition to the signs allowed by §
153.219 of this chapter, automobile gasoline service stations, including any
business selling gasoline, may display one other sign with a sign face area not
to exceed 18 square feet. For purposes of this division (A)(1), the sign may be
an electronic sign face. Signs on pump canopies may be considered secondary to
a station’s primary sign should the primary sign, for example be a ground sign.
See §
153.210 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
         (b)   On-premises signs displayed over individual entrances or service
bays shall be permitted. Not more than one such sign per bay shall be permitted
and each sign shall not exceed four square feet in total sign face area. See §
153.210 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
      (2)   Major home occupations. Major home occupations may have one wall
sign no larger than four square feet. See §
153.210 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
      (3)   Multi-tenant business center.
         (a)   Notwithstanding the requirements of §
153.210 of this chapter, in the case of a shopping center or other integrated
group of stores or commercial buildings, one ground sign may be erected per
street frontage. The maximum area for such a sign face shall be equal to 20
square feet one of sign face area for each business, or 60 square feet,
whichever is less.
         (b)   See §
153.210 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
(Prior Code, § 5.104)
   (B)   Schedule of regulations for specific land use.
 
Table 153.209: Schedule of Regulations for Specific Land Use
Land Use    Sign Type  Sign Face Height    Number       Location     Permit
            Allowed    Area                                          Required?
Major home  Wall       Max 4 sf  Max 8 ft  Max 1 per    First floor  Yes
occupations                                parcel       of building
                       See                              Min setback
Business    Ground     division  Max 16 ft See division 4 ft from    Yes
center                 (A)(3)              (A)(3) above ROW
                       above
Automobile                                 See division Min setback
gasoline    Electronic Max 18 sf Max 16 ft (A)(1) above 4 ft from    Yes
service                                                 ROW
Service bay Max 4 sf   Min 8 ft  Max 12 ft Max 1 per    See division Yes
                                           service bay  (A)(1) above
 
(Prior Code, § 5.105)
(Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.210 R1, R2, R4, PC AND SR ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following signs are authorized in the R1 (Residential Low Density), R2
(Residential Medium Density), R4 (Residential Planned High Density), PC
(Residential Private Clubs), and SR (Scenic Reserve) Zoning Districts. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206 of this chapter; and
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to eight square feet in sign
face area. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the activity
referenced has concluded.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than eight square feet in sign face area
but not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded; and
      (2)   On-premises ground sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.106) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.211 PUD ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the PUD (Planned Unit Development)
Zoning District. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter; and
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the activity
referenced has concluded.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than 16 square feet in sign face area but
not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises ground sign;
      (3)   On-premises projecting sign; and
      (4)   On-premises wall sign.
   (C)   Mixed-use planned unit development. Except for the signs permitted
under this section, no other signs are permitted in residential areas of a PUD
Zoning District, but are allowed in the commercial areas of a PUD Zone
District. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
(Prior Code, § 5.107) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.212 PF ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the PF (Public Facilities) Zoning
District. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter; and
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the activity
referenced has concluded.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than sixteen (16) square feet in sign face
area but not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such
signs shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has
concluded;
      (2)   On-premises ground sign; and
      (3)   On-premises wall sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.108) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.213 GC ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the GC (General Commercial) Zoning
District. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter;
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the activity
referenced has concluded; and
      (3)   External neon signs no larger than two square feet in sign face
area.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than 16 square feet in sign face area, but
not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises awning, canopy or marquee sign;
      (3)   On-premises ground sign;
      (4)   On-premises projecting sign; and
      (5)   On-premises wall sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.109) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.214 CM ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the CM (Commercial Mixed Use) Zoning
District. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter;
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area and less than eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after the activity referenced has concluded; and
      (3)   Portable signs. See §
153.208(H) of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   On-premises temporary ground signs greater than 16 square feet in
sign face area but not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in
height. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced
has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises awning, canopy or marquee sign;
      (3)   On-premises ground sign; and
      (4)   On-premises projecting sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.110) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.215 CBD ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the CBD Zoning Districts. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter;
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area and less than eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after the activity referenced has concluded;
      (3)   External neon signs no larger than two square feet in sign face
area;
      (4)   One commercial flag per business. See §
153.208(G) of this chapter; and
      (5)   Portable signs. See §
153.208(H) of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than 16 square feet in sign face area but
not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises awning, canopy, marquee sign;
      (3)   On-premises ground sign;
      (4)   On-premises projecting sign; and
      (5)   On-premises wall sign.
   (C)   Commercial properties on Bridge Park Drive located beneath Bridge
Park.
      (1)   Each business may attach a sign less than or equal to two square
feet in the sign face area on the Bridge Park railing above the location of
their business. A sign permit must be obtained, which must also be approved by
the City Manager. The method of sign attachment must be included in the sign
permit application. A sign permit approved under this division is valid only
for the permit applicant and cannot be transferred to another entity.
      (2)   One multi-tenant business center sign meeting §
153.209(A)(3)(a) may be placed at the northwest corner of the parcel, directly
in front of the mechanical units of the building. The sign will be no more than
seven feet wide and shall not extend beyond seven feet above the ground. The
sign shall follow the sign permit requirements, and shall, in the opinion and
with the approval of the City Manager, complement the wayfinding signage of the
city. The sign may include the specific logo identity of the establishments
located within the building.
(Prior Code, § 5.111) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 834, passed 1-2-2023;
Ord. 849, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 153.216 I ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the I (Industrial) Zoning District.
See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter; and
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area and less than eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after the activity referenced has concluded.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than 16 square feet in sign face area but
not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises awning, canopy, marquee sign;
      (3)   On-premises ground sign;
      (4)   On-premises projecting sign; and
      (5)   On-premises wall sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.112) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.217 PO AND MC ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following signs are authorized in the PO (Professional Office) and MC
(Marine Commercial) Zoning Districts. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter; and
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area and less than eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after the activity referenced has concluded.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than 16 square feet in sign face area but
not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises awning, canopy, marquee sign;
      (3)   On-premises ground sign;
      (4)   On-premises projecting sign; and
      (5)   On-premises wall sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.113) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.218 CH ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are authorized in the CH (Commercial Hospitality)
District. See §
153.219 of this chapter for all dimensional requirements.
   (A)   Signs not requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign
permit:
      (1)   Signs authorized by §
153.206(B) of this chapter;
      (2)   Temporary signs less than or equal to 16 square feet in sign face
area and less than eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after the activity referenced has concluded; and
      (3)   External neon signs no larger than two square feet in sign face
area.
   (B)   Signs requiring a sign permit. Subject to any other applicable
requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized after issuance of
a sign permit:
      (1)   Temporary signs greater than 16 square feet in sign face area, but
not to exceed 36 square feet and less than eight feet in height. Such signs
shall be removed within seven days after activity referenced has concluded;
      (2)   On-premises ground sign;
      (3)   On-premises projecting sign; and
      (4)   On-premises wall sign.
(Prior Code, § 5.114) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 153.219 SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
Table 153.219: Schedule of Regulations by Zoning District
Zoning District Max Sign Face
Sign Type       Area          Max Height Max. Number Location Permit Required?
Table 153.219: Schedule of Regulations by Zoning District
Zoning
District      Max Sign Face Max Height Max. Number Location      Permit
Sign Type     Area                                               Required?

R1, R2, R2A, R4, PC, SR
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 8 sf
Ground        Max 16 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
PUD
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Ground        Max16 sf      Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft   1/public    Shall not be
Projecting    Max16 sf      Max 12 ft  frontage    located in    Yes
                                                   ROW
PF
                                                   U.S. 31/M 66
                                                   intersection
Temporary     Max 30 sf     Max 16 ft  n/a         only. Shall   Yes
banner                                             not be
                                                   located in
                                                   ROW
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Ground        Max 16 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
GC
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 8 sf
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Awning,                                1/awning,   Shall not be
canopy,       Max 16 sf     Max 8 ft   canopy, or  located in    Yes
marquee                                marquee     ROW
Ground        Max 20 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft               Shall not be
Projecting    Max 16 sf     Max 12 ft  1/parcel    located in    Yes
                                                   ROW
External neon Max 2 sf      Max 8 ft   1/business  n/a           No
CM
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
Portable      Max 6 sf      Max 4 ft   1/business                No
Awning,                                1/awning,   Shall not be
canopy,       Max 16 sf     Max 8 ft   canopy, or  located in    Yes
marquee                                marquee     ROW
Ground        Max 16 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft               Shall not be
Projecting    Max 16 sf     Max 12 ft  1/parcel    located in    Yes
                                                   ROW
CBD1
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Portable      Max 6 sf      Max 4 ft   1/business                No
External neon Max 2 sf      Max 8 ft   1/business  n/a           No
                                                   Shall not
Commercial    Max 15 sf     n/a        1/business  interfere     No
flag                                               with
                                                   pedestrians
Awning,                                1/awning,   Shall not be
canopy,       Max 16 sf     Max 8 ft   canopy,     located in    Yes
marquee                                marquee     ROW
Ground        Max 16 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft               Shall not be
Projecting    Max 16 sf     Max 12 ft  1/parcel    located in    Yes
                                                   ROW
1 See § 153.215(C) regarding commercial properties on Bridge Park Dr. located
beneath Bridge Park.
PO, MC
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Awning,                                1/awning,   Shall not be
canopy,       Max 16 sf     Max 8 ft   canopy,     located in    Yes
marquee                                marquee     ROW
Ground        Max 16 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft               Shall not be
Projecting    Max 16 sf     Max 12 ft  1/parcel    located in    Yes
                                                   ROW
CH
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Ground        Max 20 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min setback 4 Yes
                                       frontage    ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft               Shall not be
Projecting    Max 16 sf     Max 12 ft  1/parcel    located in    Yes
                                                   ROW
(I) Industrial
                                                                 No - if sign
Temporary     Max 36 sf     Max 8 ft   1/public    Min setback 4 face area less
                                       frontage    ft from ROW   than/equal to
                                                                 16 sf
                                                   Adjacent to
                                                   city golf
Temporary     Max 30 sf     Max 16 ft  n/a         course. Shall Yes
banner                                             not be
                                                   located in
                                                   the ROW
Wall          Max 30 sf     Max 8 ft   1/parcel    First floor   Yes
                                                   of building
Awning,                                1/awning,   Shall not be
canopy,       Max 16 sf     Max 8 ft   canopy,     located in    Yes
marquee                                marquee     the ROW
Ground        Max 16 sf     Max 16 ft  1/public    Min. setback  Yes
                                       frontage    4 ft from ROW
                            Min 8 ft               Shall not be
Projecting    Max 16 sf     Max 12 ft  1/parcel    located in    Yes
                                                   the ROW
 
(Prior Code, § 5.115) (Ord. 789, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 834, passed 1-2-2023)
SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 153.230 INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish uniform requirements for the
planning and design of developments within the city in order to achieve the
following objectives:
   (A)   To determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   To apply provisions of this subchapter equitably and fairly;
   (C)   To promote the orderly development of the city;
   (D)   To prevent depreciation of land values;
   (E)   To ensure a consistent level of quality throughout the community;
   (F)   To ensure a harmonious relationship between new development and the
existing natural and manmade surroundings;
   (G)   To achieve the goals and recommendations of the city Master Plan; and
   (H)   To promote consultation and cooperation between applicants and the
city in order that applicants may accomplish their objectives in the
utilization of land, consistent with the public purposes of this chapter and
the Master Plan.
(Prior Code, § 5.115) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.231 APPLICABILITY.
   Site plan review shall be required, as applicable, under the following
conditions, or under other circumstances required by the City of Charlevoix
Zoning Ordinance or other applicable law, unless exempted by §
153.232.
   (A)   Level “A” review. The Zoning Administrator shall review site plans in
connection with the creation of a use or the erection of a building or
structure in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Any use permitted by right within any zoning district, if the
proposed building is less than 2,000 square feet;
      (2)   Additions to existing buildings in any zoning district; provided,
the addition is not larger than 20% of the area of the building prior to the
expansion or more than 2,000 square feet in area, whichever is less;
      (3)   Changes in the use of any existing building in any zoning district;
provided, the use is permitted by right in that zoning district; and
      (4)   When, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, a project which
otherwise qualifies for level “A” site plan review may have a significant
impact on surrounding properties or the city, the Zoning Administrator may, at
their sole discretion, submit the site plan to the Planning Commission for
review. In such cases, the Planning Commission shall follow the review
procedure for level “B” site plans and may require any additional information
needed to make an informed decision.
   (B)   Level “B” review. The Planning Commission shall act upon all site
plans, other than those provided for level “A” review, in connection with the
creation of a use or the erection of a building or structure in any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Any “permitted” use within any zoning district occupying a building
of 2,000 square feet or more;
      (2)   Any special use in any district;
      (3)   Any planned unit development;
      (4)   Any site plan on a waterfront parcel. A waterfront parcel is a
parcel of land, or a portion thereof, abutting a water body; and
      (5)   As otherwise required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.116) (Ord. 791, passed 3-19-2018; Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.232 EXEMPTIONS.
   Site plan review shall not be required for:
   (A)   Developments, expansions, or additions to existing uses within the
Charlevoix City Airport.
   (B)   Single- or two-family dwellings on a lot on which there exists no
other principal building or use or for any home occupation or accessory
building in a single-family residential district.
(Prior Code, § 5.117) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.233 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Charlevoix Zoning Administrator and/or planner shall have the
authority to conduct a pre-application meeting with the applicant/developer to
assist them in understanding the site plan review process and other subchapter
requirements; and to provide insight as to what portions of their proposed
development may be of special concern to the Planning Commission.
   (B)   This conference is not mandatory, but is recommended for small and
large projects alike. For large projects, a pre-application conference should
be held several months in advance of the desired start of construction. Such an
advance conference will allow the applicant/developer time to prepare the
needed information for the Planning Commission to make a proper review.
(Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.234 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The process for reviewing the site plan shall be as follows:
   (A)   Site plan and level "A" reviews shall be performed by the Zoning
Administrator as follows:
      (1)   Two copies of a complete site plan and an electronic version, in a
format specified by the city, shall be submitted along with an application for
that purpose and a fee, as established by the City Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan for
completeness.
      (3)   If the site plan is found to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall return the site plan to the applicant with a list of items
needed to make the site plan complete.
      (4)   Once the site plan is determined to be complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify and seek comment from other city departments as
applicable. A review by all the applicable departments will be held within 14
days. A report will be drafted by the Zoning Administrator stating a synopsis
of the proposal and how the proposal relates to the zoning ordinance standards.
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator shall consider the site plan, any comments
received and the applicable standards of this subchapter and shall either
approve the site plan, as submitted, if all applicable requirements and the
standards of §
153.237 have been met; approve the site plan with conditions; or deny approval
of the site plan, if applicable requirements and standards have not been met.
      (6)   The reasons for the Zoning Administrator's action, along with any
conditions that may be attached, shall be stated in writing and provided to the
applicant.
      (7)   If approved, two copies of the final site plan shall be signed and
dated by the Zoning Administrator and the applicant. One copy, along with the
digital version, shall be kept on file with the city and one copy shall be
returned to the applicant or their designated representative. If the plan is
approved with conditions, a revised plan shall be submitted reflecting those
conditions and signed by the applicant and Zoning Administrator prior to the
issuance of any permits.
   (B)   Site plan and level "B" reviews shall be performed by the Planning
Commission as follows:
      (1)   Two copies of a complete site plan and an electronic version, in a
format specified by the city, shall be submitted along with an application for
that purpose and a fee, as established by the City Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan for
completeness.
      (3)   If the site plan is found to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall return the site plan to the applicant with a list of items
needed to make the plot plan or site plan complete.
      (4)   Once the site plan is determined to be complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify and seek comment from other city departments as
applicable. A review by all the applicable departments will be held within 14
days. A report will be drafted by the Zoning Administrator stating a synopsis
of the proposal and how the proposal relates to the zoning ordinance standards.
      (5)    The applicant will then submit 11 copies of the complete (revised)
site plan; two full size, nine 11 inches by 17 inches and an electronic
version, in a format specified by the city.
      (6)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the site plan and report to
the Planning Commission for consideration at its next meeting that meets the
noticing requirements. Comments, if any, from the public, city departments and
consultants shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission prior to its review
of the plan. Where required by the City of Charlevoix Zoning Ordinance or other
applicable law, notice shall be given to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the request and
to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the subject property
regardless of whether the property or structure is located in the zoning
jurisdiction, and a public hearing held.
      (7)   The Planning Commission shall consider the site plan and shall
either approve the site plan, as submitted, if all applicable requirements and
standards have been met; approve the site plan with conditions; or deny the
site plan if applicable requirements and standards have not been met. The
Planning Commission review shall be based on the requirements of this chapter,
comments received from city departments and consultants, and, specifically, the
review standards of §
153.237.
      (8)   If approved, two copies of the site plan shall be signed and dated
by the Planning Commission chairperson and the applicant. One copy, plus the
digital copy, shall be kept on file with the city and one copy shall be
returned to the applicant or their designated representative. If the plan is
approved with conditions, a revised plan shall be submitted reflecting those
conditions and signed by the applicant and the Planning Commission chairperson,
prior to the issuance of any permits.
(Prior Code, § 5.118) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.235 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required content. Each site plan submitted shall contain the
information detailed in Table 153.235, as applicable:
Table 153.235: Required Site Plan Content
Required Information Level “ALevel “B”
Table 153.235: Required Site Plan Content
Required Information                                        Level “ALevel “B”
GENERAL INFORMATION
Date, north arrow and scale                                 X         X
Name and firm address of the professional individual        X         X
responsible for preparing the site plan
Name and address of the property owner or petitioner        X         X
Location sketch                                             X         X
Legal description of the subject property                   X         X
Size of subject property in acres or square feet            X         X
Boundary survey dated within six years of application       X         X
Preparer’s professional seal                                        X
Revision block (month, day and year)                        X         X
EXISTING CONDITIONS
Existing zoning classification of subject property          X         X
Property lines and required setbacks (dimensioned)          X         X
Location, width and purpose of all existing easements       X         X
Location and dimension of all existing structures on the    X         X
subject property
Location of all existing driveways, parking areas and total X         X
number of existing parking spaces on subject property
Abutting street right-of-way width                          X         X
Location of all existing structures, driveways and parking            X
areas within 300 feet of the subject property’s boundary
Existing water bodies (rivers, creeks, wetlands and the     X         X
like)
Existing landscaping and vegetation on the subject property           X
Size and location of existing utilities                               X
Location of all existing surface water drainage facilities  X         X
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
Location and dimensions of all proposed buildings           X         X
Location of all proposed drives (including dimensions and
radii), acceleration/deceleration lanes, sidewalks, walls,
fences, signs, exterior lighting, curbing, parking areas    X         X
(including dimensions of a typical parking space and the
total number of spaces to be provided) and unloading areas
Setbacks for all buildings and structures                   X         X
Recreation areas, common use areas, dedicated open space              X
and areas to be conveyed for public use
Flood plain areas and basement and finished floor           X         X
elevations of all buildings
Landscape plan (showing location of proposed materials,               X
size and type)
Layout and typical dimensions of proposed parcels and lots            X
Number of proposed dwelling units (by type), including                X
typical floor plans for each type of unit
Number and location (by code, if necessary) of efficiency             X
and 1-, 2- and 3- or more bedroom units
All deed restrictions or covenants                                    X
Brief narrative description of the project including
proposed use, existing floor area (sq. ft.), size of        X         X
proposed expansion (sq. ft.) and any change in the number
of parking spaces
ENGINEERING
Proposed method of handling sanitary sewage and providing   X         X
potable water
Location and size of proposed utilities, including
connections to public sewer and water supply systems and/or X         X
size and location of on-site systems
Location and spacing of fire hydrants                                 X
Location and type of all proposed surface water drainage    X         X
facilities
Grading plan at no more than 2-foot contour intervals                 X
Proposed streets (including pavement width, materials and             X
easement or right-of-way dimensions)
BUILDING DETAILS
Typical elevation views of all sides of each building                 X
Gross and usable floor area                                 X         X
Elevation views of building additions                       X         X
Building height                                             X         X
 
   (B)   Information waiver. Specific requirements of either a level "A" or "B"
site plan may be waived by the Zoning Administrator where it is determined that
such information is not applicable to the request. The Planning Commission
reserves the right to request the waived information for level B site plan
reviews in their decision making process.
   (C)   Additional reports/study. The Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission may require additional studies, reports or written opinions from
qualified consultants to determine compliance with this chapter or other
applicable law or to ensure negative impacts to public health, safety and
welfare are avoided or mitigated. These reports/studies may include, but are
not limited to, traffic studies, transportation plans, geotechnical reports,
flood hazard evaluations or environmental assessments. The Zoning
Administrator, or Planning Commission, shall have the authority to choose the
individual consultant, firm or company. The costs of additional study shall be
paid for by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 5.119) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.236 COORDINATION WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall forward level "A" and level "B" site
plans and applications to the following departments and agencies where
applicable for their information and opportunity to comment:
      (1)   City of Charlevoix Fire and Rescue Department
      (2)   City of Charlevoix Public Works Department
      (3)   Charlevoix County Road Commission
      (4)   Michigan Department of Transportation
      (5)   Charlevoix District Health Department
      (6)   Charlevoix County Drain Commissioner
      (7)   City of Charlevoix Police Department
      (8)   City of Charlevoix Downtown Development Authority
      (9)   Any other agency that may be affected by the site plan
   (B)   This review does not alleviate the applicant from obtaining any and
all required permits and/or approvals from the departments and agencies listed
above. Any comments received from the departments and agencies within a
reasonable time (14 days) will be reviewed and considered by the Planning
Commission and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
      (1)   The Planning Commission may approve an application conditioned on
obtaining agency permits, or may, if the permit is critical to the site plan,
require the permit or approval prior to issuance of their approval.
      (2)   No construction activity associated with an approved site plan
shall be undertaken until permits and approvals from all applicable agencies
have been presented to the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Whenever possible, site plan review by the Zoning Administrator and
Planning Commission shall be coordinated and done simultaneously with other
reviews by the Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission on the same
application.
      (4)   When an application is dependent on the need for a dimensional
variance from the ZBA, re-zoning of property, or a zoning ordinance text
amendment, such action must be completed prior to final site plan approval by
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.237 STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   A site plan shall be approved or approved with conditions, only upon a
finding of compliance with the following standards:
   (A)   The site plan must comply with all standards of this section and all
applicable requirements of this chapter, as well as with all other applicable
city, county, state and federal laws and regulations.
   (B)   The site must be designed in a manner that is harmonious, to the
greatest extent possible, with the character of the surrounding area.
   (C)   The site must be designed to minimize hazards to adjacent property and
to reduce the negative effects of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes and glare to the
maximum extent possible.
   (D)   The site plan does not have a negative impact on the provisions of
human services, housing, transportation needs, and access to food in the
community.
   (E)   The site plan protects the natural environment and conserves natural
resources and energy to the extent possible in light of the proposed
development.
   (F)   Unless a more specific design standard is required by the city through
a different ordinance or regulation, all uses and structures subject to site
plan review shall comply with the following design standards:
      (1)   Traffic circulation.
         (a)   The site plan shall comply with the applicable zoning district
requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard space,
density and all other requirements as set forth in the City of Charlevoix
Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise provided.
         (b)   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Safe, convenient,
uncontested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be
provided for ingress/egress points and within the site. A pedestrian
circulation system shall be provided and shall be as insulated as completely as
reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system. The number, location
and size of access and entry points, and internal vehicular and pedestrian
circulation routes shall be designed to promote safe and efficient access to
and from the site, as well as circulation within the site. In reviewing traffic
features, the number, spacing and alignment of existing and proposed access
points shall be considered relative to their impact on traffic movement on
abutting streets and adjacent properties.
         (c)   Walkways from parking areas to building entrances.
            1.   Internal pedestrian walkways shall be developed for persons
who need access to the building(s) from internal parking areas and shall be
designed to provide access from these areas to the entrances of the building(s)
            2.   The walkways shall be designed to separate people from moving
vehicles.
            3.   These walkways shall have a minimum width of five feet with no
car overhang or other obstruction.
            4.   The walkways must be designed in accordance with the Michigan
Barrier Free Design Standards.
            5.   The walkways shall be distinguished from the parking and
driving areas by use of any of the following materials: special pavers, bricks,
raised elevation or scored concrete. Other materials may be used if they are
appropriate to the overall design of the site and building and acceptable to
the review authority.
      (2)   Storm water. Storm water retention and drainage systems shall be
designed so the removal of surface water will not adversely affect neighboring
properties or public storm water drainage systems. Unless impractical, storm
water shall be removed from all roofs, canopies and paved areas by an
underground surface drainage system. Low impact design solutions such as rain
gardens and green roofs are encouraged. The proposed project will meet the City
of Charlevoix Storm Water Ordinance. Applicants are required to submit a
grading and drainage plan, demonstrating stormwater can be contained and
managed on the subject property if no municipal stormwater system exists. If a
municipal stormwater system exists, the Director of Public Works or consulting
engineer representing the city shall review the grading and drainage plan to
determine if the existing infrastructure can adequately handle the stormwater
runoff. Applicants may be required to install stormwater management features to
mitigate impacts to the municipal stormwater system.
      (3)   Snow storage. Proper snow storage areas shall be provided so to not
adversely affect neighboring properties, vehicular and pedestrian clear vision,
and parking area capacity.
      (4)   Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state,
insofar as practical, by minimizing unnecessary tree and soil removal. Any
grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas. Provision or preservation of landscaping, buffers or
greenbelts may be required to ensure the proposed uses will be adequately
buffered from one another and from surrounding property.
      (5)   Screening. Where non-residential uses abut residential uses,
appropriate screening shall be provided in accordance with §
153.171 to shield residential properties from noise, headlights and glare.
      (6)   Lighting. Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on adjacent
properties and public streets. As a condition of site plan approval, reduction
of lighting during non-business hours may be required.
      (7)   Utility service. All utility service shall be underground, unless
impractical due to engineering difficulties.
      (8)   Exterior uses. Exposed storage areas, machinery, heating and
cooling units, service areas, loading areas, waste storage areas, utility
buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas shall be located to have
a minimum negative effect on adjacent properties and shall be screened, if
reasonably necessary, to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties.
      (9)   Emergency access. All buildings and structures shall be readily
accessible to emergency vehicles.
      (10)   Water and sewer. Water and sewer installations shall comply with
all city specifications and requirements.
      (11)   Signs. Permitted signs shall be located to avoid creating
distractions, visual clutter and obstructions for traffic entering or exiting a
site.
(Prior Code, § 5.120) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-
2023)
§ 153.238 CONDITIONS OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Conditions which are designed to ensure compliance with the intent of
this subchapter and other regulations of the City of Charlevoix may be imposed
on site plan approval.
   (B)   Conditions imposed shall be based on the following criteria:
      (1)   Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the proposed
land use and site plan will not be adversely affected.
      (2)   Ensure that the use is compatible with adjacent land uses and
activities.
      (3)   Protect natural resources, the health, safety, welfare and social
and economic well- being of those who will use the land use or activity under
consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed
land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
      (4)   Ensure compatibility between the proposed use or activity and the
rights of the city to perform its governmental functions.
      (5)   Meet the intent and purpose of the City of Charlevoix Zoning
Ordinance, be related to the regulations and standards established in the
ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to
ensure compliance with those standards.
      (6)   Ensure compliance with the intent of other city ordinances that are
applicable to the site plan.
      (7)   Ensure compatibility with other uses of land in the vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 5.121) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.239 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   To assure compliance with this subchapter and any conditions of approval,
performance guarantees may be required. The City Manager may require that a
performance guarantee be furnished to ensure compliance with the requirements
and conditions imposed under the city's Zoning Ordinance. The amount of the
performance guarantee shall be set forth by the City Manager, with input from
Council, and shall be an amount acceptable to the city in covering the
estimated cost of improvements associated with the project for which zoning
approval is sought. This performance guarantee may be in the form
of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or a
surety bond, and shall be deposited with the treasurer of the city. The
performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of issuance of the permit
authorizing the activity or project. The city shall not require the deposit of
the performance guarantee before the date on which the city is prepared to
issue the permit. The city shall rebate any cash deposits in reasonable
proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvement as work
on the required improvements progresses.
(Prior Code, § 5.122) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 822, passed 10-29-2020)
§ 153.240 AUTHORITY AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission in granting or denying approval of a site plan, or
regarding any conditions attached to an approval, may appeal the decision to
the ZBA per the requirements of §
153.038. A party aggrieved by the decision of the ZBA may appeal to the
Charlevoix County Circuit Court.
   (B)   Decisions on a Special Use Permit or Planned Unit Development site
plan may not be appealed to the ZBA, and may be appealed directly to Circuit
Court.
   (C)   Land use permits associated with an approved site plan will not be
issued until permits and approvals from applicable outside agencies have been
presented to the Zoning Administrator. Such permits and approvals shall include
but not be limited to soil erosion and sedimentation control permits, wetland
permits, floodplain permits, driveway and road permits, and Health Department
permits.
(Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.241 AMENDMENT TO APPROVED SITE PLAN
   Changes to an approved site plan shall be permitted only under the following
circumstances:
   (A)   The holder of an approved site plan shall notify the Zoning
Administrator of any proposed change to an approved site plan.
   (B)   Changes to a level "A" site plan may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (C)   Minor changes to a level "B" site plan may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator upon determining that the proposed revision(s) will not alter the
basic design or any specified conditions imposed as part of the original
approval. Minor changes shall include the following:
      (1)   Reduction in building size or increase in building size up to 5% of
total approved floor area.
      (2)   Movement of buildings or other structures by no more than ten feet.
      (3)   Replacement of plant material specified in the landscape plan with
comparable materials of an equal or greater size.
      (4)   Changes in building materials to a comparable or higher quality.
      (5)   Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use.
      (6)   Changes required or requested by a city, county, state or federal
regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or regulations.
   (D)   A proposed change to a level "B" site plan, determined by the Zoning
Administrator to not be a minor change, shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission as a site plan amendment and shall be reviewed in the same manner as
the original application.
(Prior Code, § 5.123) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.242 EXPIRATION
   Site plan approval shall expire 12 months after the date of approval, unless
substantial construction has been commenced and is continuing. The Zoning
Administrator, in the case of a level "A" site plan, or the Planning
Commission, in the case of level "B" site plan, may grant one extension of up
to 12 additional months; provided the applicant requests an extension in
writing prior to the date of expiration of the site plan. The extension shall
be approved if the applicant presents reasonable evidence that the development
has encountered unforeseen difficulties beyond the control of the applicant and
the project will proceed within the extension period. If the above provisions
are not fulfilled or the extension has expired prior to construction, the site
plan approval shall become null and void.
(Prior Code, § 5.124) (Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
§ 153.243 AS BUILT PLAN
   (A)   For a project which requires a detailed site plan review, an as-built
site plan shall be submitted to the city within 90 days of completion or
occupancy, whichever comes first. This site plan shall be prepared to the same
standard as the approved site plan. The Zoning Administrator shall use this as-
built site plan as a comparison to the approved site plan, and the actual
construction on the ground to ensure compliance with the conditions, and other
requirements of the site plan, Planned Unit Development, special use permit,
and requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   If the as-built site plan does not show compliance with the
conditions, and other requirements of the site plan, Planned Unit Development,
special use permit, or other requirements of this subchapter, the deviation
shall be considered a violation of this subchapter and shall be subject to any
applicable enforcement remedy.
(Ord. 822, passed 10-19-2020)
SPECIAL LAND USE REVIEW
§ 153.250 INTENT.
   Special uses are uses of land specifically permitted within a zoning
district only by the approval of the Planning Commission, following a review of
the use and its potential impact on its surroundings. Special uses are
generally consistent with the purpose of the zoning district in which they are
permitted but, due to unique operational characteristics, may not be desirable
or compatible in all locations within the district. Factors such as traffic,
hours of operation, noise, odor or similar potential nuisance effects require
that the special use be evaluated relative to its appropriateness on a case-by-
case basis. This article establishes the review procedure for special uses and
the general standards that must be met for all special uses. In addition, more
specific standards and requirements, as found in §§
153.140 through
153.159 of this chapter, are established for certain individual uses to
mitigate their potential negative impacts.
(Prior Code, § 5.130)
§ 153.251 PROCEDURES.
   The following application and review procedures shall be followed for all
special uses.
   (A)   Application for a special land use permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following:
      (1)   A complete site plan, in accordance with the requirements of §§
153.230 through
153.239 of this chapter;
      (2)   A completed application form; and
      (3)   Payment of an application fee in an amount as established from time
to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a special land use permit, the
Zoning Administrator shall cause notice to be given of a public hearing, in
accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as follows.
      (1)   The notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city and shall be sent by mail or personal delivery
to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the
property in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. If
the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in
making notification.
      (2)   The required notices shall be given not less than 15 days before
the application will be considered.
      (3)   The notice shall:
         (a)   Describe the nature of the special use request;
         (b)   Indicate the property which is the subject of the request;
         (c)   State when and where the request will be considered; and
         (d)   Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request
   (C)   Following notice, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the special land use application.
   (D)   The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions or deny
the special land use request based upon review and consideration of materials
submitted with the application, comments received at the public hearing and the
applicable standards of §
153.253 of this chapter.
   (E)   The Planning Commission may request that any information submitted be
reviewed by the city staff or consultants, with that cost of consultant review
to be borne by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 5.131)
§ 153.252 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   Reasonable conditions may be imposed on the approval of a special land use
in order to achieve the following:
   (A)   Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the proposed
land use and site plan will not be adversely affected;
   (B)   Ensure that the use is compatible with adjacent land uses and
activities;
   (C)   Protect natural resources, the health, safety, welfare and social and
economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under
consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed
land use or activity, and the community as a whole;
   (D)   Ensure compatibility between the proposed use or activity and the
rights of the city perform its governmental functions;
   (E)   Meet the intent and purpose of this chapter, be related to the
standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under
consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards; and
   (F)   Ensure compatibility with other uses of land in the vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 5.132)
§ 153.253 REVIEW STANDARDS.
   A special land use shall only be approved if all the following general
standards are satisfied, in addition to any applicable requirements for
specific special land uses, as found in §§
153.140 through
153.159 of this chapter:
   (A)   The use is designed and constructed, and will be operated and
maintained to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity; will be compatible with adjacent
uses of land; and will not change the essential character of the area in which
it is proposed;
   (B)   The use is, or as a result of the special land use approval, will be
served adequately by public services and facilities, including, but not limited
to, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal,
water and sewer facilities and schools;
   (C)   The use will not involve activities, processes, materials and
equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property or the general welfare by reason of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes,
glare or odors;
   (D)   The use will be compatible with the natural environment and will be
designed to encourage conservation of natural resources and energy;
   (E)   The site plan proposed for the use demonstrates compliance with the
special land use specific design standards and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter; and
   (F)   The special land use will be consistent with the intent and purposes
of this chapter and the most recent updates to the Master Plan.
(Prior Code, § 5.133)
§ 153.254 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A special land use permit shall expire one year after it is granted,
unless construction is complete or commencement of the use has substantially
begun. The Planning Commission may, upon written request by the applicant,
extend the term of the special land use by one additional period of up to 12
months upon a finding that there have been no changed conditions in the area
which would require reconsideration of the special land use application or site
plan.
   (B)   A request for an extension of the initial permit period shall be
submitted in writing prior to the expiration of the special land use permit.
(Prior Code, § 5.134)
§ 153.255 REVOCATION OF AN APPROVED SPECIAL LAND USE.
   (A)   If a violation of any of the conditions or standards imposed on a
special land use is found to exist, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
owner of the premises and the approving body that a violation exists and that
the permit will be revoked within 15 days of notification. If the violation is
not corrected within 15 days, the approving body shall revoke the permit.
   (B)   Furthermore, the violation is hereby declared to be a violation of
this chapter, subject to all of the remedies and penalties provided for in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.135)
§ 153.256 APPEALS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no jurisdiction or authority to
accept, or consider an appeal from, any special land use determination or
decision, or any part thereof, nor shall the zoning board of appeals have
authority to grant variances for, or with respect to, a special land use.
(Prior Code, § 5.136)
§ 153.257 RESTRICTIONS ON RESUBMITTAL OF A SPECIAL LAND USE REQUEST.
   A petition for special land use approval which has been denied, wholly or in
part, shall not be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of
denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed
conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration by the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5.137)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDS)
§ 153.270 INTENT.
   The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is established as an optional
development tool to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development;
to encourage innovation in land use, form of ownership and variety of design,
layout and type of structures constructed; to achieve economy and efficiency in
the use of land; to preserve significant natural, historical and architectural
features and open space; to promote efficient provision of public services and
utilities; to minimize adverse traffic impacts; to provide better housing,
employment and business opportunities particularly suited to residents; to
encourage development of convenient recreational facilities; and to encourage
the use and improvement of existing sites when the uniform regulations
contained in other zoning districts alone do not provide adequate protection
and safeguards for the property and surrounding areas. It is the further intent
of the PUD regulations to promote a higher quality of development than can be
achieved from conventional zoning requirements in furtherance of the vision and
goals of the adopted City Master Plan.
(Prior Code, § 5.140)
§ 153.271 QUALIFYING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   In order to qualify for PUD approval, the project must satisfy the
conditions of this section.
   (B)   It is the applicant’s responsibility to demonstrate in writing that
each of the following criteria is, or will be, met by the proposed PUD.
      (1)   Recognizable benefit. A PUD shall achieve recognizable and
substantial benefits that would not be possible under the existing zoning
classification(s). At least three of the following benefits shall be accrued to
the community as a result of the proposed PUD:
         (a)   Preservation of significant natural features;
         (b)   A complementary mix of land uses or housing types;
         (c)   Extensive open space and recreational amenities;
         (d)   Connectivity of open space with adjacent greenway corridors;
         (e)   Enhancement of small town appeal;
         (f)   Improvements to public streets or other public facilities that
mitigate traffic and/or other development impacts;
         (g)   Coordinated development of multiple small parcels; or
         (h)   Infill development and/or removal or renovation of blighted
buildings, sites or contamination clean-up.
      (2)   Size. Each PUD shall contain a minimum of 21,780 square feet;
provided sites containing less than 21,780 square feet may be considered for
rezoning to PUD, if the Planning Commission determines that the site will
advance the purposes of the PUD District. When determining the appropriateness
of areas less than the applicable minimum required, the Planning Commission
shall determine that:
         (a)   Rezoning the area to PUD will not result in a significant
adverse effect upon nearby or adjacent lands;
         (b)   The proposed uses will complement the character of the
surrounding area;
         (c)   The purpose and qualifying conditions of the PUD District can be
achieved within a smaller area; and
         (d)   The PUD is not being used as a means to circumvent conventional
zoning requirements.
      (3)   Utilities. The PUD shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer.
      (4)   Ownership. The PUD application shall be filed by the property
owner, lessee or other person with legal interest in the property and written
consent by the owner. The proposed development shall be under unified ownership
or control so one person or entity has proprietary responsibility for the full
completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient documentation
of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants and/or
deed restrictions indicating that the development will be completed in its
entirety as proposed.
      (5)   Master Plan. Proposed use(s) and design of the PUD shall be
substantially consistent with the city’s adopted Master Plan.
      (6)   Pedestrian accommodation. The PUD shall provide for integrated,
safe and abundant pedestrian and bicycle access and movement within the PUD and
to adjacent properties.
      (7)   Architecture. Building forms, relationships and styles shall be
harmonious and visually integrated through the use of common materials, colors,
treatment and scale.
      (8)   Traffic. The PUD shall provide for safe and efficient vehicular
movement within, into and out of the PUD site. Traffic calming techniques,
parking lot landscaping and other sustainable design solutions shall be
employed to improve traffic circulation, storm water management, pedestrian
safety and aesthetic appeal.
      (9)   Eligible districts. Land within any zoning district may qualify for
PUD zoning.
(Prior Code, § 5.141) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 153.272 PUD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right or special use approval in
any zoning district may be permitted within a PUD, subject to the provisions of
§
153.271 of this chapter and the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Minimum lot size and zoning requirements. Lot area and width,
setbacks, height, lot coverage, minimum floor area, parking, landscaping,
lighting and other requirements for the district applicable to the proposed
use, as provided in Table 153.272, shall be applicable for all such uses within
a PUD unless modified in accordance with division (C) below. In the case of a
mix of uses, the zoning requirements applicable to each use category shall
apply to that use.
Table 153.272: Minimum Zoning Requirements
Land Use Applicable Zoning District
Table 153.272: Minimum Zoning Requirements
Land Use                         Applicable Zoning District
Industry                         I
Institutional                    GC
Multiple-family                  R4
Retail, office, service business GC
Single-family                    R1, R2
Townhome                         R4
 
   (C)   Modification of minimum requirements. District regulations applicable
to a land use in the PUD may be altered from the requirements specified in
Table § 153.272, including, but not limited to, modification from the lot area
and width, building setbacks, height, lot coverage, signs and parking. The
applicant for a PUD shall identify in writing all intended deviations from the
zoning requirements. Modifications may be approved by the Planning Commission
during the preliminary development plan review stage. These adjustments may be
permitted only if they will result in a higher quality and more sustainable
development consistent with the purposes of PUD expressed in §
153.270. The modifications shall also satisfy at least four of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Preserve the best natural features of the site;
      (2)   Create, improve or maintain open space for the residents, employees
and visitors beyond the minimum required by division (E) below;
      (3)   Commit that at least 10% of all dwelling units in the PUD will be
affordable units;
      (4)   Provide a mix of residential types such as single-family, townhouse
and/or multiple-family;
      (5)   Employ practices in site layout, building construction and
materials that will result in a measurable reduction in energy consumption;
      (6)   Introduce new development concepts, such as cohousing:
      (7)   Include a mix of residential and non-residential uses; and
      (8)   Incorporate pathways for pedestrians and bicycles within the PUD
and connectivity to adjacent uses.
   (D)   Density bonus. In addition to the modification of minimum requirements
permitted in division (C) above, the Planning Commission may permit an increase
in the total number of residential units allowed within a PUD where it is
demonstrated that at least three of the following amenities will be included in
the development:
      (1)   More than 20% of the total units within the PUD will be committed
as affordable units;
      (2)   Forty percent or more of the PUD site will be dedicated as open
space;
      (3)   Low impact development design principles will be employed to
minimize storm water runoff;
      (4)   The proposed development will be an infill or redevelopment
project; and/or
      (5)   The project clearly contributes, in a meaningful way, to the
furtherance of the city’s vision, goals and smart growth principles as stated
in the Master Plan.
   (E)   Open space. At least 25% of the area of a PUD site shall be preserved
as open space, in accordance with the following requirements. For purposes of
this requirement, “green roofs” shall be counted as open space.
      (1)   Areas not considered open space. The following land areas shall not
be counted as required open space for the purposes of this section:
         (a)   The area within any public street right-of-way or private street
easement;
         (b)   Any easement for overhead utility lines, unless adjacent to
qualified open space;
         (c)   Fifty percent of any flood plain, wetland, water body or steep
slope (15% or greater) area and 50% of the area of any golf course;
         (d)   The area within a platted lot or site condominium unit, unless
the lot has been dedicated to open space via conservation easement or other
means of ensuring that the lot is permanent open space; and
         (e)   Parking and loading areas.
      (2)   Specifications for required open space. Required open space areas
shall meet the following specifications:
         (a)   Shall be for use by all residents, employees and visitors of the
PUD, subject to reasonable rules and regulations. In the case of a golf course,
stable or similar facility, membership shall be available to all residents of
the PUD, subject to charges, fees or assessments for use;
         (b)   If the site contains a river, stream or other body of water, the
city may require that a portion of the required open space abuts the body of
water;
         (c)   Leaves scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted,
particularly as seen from public street rights-of-way;
         (d)   Protects the roadside character by establishing buffer zones
along scenic corridors and improves public safety and vehicular carrying
capacity by avoiding development that fronts directly onto existing roadways;
         (e)   Shall be configured so the open space is reasonably usable by
residents of the PUD;
         (f)   Shall be of sufficient size and dimension and located,
configured or designed in such a way as to achieve the applicable purposes of
this chapter and enhance the quality of the development. The open space shall
neither be perceived nor function simply as an extension of the rear yard of
those lots abutting it;
         (g)   To the extent practical, open space areas shall be linked with
adjacent open spaces, public parks, bicycle paths or pedestrian paths;
         (h)   Pedestrian access points to the required open space areas from
the interior of the PUD shall be provided and clearly identified by signs or a
visible improved path for safe and convenient access;
         (i)   Grading shall be minimal, with the intent to preserve existing
topography and landscaping where practical; and
         (j)   May contain ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools and
related buildings, community buildings, golf courses and similar recreational
facilities. However, no more than 50% of the required open space may contain
any of these uses.
(Prior Code, § 5.142) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018 ; Ord. 842, passed 12-18-2023
)
§ 153.273 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conditions. Reasonable conditions may be imposed upon the PUD approval
by the Planning Commission as part of the final decision of the PUD
application. The conditions imposed shall be recorded in the minutes of the
approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon amendment of the PUD in
accordance with the procedures of §
153.290. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, those necessary to:
      (1)   Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the proposed
land use and site plan will not be adversely affected;
      (2)   Ensure that the use is compatible with adjacent land uses and
activities;
      (3)   Protect natural resources, the health, safety, welfare and social
and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under
consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed
land use or activity, and the community as a whole;
      (4)   Ensure compatibility between the proposed use or activity and the
rights of the city to perform its governmental functions;
      (5)   Meet the intent and purpose of this chapter, be related to the
regulations and standards established in the ordinance for the land use or
activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance with those
standards;
      (6)   Ensure compatibility with other uses of land in the vicinity; and
      (7)   Ensure compliance with the final development plan and the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Performance guarantees. The Planning Commission may require reasonable
performance guarantees in accordance with §
153.239 of this chapter to ensure completion of specified improvements within
the PUD.
   (C)   Interior streets. Public or private streets may be required to be
extended to exterior lot lines in order to allow connection to existing or
planned streets on adjacent parcels in order to provide for secondary access,
continuity of the circulation system and to reduce traffic on collector
streets.
   (D)   Time limits. Each PUD shall be under construction within 12 months
after the date of approval of the final development plan. If this requirement
is not met, the Planning Commission may, in its discretion, grant one extension
not exceeding up to 12 additional months; provided that prior to the expiration
of the initial 12-month period, the applicant shall submit reasonable evidence
in writing to the effect that unforeseen difficulties or special circumstances
have been encountered, causing delay in commencement of the PUD. If the PUD has
not been commenced within the initial 12-month approval period, or within an
authorized extension thereof, any building permits issued for the PUD or any
part thereof shall be of no further effect. At the expiration of the applicable
period of time, the Planning Commission may initiate proceedings for the
rezoning of the property to some other zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 5.143) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 153.274 PUD REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The following procedures shall be followed in the establishment of any PUD.
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a
PUD, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator and others, as the
Zoning Administrator determines, in order to review the general character of
the proposed development (i.e., its scope, nature and location). At this time,
the applicant shall be advised of the PUD review procedures and the various
information, studies and the like, which may be required as part of the review
process.
   (B)   Preliminary PUD application. An application for rezoning to PUD shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a form for that purpose, along with
an application fee in accordance with the schedule of fees established by the
City Council. In addition, the application shall include the following.
      (1)   Parallel plan. Residential density shall be determined through the
preparation of a conventional development plan illustrating how the site could
be developed in accordance with the basic requirements of this chapter. A
concept layout shall be prepared to scale showing, as applicable, single-family
and two-family lots, townhome and multiple-family buildings, parking, setbacks
and street rights-of-way. The number of units that could be accommodated under
the base zoning shall serve as maximum number permitted, unless a density bonus
is approved in accordance with division (D) below. Live/work units located
above main floor businesses shall not be counted toward the maximum number of
dwellings.
      (2)   Preliminary development plan. A preliminary development plan
containing the following information shall be submitted:
         (a)   A general location map;
         (b)   A legal description of the subject property;
         (c)   A title block, date, north arrow, scale, name and contact
information of applicant and name and contact information of plan preparer;
         (d)   A current topographical map clearly showing existing topographic
conditions, including contour intervals of no more than two feet based on field
survey or photogrammetric methods;
         (e)   A map showing the existing flood plains as indicated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
         (f)   A property boundary survey;
         (g)   The location of existing natural features including woods,
streams, ponds, wetlands and steep 15% or greater) slopes;
         (h)   Existing land uses within the development site and surrounding
areas for a distance of 300 feet, including the approximate location of all
buildings, structures, lots and streets (an aerial photo may suffice);
         (i)   The location and identification of existing and proposed public,
semi-public or community facilities such as schools, parks, trails, churches,
public buildings and dedicated open space;
         (j)   Existing zoning on all abutting properties;
         (k)   The approximate location of existing and proposed utilities,
including a preliminary utility and drainage concept plan;
         (l)   Uses proposed within the PUD;
         (m)   Number and type of dwelling units proposed, including the number
and type of committed affordable units, if any;
         (n)   Conceptual layout;
         (o)   The general location of proposed interior streets and access
points to abutting streets;
         (p)   The general location of off-street parking facilities and number
of spaces proposed; and
         (q)   Perspective drawings or photographs of representative building
types, indicating the proposed architectural style and appearance.
      (3)   Summary of intent. A written statement containing the following
information shall be submitted with the preliminary development plan:
         (a)   A statement of how the proposed PUD meets each of the qualifying
conditions of §
153.271 of this chapter;
         (b)   A statement of the present ownership of all land within the
proposed development;
         (c)   An explanation of the character of the proposed development
including a summary of acres or square footage by type of use, number and type
of dwelling units, gross density calculation for dwelling units and minimum
standards for floor area, lot size and setbacks;
         (d)   A complete description of any requested deviations from the
applicable spatial or other requirements applying to the property, in
accordance with §
153.272(C) of this chapter;
         (e)   A general statement of the proposed development schedule and
progression of each phase or stage; and
         (f)   Intended agreements, provisions and covenants to govern the use
of the development, building materials or architectural styles and any common
or open space areas, including the provisions which will organize, regulate and
sustain the property owners association, if applicable.
   (C)   Preliminary PUD plan.
      (1)   Planning Commission review. Upon receipt of the PUD application and
related materials, the Planning Commission shall conduct a work session with
the applicant to review the development concept and determine the need for
additional information, if any, prior to conducting a public hearing.
      (2)   Additional information. If required by the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall submit additional information and/or studies to support the
request such as, but not limited to: impact assessment; traffic analysis; storm
water study; or a market feasibility study.
      (3)   Public hearing. Upon completion of its initial review and following
receipt of any additional materials, the Planning Commission shall conduct a
public hearing, notice of which shall be in accordance with the requirements of
§
153.006(C) of this chapter.
      (4)   Recommendation. Following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall review the PUD request and the preliminary development plan
based on conformance with the standards of §
153.275 and shall approve, deny or approve with modifications the request for
PUD zoning and the preliminary development plan.
      (5)   Zoning Map. If the PUD zoning is approved, the Zoning Administrator
shall cause the zoning map to be changed to indicate the planned unit
development. If the preliminary development plan is approved with
modifications, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator written
notice of consent to the modifications and a properly revised preliminary
development plan prior to the map being changed.
   (D)   Final development plan. Within 12 months of the Planning Commission's
approval of the preliminary development plan and PUD rezoning, the applicant
shall submit a final development plan for the entire PUD or one or more phases
to the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements for Level B
site plan review, as contained in §
153.235 of this chapter. If determined to be complete by the Zoning
Administrator, copies of the plan shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission.
      (1)   Phased projects. If the PUD is to be developed in phases, the final
development plan may be submitted for one or more phases of the overall PUD. A
tentative schedule for the completion of each phase and commencement of the
next phase shall also be submitted for Planning Commission approval.
      (2)   Extension of time limit. One extension of the time period for
submitting the final development plan may be granted by the Planning Commission
for up to an additional 12 months if a request is submitted by the applicant in
writing prior to the expiration of the original 12-month approval period. If an
application for final development plan approval has not been submitted prior to
the expiration of the original 12 months or an approved extension, the
preliminary development plan shall be null and void. In addition, the Planning
Commission may initiate a rezoning of the property to another zoning district.
      (3)   Subdivision plat. For any PUD requiring subdivision plat or site
condominium approval, the subdivision plat or site condominium shall be
submitted simultaneously with the final development plan and reviewed
concurrently as part of the PUD.
      (4)   Review and action. The Planning Commission shall review the final
development plan in relation to its conformance with the preliminary
development plan and any conditions or modifications attached to the PUD
rezoning. If it is determined that the final plan does not substantially
conform to the preliminary development plan, the review process shall be
conducted as a preliminary development plan review, in accordance with §
153.274. If the final development plan is consistent with the approved
preliminary development plan, the Planning Commission shall review the final
plan in accordance with the standards for site plan review, §
153.237 and the PUD standards of §
153.275. The Planning Commission shall prepare a record of its findings and
shall approve, deny or approve with modifications the final development plan.
(Prior Code, § 5.144) (Ord. 794, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 823, passed 1-4-2021)
§ 153.275 REVIEW STANDARDS.
   In considering the PUD request, the reviewing body must find that the
proposed development meets all of the following general standards.
   (A)   The PUD will promote the intent and purpose of this subchapter.
   (B)   The PUD will comply with the standards, conditions and requirements of
this subchapter.
   (C)   The proposed project will be compatible with adjacent uses of land,
the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities
affected by the proposed project.
   (D)   The proposed project will be consistent with the public health, safety
and welfare needs of the city.
   (E)   Granting the PUD rezoning will result in a recognizable and
substantial benefit to ultimate users of the project and to the community which
would not otherwise be feasible or achievable under the conventional zoning
districts.
   (F)   The PUD will not result in a significant increase in the need for
public services and facilities and will not place a significant burden upon
surrounding lands or the natural environment, unless the resulting adverse
effects are adequately provided for or mitigated by features of the PUD as
approved.
   (G)   The PUD will be consistent with the city’s Master Plan and the
following planning principles, as applicable:
      (1)   Redevelopment and infill locations should be favored over
greenfield development;
      (2)   Natural features and resources should be preserved or at least
conserved;
      (3)   Future development/redevelopment shall strengthen the physical
character of the city;
      (4)   Quality design is emphasized for all uses to create an attractive,
distinctive public and private realm;
      (5)   Places are created with an integrated mix of uses that contribute
to the city’s identity and vitality;
      (6)   Diverse housing choices are offered, including relatively high
density and affordable units;
      (7)   Parks, open space and recreational areas are incorporated into
future development; and
      (8)   Places are connected and accessible throughout the community by
transportation methods other than automobiles.
   (H)   The PUD will respect or enhance the established or planned character,
use and intensity of development within the area of the city where it is to be
located.
(Prior Code, § 5.145)
§ 153.276 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of any building permits or commencement of
construction on any portion of the PUD, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the city in a recordable form, that sets forth the applicant’s
obligations with respect to the PUD.
   (B)   The agreement shall describe all improvements to be constructed as
part of the PUD and shall incorporate, by reference, the final development plan
with all required modifications, other documents which comprise the approved
PUD and all conditions attached to the approval by the city.
   (C)   A phasing plan shall also be submitted, if applicable, describing the
intended schedule for start and completion of each phase and the improvements
to be undertaken in each phase.
   (D)   The agreement shall also establish the remedies of the city in the
event of default by the applicant in carrying out the PUD and shall be binding
on all successors in interest to the applicant.
   (E)   All documents shall be executed and recorded in the county.
(Prior Code, § 5.146)
§ 153.277 DEVIATIONS FROM APPROVED FINAL PUD SITE PLAN.
   Changes to an approved PUD shall be permitted only under the following
circumstances.
   (A)   Notify Zoning Administrator. The holder of an approved PUD final
development plan shall notify the Zoning Administrator of any desired change to
the approved PUD.
   (B)   Minor change determination. Minor changes may be approved by the
Zoning Administrator upon determining that the proposed revision(s) will not
alter the basic design and character of the PUD, nor any specified
modifications imposed as part of the original approval. Minor changes shall
include the following:
      (1)   Reduction of the size of any building and/or sign;
      (2)   Movement of buildings and/or signs by no more than ten feet;
      (3)   Landscaping approved in the final development plan that is replaced
by similar landscaping to an equal or greater extent;
      (4)   Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use
or increase the amount of required parking;
      (5)   Internal rearrangement of a parking lot that does not affect the
number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design; or
      (6)   Changes required or requested by the city or any other county,
state or federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or
regulations.
   (C)   Major change determination. A proposed change not determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be minor shall be submitted as an amendment to the PUD
and shall be processed in the same manner as the original PUD application for
the final development plan. While not required, the Planning Commission may
elect to hold a public hearing in which case the notification requirements of §
153.274(C)(3) of this chapter shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 5.147)
§ 153.278 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no jurisdiction or authority to
accept or consider an appeal from any PUD determination or decision, or any
part thereof, nor shall the Zoning Board of Appeals have authority to grant
variances for or with respect to a PUD or any part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5.148)
NON-CONFORMITIES
§ 153.290 INTENT.
   (A)   It is recognized that there exists within zoning districts certain
lots, buildings, structures and uses which were lawful before this chapter was
passed or amended, but are now prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this chapter. It is the intent to permit these legal non-conformities
to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
   (B)   Non-conforming lots, buildings, structures and uses are declared by
this chapter to be incompatible with the provisions of the districts in which
they are located. It is the intent of this chapter that these non-conformities
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, except as otherwise permitted
in this subchapter, nor be used as grounds for adding other buildings,
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the district.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been
diligently conducted.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for, or
approval of, the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation
of the zoning regulation in effect at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.150)
§ 153.291 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   Where a legally established lot of record in existence at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter does not meet the minimum requirements
for lot width or lot area, the lot of record may be used for any permitted or
special land use in the district in which the lot is located; provided that,
any building or structure constructed on the lot complies with all other
requirements for the zoning district, except as subject to the following:
      (1)   Required minimum front and rear yard setbacks and the maximum
building height limitations shall be met as required in the zoning district in
which the lot is located.
      (2)   The required minimum side yard setback for a lot which is non-
conforming by reason of lot width shall be 10% of the width of the non-
conforming lot, but in no event shall the required minimum side yard setback
for such a non-conforming lot be less than five feet on each side.
   (B)   If two or more vacant lots of record or a combination of lots and
portions of lots of record in existence at the time of the passage of this
chapter, or an amendment thereto, with continuous frontage and under single
ownership do not meet the requirements established for lot width or lot area,
the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this chapter, and no portion of that parcel shall be used or
divided in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area
requirements established by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.151)
§ 153.292 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land or building area than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (B)   No part of any non-conforming use shall be moved unless that movement
eliminates or reduces the non-conformity.
   (C)   If a non-conforming use is abandoned for any reason for a period of
more than 12 months, any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter. A non-conforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one
or more of the following conditions exists, and which shall be deemed to
constitute an intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the non-
conforming use:
      (1)   Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property, have
been disconnected;
      (2)   The property, buildings and grounds have fallen into disrepair;
      (3)   Signs or other indications of the existence of the non-conforming
use have been removed;
      (4)   Equipment or fixtures necessary for the operation of the non-
conforming use have been removed; and
      (5)   Other actions which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator,
constitute an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon
the non-conforming use.
   (D)   A non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use
provided all of the following determinations are made by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
      (1)   The proposed use shall be as compatible or more compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood than the previous non-conforming use, considering
factors such as hours of operation, traffic, noise and similar external
impacts.
      (2)   The proposed non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased,
nor extended to occupy a greater area of land or building area than the
previous non-conforming use.
      (3)   That appropriate conditions and safeguards are provided that will
ensure compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (E)   Uses consisting of lots occupied by storage yards, used car lots, auto
wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses and similar
open uses, where the only buildings on the property are ancillary to the open
use and where the use is non-conforming shall be subject to the following
restrictions, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this
subchapter.
      (1)   When a non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it
shall not be used again for any other non-conforming use.
      (2)   Non-conforming open uses of land shall only be converted to a
conforming use.
      (3)   A non-conforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover
more land than was occupied by that use when it became non-conforming.
      (4)   When any non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of more
than six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses
permitted in the zoning district under which the property is governed. Vacancy
and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant,
shall constitute discontinuance under this provision.
(Prior Code, § 5.152)
§ 153.293 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Where a lawful building or structure exists at the effective date of
this chapter, or an amendment thereto, that does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter because of restrictions such as lot area, lot
coverage, width, height or setbacks, that building or structure may continue to
be occupied and used so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions.
      (1)   No non-conforming building or structure may be enlarged or altered
in a way that increases its non-conformity, except in cases in which the
setback of a building or structure is non-conforming by 50% or less of the
distance required by this chapter. Only in these cases may the non-conforming
setback be extended along the same plane as the existing non-conforming
setback; provided that, in doing so, the setback itself is not further reduced.
      (2)   In the event that a non-conforming building or structure is
destroyed to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement value, exclusive of
the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter; provided that, the Zoning Board of Appeals may,
upon application, permit the reconstruction of the non-conforming building or
structure if all of the following conditions are met.
         (a)   The prior non-conforming condition(s) shall not be increased.
         (b)   All building materials and architectural details shall conform
to the requirements of §§
153.170 through
153.174 of this chapter.
         (c)   The new building or structure shall be placed on the original
foundation, unless the building or structure could be so located as to reduce
the extent of its non-conformity on the lot.
         (d)   The application to reconstruct the non-conforming building or
structure shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within six months of the
event in which the building or structure was damaged or destroyed.
         (e)   The reconstruction of the building or structure shall not be
detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood.
      (3)   If a non-conforming building or structure is moved for any reason
and for any distance, it shall be moved to a location which complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   None of the provisions of this section are meant to preclude normal
repairs and maintenance on any non-conforming building or structure that would
prevent strengthening or correcting any unsafe condition of the building or
structure.
(Prior Code, § 5.153)
§ 153.294 UNLAWFUL NON-CONFORMITIES.
   Any lot, use, building or structure established in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any prior zoning ordinance or amendment shall not
be considered a legal non-conformity and shall not be entitled to the
provisions, remedies and safeguards of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.154)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, partnership, corporation or association who creates or
maintains a nuisance per se or who violates or fails to comply with this
chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of no more than $500 as
determined by the court. Every day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense under the provisions of this
chapter. Nothing in this section shall exempt the offender from compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon the request of the Zoning Administrator, the city’s Police Chief
or any city police officer is authorized to issue municipal civil infraction
citations directing alleged violators of this chapter to appear in court.
   (C)   In addition to enforcing this chapter through the use of a municipal
civil infraction proceedings, the city may initiate proceedings in the Circuit
Court to abate or eliminate the nuisance per se or any other violation of this
chapter.
   (D)   If during an enforcement action an alleged zoning violator files a
request for a variance, the enforcement action may be adjourned until a hearing
is held on the variance request.
(Prior Code, § 5.163)
CHAPTER 154: PARCEL DIVISION
Section
   
154.01   Title
   
154.02   Purpose
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Approval of land divisions or property transfers required;
establishment of exempt splits
   
154.05   Procedure for division or property transfer
   
154.06   Standards for approval of divisions or property transfers
   
154.07   Limitation affecting property transfers
   
154.08   Land configuration variances
   
154.09   Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals
   
154.10   Enforcement officer
   
154.11   Nuisance per se
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Charlevoix Parcel Division
Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 5.300) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the provisions of the Land
Division Act (Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101
through 560.293, formerly known as the Subdivision Control Act), to prevent the
creation of lots and parcels that do not comply with applicable city
ordinances, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain the orderly
development of the city, and to otherwise protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the residents and the present and future property owners of
the city. This shall be accomplished by regulating the division of existing
lots and parcels and the property transfer between two or more adjacent lots or
parcels. It is further the purpose of this chapter to prescribe the procedures
for the submission and review of proposed lot and parcel divisions and property
transfers, to authorize fees for the review of applications submitted under
this chapter and to provide penalties for violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.301) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as provided in this section, the terms used in this chapter shall
have the same meaning as in the Land Division Act, being Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293. For the purpose of
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. An owner of a lot or parcel of land, or his or her designee.
   PARENT PARCEL. First a tract of land lawfully in existence on 3-31-1997, if
one exists in connection with a proposed division, or, if one does not exist, a
parcel lawfully in existence on 3-31-1997.
   PROPERTY TRANSFER. A transfer of property between two or more adjacent lots
or parcels.
(Prior Code, § 5.303) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.04 APPROVAL OF LAND DIVISIONS OR PROPERTY TRANSFERS REQUIRED;
ESTABLISHMENT OF EXEMPT SPLITS.
   The owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land shall not divide or effect a
property transfer involving, or cause any person to divide or effect a property
transfer involving, that lot, parcel or tract of land except as provided in
this Chapter, unless the division is an exempt split as defined in the Land
Division Act of 1967, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 560.101 through 560.293, the division or property transfer is approved as
part of a subdivision plat at the time of plat approval under the Land Division
Act, as amended, the division or property transfer is part of a condominium
project developed under the Condominium Act, being Public Act 59 of 1978, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through 559.272, or the division or property
transfer is done pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 5.304) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.05 PROCEDURE FOR DIVISION OR PROPERTY TRANSFER.
   The following procedure shall be followed to divide a lot, parcel or tract
of land or to effect a property transfer.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator
on a form supplied by the city for that purpose. The application shall include,
but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Proof of ownership of the lot, parcel or tract of land to be
divided, or of the lots or parcels involved in a property transfer, which shall
include a copy of a warranty deed, land contract, title commitment or other
evidence satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator;
      (2)   The names and addresses of all persons having an interest in the
lot, parcel or tract of land to be divided, or of the lots or parcels involved
in a property transfer and a statement of the type of interest each holds;
      (3)   The history of the prior divisions of the parent parcel from which
the applicant’s parcel or tract of land came and proof that the applicant holds
the right to divide the parcel or tract of land proposed for division;
      (4)   A survey map of the land proposed to be divided or the land
involved in the property transfer prepared pursuant to the survey map
requirements of Public Act 132 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. §§ 54.211 to 54.213, as
amended, certified by a land surveyor licensed by the state. This survey map
shall depict all of the following:
         (a)   The dimensions of the lot, parcel or tract of land to be
divided, or the lots or parcels involved in a property transfer;
         (b)   The dimensions of the lots, parcels or tracts of land that will
result from the division or property transfer;
         (c)   The location of all current easements on the lot, parcel or
tract of land to be divided, or on the lots or parcels involved in a property
transfer;
         (d)   The location of all proposed utility and ingress/egress
easements on the lots, parcels or tracts of land that will result from the
division or property transfer;
         (e)   The location of all buildings and structures on the lot, parcel
or tract of land to be divided, or on the lots or parcels involved in a
property transfer;
         (f)   The distances between these buildings and structures and the
original property lines of the lot, parcel or tract of land to be divided, or
the lots or parcels involved in a property transfer; and
         (g)   The distances between these buildings and structures and the
property lines of the lots, parcels or tracts of land that will result from the
division or property transfer.
      (5)   In addition to providing the survey map, the applicant or his or
her representative shall accurately stake the boundaries of the lot, parcel, or
tract of land proposed to be divided or the lot or parcel involved in the
property transfer and the boundaries of the lots, parcels or tracts of land
that will result from the division or property transfer such that the Zoning
Administrator may, by use of a tape measure and horizontal measurements,
confirm that the boundaries as staked are as represented on the survey;
      (6)   Accurate legal descriptions of the lots, parcels or tracts of land
that will result from the division or property transfer. In the event the
Zoning Administrator is unable to determine whether the legal description is
accurate, he or she may require the applicant to obtain at applicant’s sole
expense legal descriptions of the lots, parcels or tracts of land that will
result from the division or property transfer certified by a registered land
surveyor licensed by the state;
      (7)   The Applicant shall submit documentation that each such resulting
lot, parcel or tract of land has or will have adequate permanent access, as
defined in
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances, as amended. In addition, if the lot,
parcel or tract of land that will result from the division or property transfer
will be a development site, then the applicant shall submit evidence
establishing adequate easements for public utilities from each such resulting
lot, parcel or tract of land to existing public utility facilities; and
      (8)   Such other documentation that the Zoning Administrator may require
relating to the application to divide a lot, parcel or tract of land or to
effect a property transfer.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by an application fee as
established and set forth in a city fee schedule. This fee schedule shall also
establish “after the fact” fees that must be paid when an otherwise lawful
division or property transfer occurs, but without first complying with the
procedural requirements of this chapter. This “after the fact”
   (C)   Within 45 days after receiving the information required in division
(A) above, the Zoning Administrator shall decide whether to approve or
disapprove the proposed division or property transfer. If the Applicant fails
to provide all the information required by this chapter, then the application
shall be deemed incomplete and may be denied on that basis. The Zoning
Administrator’s decision to approve the division or property transfer shall be
made pursuant to the standards contained in §
154.06 of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator may grant conditional approval
of an application, subject to the applicant obtaining any necessary variances
from the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to §
154.08 of this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator fails to grant approval of
a proposed division or property transfer, written reasons for his or her
decision shall be given to the applicant. The applicant shall then have the
option of resubmitting information for approval to the Zoning Administrator or
appealing the Zoning Administrator’s decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals
pursuant to §
154.09 of this chapter.
   (D)   Upon approval of a proposed division or property transfer, the Zoning
Administrator shall send a letter indicating such approval to the applicant
with a copy to the county's Equalization Department. This letter shall contain
the following statement: “Pursuant to Section 109a of the Land Division Act, as
amended, the City of Charlevoix, its officers and employees are not liable if a
building permit is not issued for a parcel less than one (1) acre in size that
resulted from an approved division under the City of Charlevoix Parcel Division
Ordinance.” A copy of this letter shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator
in his or her official records.
   (E)   Because zoning requirements may change over time, any approval of an
application for a division or property transfer by the Zoning Administrator
under division (C) above shall expire and a new approval required after 90 days
from the date of the approval, unless the applicant records in the county's
Register of Deeds Office an instrument(s) of conveyance documenting the
division or property transfer and files a copy of that recorded instrument(s)
with the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 5.305) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.06 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF DIVISIONS OR PROPERTY TRANSFERS.
   An application to divide a lot, parcel or tract of land, or to effect a
property transfer shall be granted when all of the following standards are met.
   (A)   The proposed division or property transfer shall comply with all
requirements of the Land Division Act of 1967, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.
   (B)   The lots, parcels or tracts of land that will result from the division
or property transfer shall comply with all requirements of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances, as amended, including, but not limited
to, the requirements relating to area and width for the newly created lots,
parcels or tracts of land, the requirements relating to lake and/or street
frontages, and the requirements relating to setbacks if the newly created lots,
parcels or tracts of land have buildings or structures on them.
   (C)   Each lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from the division
or property transfer shall have an adequate and accurate legal description.
   (D)   Each new lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from the
division shall have a depth of not more than four times its width as measured
under the requirements of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances. This standard shall not apply to a
property transfer.
   (E)   If a lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from the division
or property transfer will be a development site, then each such resulting lot,
parcel or tract of land shall have adequate easements for public utilities from
each such resulting lot, parcel or tract of land to existing public utility
facilities.
   (F)   Each lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from the division
or property transfer shall be accessible.
   (G)   The owner of the parcel or tract of land shall possess the right to
divide the parcel or tract of land. This standard shall not apply to a property
transfer.
   (H)   The property lines of the lots, parcels or tracts of land that will
result from the division or property transfer shall be consistent and in
harmony with the property lines of the lot, parcel or tract of land to be
divided, or the lots or parcels involved in a property transfer, and/or the
property lines of adjacent lots, parcels or tracts of land.
(Prior Code, § 5.306) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.07 LIMITATION AFFECTING PROPERTY TRANSFERS.
   If the land transferred between two or more adjacent lots or parcels does
not independently conform to the requirements of the Land Division Act, being
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 being 560.293,
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances, as amended, and this chapter, then the
land transferred shall not thereafter be independently considered a development
site, but may only be used in conjunction with an adjoining lot(s), parcel(s)
or tract(s) of land.
(Prior Code, § 5.307) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.08 LAND CONFIGURATION VARIANCES.
   (A)   If a lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from a division or
property transfer does not meet the requirements of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances as specified in §
154.06 (B) of this chapter, then the applicant may seek a variance from those
zoning requirements from the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the procedures
of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If a lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from a division
does not meet the depth to width requirements of §
154.06(D) of this chapter, then the applicant may seek a variance from those
requirements from the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the procedures of
this section.
   (C)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance under this chapter
from the depth to width requirement of §
154.06(D) of this chapter, if all of the following exist:
      (1)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions exist on
the parent parcel, including exceptional topographic or physical conditions,
that do not generally apply to other lots, parcels or tracts of land in the
city;
      (2)   The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
existing on the parent parcel are not the result of any act or omission by the
applicant or his or her predecessors in title;
      (3)   The granting of the variance shall not be injurious or otherwise
detrimental to adjoining lots, parcels or tracts of land or to the general
health, safety and general welfare of the city;
      (4)   The resulting lots, parcels or tracts of land with the variance
granted shall be compatible with surrounding lots, parcels or tracts of land;
and
      (5)   The variance granted shall be the minimum variance that will make
possible the reasonable use of the parent parcel.
   (D)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall follow the procedures of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances relating to variances when deciding
whether to grant a variance under this section.
   (E)   In granting any variance under this chapter, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in order to ensure
that the lot, parcel or tract of land that will result from the division or
property transfer complies with the variance granted under this chapter.
Violations of such conditions and safeguards shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter, punishable under §
154.99 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.308) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.09 APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator may
appeal that decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals following the procedures of
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances, as amended, for appeals to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Any such appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date
of the decision from which the appeal is taken. During the appeal, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall conduct a de novo hearing of the matter and to that end
shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   In rendering its decision, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall receive
and consider evidence and data relevant to the case and shall issue its
decision in writing within 30 days after receiving all evidence and data in the
case. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall then be sent promptly
to the applicant, to the person who filed the appeal (if different than the
applicant), to the Zoning Administrator and to the City Assessor.
(Prior Code, § 5.309) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.10 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the authorized city
official to issue municipal civil infraction citations directing alleged
violators of this chapter to appear in court.
(Prior Code, § 5.311) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 154.11 NUISANCE PER SE.
   A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and
is declared to be offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 5.312) (Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
 
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined in Public Act 12 of
1994, amending Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 through
600.9939, and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. Each day this
chapter is violated shall be considered as a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 5.310)
   (B)   In addition to enforcing this chapter through the use of a municipal
civil infraction proceeding, the city may initiate proceedings in the Circuit
Court to abate or eliminate the nuisance per se or any other violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.313)
(Ord. 680, passed 11-18-2002)
CHAPTER 155: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Purpose, Objectives, and Administration
   
155.001   Purpose
   
155.002   Objectives
   
155.003   Ordinance administration
   
155.004   Exclusive storm water regulation provision
   
155.005   Rules applying to text in this chapter
Definitions
   
155.015   General
   
155.016   Undefined words
   
155.017   Definitions   
Regulated Activities and Permit Requirements
   
155.030   Regulated activities
   
155.031   Permit requirements
   
155.032   Permit application submittal
   
155.033   Plan preparation by a registered professional
   
155.034   Sequential applications
   
155.035   Permit application review
   
155.036   Permit approval or disapproval
   
155.037   Permit expiration or revocation
   
155.038   Permit revisions
   
155.039   Administrative fee schedule
   
155.040   Penalties for initiating earth change activities without a permit
Storm Water Management Plan Requirements
   
155.055   Storm water plan management requirements
   
155.056   Site condominium and subdivision requirements
   
155.057   General standards for approval of storm water management plans
Maintenance, Inspection and Access
   
155.070   Applicability
   
155.071   Maintenance requirements
   
155.072   Inspections
   
155.073   Storm water management easements
Compliance Assurance
   
155.085   Performance guarantees
   
155.086   Construction certification by a registered professional
   
155.087   Letter of compliance
Stop Work Orders and Enforcement Action
   
155.100   Stop work orders
   
155.101   Enforcement
   
155.102   Emergency action
Appeals
   
155.115   Creation of Appeals Board
   
155.116   Right of appeal
   
155.117   Appeals process
Revisions
   
155.130   Revisions
   
Appendix A: City of Charlevoix Storm Water Ordinance Design Standards
PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES, AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to supplement Michigan Public Act 451 of
1994, as amended, for the more stringent regulation of storm water discharges
originating within the city; to provide a set of regulations for storm water
management; and to provide rules and guidelines to facilitate enforcement
thereof.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.002 OBJECTIVES.
   The objective of this chapter is to accomplish, among other things, the
following:
   (A)   To manage storm water runoff resulting from earth changes occurring
within the City of Charlevoix, both during and after development.
   (B)   To ensure that future development provides measures to manage the
quantity and quality of storm water runoff originating from the property so
that surface water and groundwater quality is protected and flooding potential
is reduced.
   (C)   To preserve and use the natural drainage system for receiving and
conveying storm water runoff and to minimize the need to construct enclosed,
below grade storm drain systems.
   (D)   To preserve natural infiltration and the recharge of groundwater and
to maintain subsurface flows which replenish lakes, streams and wetlands.
   (E)   To ensure that storm water management systems are incorporated into
site planning at an early stage of the planning and design process.
   (F)   To minimize the need for costly maintenance and repairs to roads,
embankments, ditches, streams, lakes, wetlands and storm water management
facilities which are the result of inadequate storm water control.
   (G)   To reduce long-term expenses and remedial projects which are caused by
uncontrolled storm water runoff.
   (H)   To encourage the design and construction of storm water management
systems which serve multiple purposes, including but not limited to flood
prevention, water quality protection, wildlife habitat preservation, education,
recreation and wetlands protection.
   (I)   To minimize the impact of development on downstream properties and to
preserve the biological and structural integrity of existing watercourses.
   (J)   To allow for off-site storm water management facilities and measures
if such proposals meet the requirements of these regulations.
   (K)   To assure that all storm water management facilities will be properly
designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with a uniform set of
standards.
   (L)   To provide for enforcement of this chapter and penalties for
violations.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.003 ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION.
   The City of Charlevoix shall designate an enforcing agent (“agent”) to
administer and enforce the ordinance. The city may enter into an inter-local
agreement with Charlevoix County which will permit the Charlevoix County Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Officer to be the agent for this chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.004 EXCLUSIVE STORM WATER REGULATION PROVISION.
   To the extent that this storm water ordinance is in conflict with any
previously adopted ordinance within the city, the intent is to have this storm
water ordinance supersede any other storm water regulations that may have been
previously adopted or included as a portion of other local ordinances or zoning
provisions. If any conflicts arise, the city shall either repeal or amend such
other ordinances to make this chapter the exclusive regulation.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.005 RULES APPLYING TO TEXT IN THIS CHAPTER.
   When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense includes the
future; words used in the singular include the plural. The word “shall” is
understood to be mandatory, and the word “may” is merely suggestive.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
DEFINITIONS
§ 155.015 GENERAL.
   This subchapter sets forth the definitions of certain terms used within the
chapter which have a meaning specific to the interpretation of the text of the
chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.016 UNDEFINED WORDS.
   Any word not defined herein shall first be interpreted as defined within
Part 91, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, and where not defined there, shall
be interpreted within its common and approved usage.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.017 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms and phrases shall have the meaning given herein, unless
the context otherwise requires:
   AGENT. Person designated by the City of Charlevoix for administration and
enforcement of the Ordinance.
   APPEALS BOARD. The public body which is charged with the responsibility to
consider and decide appeals from decisions made by the agent in administering
and enforcing this chapter.
   APPEALS BOARD CLERK. The individual who is charged with the responsibility
to process appeals to the Appeals Board pursuant to §§
155.100 through
155.102 of this chapter.
   APPLICANT. The landowner, or his duly authorized agent, for the property
upon which a regulated earth change is proposed, and who has submitted an
application for a storm water management permit.
   CHANNEL. The portion of a stream which conveys normal flows of water, or a
ditch or other conveyance structure excavated for the flow of water.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. An activity, action or alteration of property that
is proposed for the purpose of a commercial activity, such as retail sales,
professional offices, multi-family residential structures of three or more
units, or any other purpose which includes access by the public for conducting
business. Activity, action or alteration of property by the city is not
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   CONVEYANCE FACILITY (STRUCTURE). A surface or subsurface structure, pipe or
channel which transports storm water from one location to another.
   COUNTY DRAIN. Drains established and/or constructed pursuant to the Michigan
Drain Code (Act 40 of 1956, as amended).
   DESIGN STANDARD (OR ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARD). A specification or set of
specifications that prescribes the methodology for developing storm water
management facilities based upon a uniform set of standards, calculations, and
procedures.
   DESIGN STORM.  A hypothetical rainfall event that is developed as a
statistical relationship between actual rainfall intensity-duration-frequency
data for the purpose of modeling the effectiveness of a given drainage system.
   DETENTION BASIN (POND). A structure or facility, natural or artificial,
which stores storm water on a temporary basis and releases it at a controlled
rate to another water course, wetland, conduit or drain. A detention basin may
drain completely after a storm event (dry detention basin) or it may be a body
of water with a fixed minimum and maximum water elevation between runoff events
(wet detention basin).
   DISCHARGE. The rate of flow of water through an outlet structure at a given
point and time, typically measured in cubic feet per second (cfs) or gallons
per minute (gpm).
   DISTURBED AREA. An area of land subjected to erosion due to the removal of
vegetative cover and/or earthmoving activities, including filling.
   DOWNSTREAM PROPERTIES. Down gradient lands and waters which receive storm
water runoff and other surface water flows from the applicant’s property and
are often subjected to the cumulative impact of upstream development.
   DRAINAGE. The interception and removal of water (groundwater or surface
water) by natural or artificial means.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All facilities, channels and areas which serve to convey,
filter, store and/or receive storm water, either on a temporary or permanent
basis.
   EARTH CHANGE. A human-made change in the natural cover or topography of
land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to
soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. The term EARTH CHANGE
as used in this chapter shall not apply to the practice of plowing and tilling
soil for the purpose of crop production.
   FLOOD. An overflow of surface water onto lands not normally covered by
water. FLOODS have these essential characteristics: the inundation of land is
temporary and results from unusually heavy precipitation and the land is
inundated by overflow from a lake, pond, stream and/or wetland, or is flooded
by natural runoff.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area of land adjoining a lake or stream which is inundated
when the flow exceeds the capacity of the normal watercourse. For mapping
purposes, FLOODPLAINS are as designated in the National Flood Insurance Program
Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the City of Charlevoix effective May 16, 2019 (as
amended).
   GRADING. Any stripping, clearing, stumping, excavating, filling, stockpiling
or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled
condition.
   GRUBBING. To clear (ground) of roots and/or stumps.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. Surfaces that do not readily allow rainfall to infiltrate
into the soil; examples include but are not limited to: roof area, paved or
gravel driveways, parking areas, roads (both asphalt and gravel), or areas of
heavy clay soils.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. Any manufacturing, processing, fabrication, maintenance
assembly, printing or improvement of articles or merchandise, warehousing,
wholesaling, storage, or activities related to mineral extraction and
processing; and other business enterprises not classified as commercial.
   INFILTRATION. The downward movement or seepage of water from the surface
into the subsoil and/or groundwater. The infiltration rate is expressed in
terms of inches per hour.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A binding agreement between the landowner and the
city, which sets forth the location and design of best management practices as
well as terms and requirements for storm water and erosion management facility
maintenance, recorded with the Charlevoix County Register of Deeds.
   OFF-SITE FACILITY. Storm water management facility which is located
partially or completely off the applicant’s subject property.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The line between upland and bottomland which
persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence
and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the
land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself,
the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation. On an inland
lake which has a level established by law, it means the ordinary high
established level. Where water returns to its natural level as the result of
the permanent removal or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary
high water mark.
   OUTFALL. The point where storm water flows out from a conduit, drain or
stream.
   PEAK DISCHARGE RATE (PEAK FLOW). The maximum calculated rate of storm water
flow at a given point in a channel, watercourse, or conduit resulting from a
predetermined frequency storm or flood, measured in cubic feet per second
(cfs).
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including
governmental agencies.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL. One following licensed professionals: State of
Michigan licensed engineer, land surveyor, architect and/or landscape
architect.
   RETENTION BASIN. A wet or dry storm water holding area, either natural or
manmade, which does not have any outlet to adjoining watercourses or wetlands
other than an emergency spillway.
   SITE. Any tract, lot, or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or
parcels of land proposed for development.
   STOP WORK ORDER. A notice for cessation of activity issued by the agent to
any person engaged in an activity in violation of this chapter including, but
not limited to, grading and development activities.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES. Any structure, ditch, swale, facility,
barrier, berm, vegetative cover, basin or other measure which serves to manage
storm water.
      PERMANENT MEASURES. Installations designed to manage storm water runoff
after development is completed.
      TEMPORARY MEASURES. Installations designed to manage storm water runoff
during development or until soils in the contributing drainage area are
stabilized.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT. Written approval along with supporting
documentation and storm water management plan that is executed by the agent and
issued under the provisions of this chapter authorizing the applicant to engage
in specified earth changes.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. Maps and written information prepared in
accordance with specific standards identified within the ordinance for a
proposed land use or earth change. The STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN describes
the way in which storm water runoff will be managed during and after completion
of the proposed development.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. Excess water that does not infiltrate the soil, but
instead flows over the surface of the ground or is collected in channels,
watercourses or conduits and transported over a given drainage area.
   STREAM. A moving body of water that has definite banks, a bed and visible
evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. See Public Act
451 of 1994, as amended, Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams § 324.30101,
Subparagraph E, as amended.
   SWALE. Low lying grassed area with gradual slopes which transports storm
water, either on site or off site.
   WATERSHED. A land area, also known as a drainage area, which collects
precipitation and contributes runoff to a receiving body of water or point
along a watercourse.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
REGULATED ACTIVITIES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.030 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all earth changes described
below shall be regulated activities and shall require a storm water management
permit from the agent, pursuant to §
155.031
 of this chapter:
   (A)   Industrial and commercial development regardless of the size or
location, with the following exception: a proposal for redevelopment or
alteration of an existing commercial or industrial site with a maximum total
increase of 10% of the impervious surface in existence on May 8, 2018, or 4,356
square feet, whichever is less, shall not be required to meet the design
standards of this chapter. Greater than a 10% increase in the impervious
surface in existence on May 8, 2018, or more than 4,356 square feet of
additional impervious surface shall require storm water management measures in
accordance with the design standards of this chapter for the entire increase.
   (B)   All subdivision developments as defined by § 102 of Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended, regardless of size, location or environmental sensitivity.
   (C)   All site condominium developments or condominium developments as
defined by Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, M.C.L.A. § 559.101 et seq.
regardless of size, location or environmental sensitivity.
   (D)   A mobile home park, manufactured housing development, or campground.
   (E)   Private roads which either provide access to five or more parcels, are
more than 500 feet in length, and/or have a grade of 10% or greater.
   (F)   A private driveway that is at a 10% grade or greater, sloping down
toward the intersecting road.
   (G)   Public road and facility projects of the city are not classified as
regulated activities and are exempt from the permitting requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.031 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   For purposes of this chapter, a storm water management (SWM) permit for
regulated activities as identified in §
155.030 is required before any earth changes commence. The SWM permit
requirements are independent of any other regulations governing the proposed
earth change, such as soil erosion regulations or zoning requirements, which
may require additional permitting through other enforcing agencies. The
granting of a SWM permit shall authorize only such earth changes for which the
permit has been issued, and shall not be deemed to approve any development as a
whole, or any other land use activities.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.032 PERMIT APPLICATION SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   An application for a SWM permit shall be submitted on the form
provided by the agent, signed by the landowner or his/her duly authorized
agent, and shall include a storm water management plan, prepared in accordance
with §§
155.055 through
155.057, along with the appropriate permit and review fees, prior to being
considered by the agent as an administratively complete application. The agent
may request additional storm water management plans or supporting documentation
at his/her discretion during the permit review process.
   (B)   The application for a SWM permit shall be made, reviewed and approved
prior to the start of any earth change including construction of access roads,
driveways, grubbing or grading. Permit approval shall be given prior to the
initiation of any work activity. Any unauthorized work shall be considered a
violation of this chapter subject to enforcement actions under §§
155.100 through
155.102 regardless of any later actions taken toward compliance. Soil test
borings including those utilizing reasonable backhoe test excavation,
vegetative cutting for land surveys, percolation tests and normal maintenance
shall not be considered a start of work under these regulations.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.033 PLAN PREPARATION BY A REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL.
   Following the calculation of pre- and post-development (or increase in
development) stormwater runoff, if 100% of this increased storm water will not
be retained on-site in a stormwater retention basin, the storm water management
plan shall be prepared by a registered professional as defined by this chapter.
The agent may waive this requirement for regulated activities on a single
family dwelling site when the agent finds that, considering the size, location,
or natural discharge of the stormwater runoff, a storm water management plan is
not reasonably required to accomplish the objectives of this chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.034 SEQUENTIAL APPLICATIONS
   (A)   On development proposals which are so large or complex that a storm
water management plan encompassing all phases of the project cannot reasonably
be prepared prior to initial ground breaking, an application for a sequential
SWM permit, based on successive major incremental earth change activities may
be allowed. Requests for sequential applications shall be approved by the agent
prior to submittal of the initial SWM permit application.
   (B)   Approval of sequential applications shall take place in two phases.
First, the overall conceptual plan for the entire development shall be
submitted for review and approval. Second, detailed plans for each phase of the
total project shall be submitted for review and approval.
   (C)   All permits processed and issued for phases of a project shall be
clearly defined as to the nature and extent of work covered for that phase.
Each phase of the project must be reviewed and permitted individually prior to
construction.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.035 PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW.
   The application review period begins upon receipt of an administratively
complete application submittal. The agent shall act upon an application for an
earth change permit involving five acres or less of disturbed area within 15
calendar days. An application for all other regulated projects shall be acted
upon within 30 calendar days.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.036 PERMIT APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.
   (A)   If the agent determines that the proposed storm water management plan
complies with the standards in this chapter, a permit shall be issued
specifying the work approved, along with any supplemental conditions. If the
proposed storm water management plan does not comply with these standards, the
permit request shall be modified by the applicant or denied. When necessary,
the agent may request additional information from the applicant upon which to
base the permit decision.
   (B)   The agent shall notify the applicant in writing if the application is
denied, citing the reasons for the denial.
   (C)   The agent shall notify the city after a permit decision has been made.
   (D)   Upon written request, the agent shall furnish any interested party
with a statement in writing, detailing the reasons for permit denial or
approval.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.037 PERMIT EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   SWM permits shall terminate automatically upon completion of the
project or one year from the date of issuance, whichever occurs first. The
applicant may request a one-year extension, which shall be reviewed and shall
be granted by the agent if he/she finds good cause for the extension and that
the SWM regulations governing the proposed development have not changed since
the date the SWM permit was first approved.
   (B)   A SWM permit issued by the agent under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended, subject to the provisions of §§
155.100 through
155.102, for any of the following causes:
      (1)   A violation of a condition of the permit.
      (2)   Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to fully
disclose relevant facts in the application or storm water management plan.
      (3)   A change in a condition that requires a temporary or permanent
change in the activity.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.038 PERMIT REVISIONS.
   Revisions to an approved SWM permit, permit condition, or approved storm
water management plan must first be approved by the agent. The applicant shall
make a written request for the proposed revision(s) to the agent, including any
supporting documentation that the agent may require as a basis for making a
decision regarding the proposed revision. Proposed revisions do not take effect
until approved by the agent, and construction of unapproved plan revisions may
be subject to enforcement action.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.039 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   All fees applicable under this chapter shall be specified in a fee
schedule determined from time to time by resolution of the legislative body of
the city and maintained in the agent’s office.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be directly related to the actual costs of
administering the SWM permit program, including design review, site inspection,
enforcement and permit administration.
   (C)   A printed fee schedule shall be made available by the agent.
   (D)   If the agent determines that the basic fees will not cover the actual
costs of the application review, or if the agent determines that review of the
application and/or participation in the review process by qualified
professional planners, engineers, attorneys, or other professionals is
necessary or advisable, then the applicant shall deposit with the agent such
additional fees in an amount determined by the agent equal to the estimated
additional costs. The additional fees shall be held in escrow in the
applicant’s name and shall be used solely to pay these additional costs. If the
amount held in escrow becomes less than 10% of the initial escrow deposit or
less than 10% of the latest additional escrow deposit and review of the
application is not completed, then the agent may require the applicant to
deposit additional fees into escrow in an amount determined by the agent to be
equal to the estimated costs to complete the review. Failure of the applicant
to make any escrow deposit required under this chapter shall be deemed to make
the application incomplete thereby justifying the denial of the application.
Any unexpended funds held in escrow shall be returned to the applicant
following final action on the application. Any actual costs incurred by the
agent in excess of the amount held in escrow shall be billed to the applicant
and shall be paid by the applicant prior to the release of a final decision on
the application.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.040 PENALTIES FOR INITIATING EARTH CHANGE ACTIVITIES WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   Any earth change activity, subject to regulation under this chapter, which
has commenced without a valid permit, is not proceeding in accordance with an
issued SWM permit, or is in violation of a permit condition shall be considered
a violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of §§
155.100 through
155.102 of this chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.055 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   A storm water management plan shall be prepared for any regulated earth
change subject to SWM permit requirements. The plan shall be designed to
effectively manage the runoff from the site to not more than the rate and
volume prior to development. Pretreatment of runoff shall be required if deemed
necessary by the agent. Administratively complete plans shall include the
following:
   (A)   A map or maps at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch or as
otherwise determined by the agent, including the following:
      (1)   A legal description;
      (2)   Site location sketch which includes the proximity of any proposed
earth change to lakes, streams, and wetlands;
      (3)   Predominant land features;
      (4)   Contours at not more than two-foot intervals, or slope description.
   (B)   A written description of the soil types of the exposed land area
contemplated for the earth change.
   (C)   A description and the location of the physical limits of each proposed
earth change.
   (D)   Location of all lakes, streams, and wetlands partially or completely
contained within the boundaries of the site or within 50 feet of the site
boundary to the extent that the property owner has the ability of depicting the
same.
   (E)   A description and the location of all existing and proposed on-site
storm water management facilities and measures.
   (F)   The timing and sequence of each proposed regulated earth change.
   (G)   A description and the location of all proposed temporary storm water
facilities and measures.
   (H)   A description and the location of all proposed permanent storm water
facilities and measures.
   (I)   Pre- and post-development storm water calculations.
   (J)   A program for the continued maintenance of all permanent storm water
facilities and measures.
   (K)   Other information which the agent requires to review the impact of the
proposed earth change in relationship to the standards and requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.056 SITE CONDOMINIUM AND SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   Applicants for site condominium or subdivision plat approval shall submit
the same information as in §
155.055 of this chapter and may need to submit additional relevant information
including but not limited to the following: off-site watershed boundaries,
existing and proposed easements, and proposed drainage system including water
movement onto and out of the proposed development.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.057 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   Approval of a storm water management plan shall be based upon the following
general provisions:
   (A)   The agent shall approve or disapprove storm water management permit
applications and plans in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
the design standards included and/or referenced in
Appendix A .
   (B)   All regulated earth changes subject to review under the requirements
of this chapter shall be designed, constructed and maintained to provide for
the retention/detention of storm water runoff and to protect water quality.
   (C)   Measures required for storm water shall take into consideration
natural features, proximity of the site to lakes, streams and wetlands, extent
of impervious surfaces, potential for flooding, and the size of the site.
   (D)   Alteration to natural drainage patterns shall not create downstream or
off-site flooding.
   (E)   Storm water management plans shall be designed in accordance with the
specific design criteria included as “Design Standards”, attached and made a
part of this chapter as
Appendix A .
   (F)   All storm water management plans and maintenance agreements shall be
recorded with the Charlevoix County Register of Deeds by the agent, at the
expense of the applicant.
   (G)   Storm water management facilities shall be constructed, operated and
maintained on the applicant’s property, without impact or degradation to
downstream conveyance structures or properties. However, the applicant may
request a waiver from the requirements for on-site storm water management by
written petition to the agent with the SWM permit application. Where a request
is made for off-site storm water management, the request shall comply with the
following general criteria:
      (1)   Off-site storm water management areas may be shared between two or
more property owners or developments, provided that maintenance agreements have
been approved by the agent and storm water management easements have been
obtained and recorded with the Charlevoix County Register of Deeds by the
agent, at the expense of the applicant.
      (2)   The storm water management easement shall contain language stating
that the easement shall exist as long as said development exists and shall not
be modified or terminated without the prior written authorization of the agent.
The Agent may only approve a modification or termination of this easement upon
a determination that alternative means are available and will be used to
improve the handling and disposition of storm water generated from the
development or redevelopment of the site.
      (3)   Easements within drainage districts shall require prior approval of
the Drain Commissioner.
      (4)   Storm water management plan requirements specified in §
155.057 and the Design Standards included as
Appendix A of this chapter shall be used as the basis for reviewing off-site
storm water management proposals.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION AND ACCESS
§ 155.070 APPLICABILITY.
   All temporary storm water management facilities shall be maintained and
inspected during the life of the facility to provide adequate protection
against adverse impacts from storm water runoff. Permanently installed storm
water management facilities shall be routinely inspected and maintained by the
property owner or designated qualified party to ensure the continued and proper
operation of the facility for the protection of downstream properties.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.071 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Where maintenance is required, it shall be performed in accordance with the
following general provisions, as well as any specific conditions that may be
included with the SWM permit.
   (A)   All storm water management facilities and measures shall be maintained
in accordance with permit conditions.
   (B)   The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be
designated in the storm water management plan or the permit application
submitted to the agent. Options may include:
      (1)   The owner(s) of the property.
      (2)   Property owners association or other designated qualified party as
determined by the agent, provided that provisions for financing necessary
maintenance are included in deed restrictions or other contractual agreements.
   (C)   Maintenance agreements may be required by the agent when the average
annual cost of maintenance is reasonably expected to exceed $500 per year and
shall be required for all site condominium and subdivision plat proposals. When
required, maintenance agreements shall specify responsibilities for financing
maintenance and emergency repairs, including but not limited to the procedures
specified in §§
155.072 and
155.073 and §§
155.085 through
155.087 of this chapter.
   (D)   The agent is not required to accept the applicant’s desired
responsible party for maintenance purposes in a given situation. Natural
features, proximity of site to lakes, streams and regulated wetlands, extent of
impervious surfaces, size of the site and potential need for ongoing
maintenance activities will be considered when making this decision, as well as
the overall complexity of the storm water management facilities. Where deemed
necessary by the agent, third party maintenance may be required for the
adequate protection of sensitive sites, or complex storm water management
facilities.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.072 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The agent, or his/her authorized agent, shall have the right to
conduct on-site inspections of the storm water management facilities to verify
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, including that maintenance is
being performed as required by this chapter. Any such inspections may take
place before, during, and after any earth change activity has occurred for
which a permit has been issued. The agent or his/her authorized agent shall
exercise this right to inspection by written consent of the person having the
right to possession of the property, or by administrative search warrant issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction. Submission of an application for a permit
under this chapter shall be deemed as providing written consent for the agent
to conduct on-site inspections of the storm water management facilities.
   (B)   If upon inspection, existing site conditions are found not to be as
stated in the permit or approved storm water management plan, the permit may be
revoked. No earth disrupting work shall be undertaken or continued, except
preventative storm water measures as authorized by the agent, until revised
plans have been submitted and a valid permit issued.
   (C)   Requests for revisions must be submitted to and approved by the agent
in writing before being effective unless approved by the agent on site. If a
change is approved on site, the following shall occur:
      (1)   The agent shall provide written verification of a change and/or
revision.
      (2)   The permit holder shall provide updated drawings, calculations,
etc. to reflect the changes and/or revisions.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.073 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENTS.
   (A)   If any portion of the storm water management facilities will be
located on property other than the property on which the storm water will
originate, then the owner of the property on which the storm water will
originate shall obtain a storm water management easement from the owner of the
property on which all or a portion of the storm water management facilities
will be located. The storm water management easement shall define the scope of
the easement to include at a minimum the legal right of the owner of the
property on which the storm water will originate to access the property on
which the storm water management facilities will be located for the purpose of
installing, inspecting, and maintaining the storm water management facilities;
shall run in perpetuity with the land benefitted by the easement, or until the
storm water management facilities are removed, whichever is sooner; and shall
be recorded in the office of the Charlevoix County Register of Deeds.
   (B)   A recorded copy of the storm water management easement shall be filed
with the agent prior to the issuance of a SWM permit.
   (C)   The recorded storm water management easement shall not be revoked,
terminated, re-conveyed, or amended without the prior written authorization of
the agent. Any such extinguished or revised storm water management easement
shall be recorded in the office of the Charlevoix County Register of Deeds, and
a recorded copy shall be filed with the agent.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE
§ 155.085 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Applicants proposing subdivision plats, site condominiums, private
road construction projects, or other developments identified by the agent with
a high potential for storm water management problems may be required to post a
cash escrow, letter of credit, or other acceptable form of performance security
in an amount sufficient to assure the installation and completion of the storm
water management plan.
   (B)   Letters of credit shall extend for a minimum of one year with the
option of renewal. Money held in escrow, cash deposits, and/or certified checks
will be returned to the applicant when the site is completely stabilized to
meet requirements set forth by the agent, and as-built plans of the site,
sealed by a State of Michigan licensed professional engineer, are submitted to
the agent.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.086 CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATION BY A REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL.
   (A)   For any sites that require a professionally prepared site plan in
accordance with §
155.033, a certification letter shall be submitted after any storm water
management facilities have been installed to affirm that construction has been
completed in accordance with the approved storm water management plan. Unless
this chapter requires certification by a State of Michigan licensed engineer as
provided later in this section, the certification letter can be prepared by a
registered professional as defined by this chapter.
   (B)   If there are changes during the course of construction, the agent may
require final “as-built” drawings for final approval of the site work.
   (C)   CHANGES DURING CONSTRUCTION, as used in this section, includes, but is
not limited to: unanticipated soil conditions, elevation, acts of God, or other
changes in circumstances not anticipated during the initial application,
process.
   (D)   Sites where certification by a state of michigan licensed engineer is
mandatory.
      (1)   Certain activities listed under the Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act (Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended).
         (a)   Part 23, Pretreatment.
         (b)   Part 31, Floodplain.
         (c)   Part 41, Sewage Systems.
         (d)   Part 111, Solid Waste.
         (e)   Part 115, Hazardous Waste.
         (f)   Part 307, Inland Lake Levels.
         (g)   Part 309, Inland Lake Improvements viii. Part 315, Dams.
      (2)   Certain activities listed under the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
         (a)   Part 112, Spill Prevention, Control and Counter Measures.
         (b)   Part 122, Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPS).
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.087 LETTER OF COMPLIANCE.
   Upon receipt and approval of the certification letter, the agent shall issue
a letter of compliance to the property owner.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
STOP WORK ORDERS AND ENFORCEMENT ACTION
§ 155.100 STOP WORK ORDERS.
   (A)   If necessary to assure compliance with the permit requirements,
standards, and other provisions of this chapter or to protect public health,
safety and/or welfare, the agent may issue a stop work order for the purpose of
preventing uncontrolled storm water, or other conditions posing imminent and
substantial danger to public health, safety, welfare or natural resources.
   (B)   The stop work order, when issued, shall require all specified storm
water activities to be stopped. A copy of the stop work order shall immediately
be submitted to other state and local agencies with regulatory jurisdiction.
Said order shall describe the specific alleged violation and the steps deemed
necessary to bring the project back into compliance.
   (C)   If the agent determines that storm water violations have or will
reasonably occur from a parcel of land in violation of this chapter, it may
seek to enforce the ordinance by notifying the person who owns the land by
mail, with return receipt requested, of its determination. The notice shall
contain a description of specific storm water measures which, if implemented by
the property owner, would bring the property owner into compliance.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.101 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined in Public Act 12 of
1994, amending Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101-600.9939 and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. In addition, any person found
responsible for a municipal civil infraction may be subject to an enforcement
order issued by the District Court Judge requiring remedial action to bring the
property into compliance with this chapter. Each day this chapter is violated
shall be considered as a separate violation.
   (B)   The Agent and any other person designated by the legislative body of
the city are hereby designated as the authorized officials to issue municipal
civil infraction citations directing alleged violators of this chapter to
appear in court.
   (C)   A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
or a nuisance per se and is declared to be offensive to the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (D)   In addition to enforcing this chapter through the use of a municipal
civil infraction proceeding, the agent may initiate proceedings in the Circuit
Court on behalf of the city, to abate or eliminate the nuisance per se or any
other violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.102 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   (A)   Where necessary to protect public safety or water resources, including
lakes, streams, regulated wetlands, and other receiving bodies of water, the
agent, through a Circuit Court abatement proceeding, may seek a temporary
restraining order or preliminary injunction from the court authorizing entry
onto private property for the purpose of initiating emergency action to abate
imminent and substantial danger and risk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided through maintenance agreements, the
property owner shall reimburse the city and/or Charlevoix County for all
expenses incurred as a result of the emergency action, including but not
limited to reasonable attorneys’ fees, administrative costs, and the costs of
any remedial action taken to abate the emergency condition.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
APPEALS
§ 155.115 CREATION OF APPEALS BOARD.
   An Appeals Board is hereby created which shall consist of five members. The
membership and organizational structure of the Appeals Board shall be
determined by the City. When discharging its duties under this chapter, the
Appeals Board shall comply with all requirements of the Open Meetings Act,
being Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. The Appeals Board Clerk
shall be responsible for providing all required notices for Appeals Board
hearings and for taking the minutes of the Appeals Board hearings.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.116 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the action or inaction of the agent related to this
chapter may appeal to the Appeals Board. Such appeal shall be made in writing
and shall be filed with the Appeals Board Clerk within 30 calendar days of the
decision that is being appealed. Any appeal that is not filed in a timely
manner shall be dismissed by the Appeals Board. The written appeal shall state
the order, requirement, decision, or determination that is being appealed, the
sections of this chapter that relate to the appeal, and those facts relevant to
the appeal, which support the basis for the appellant’s claim.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 155.117 APPEALS PROCESS.
   Upon receipt of an appeal, the Appeals Board Clerk shall direct the agent to
transmit to the Appeals Board a summary report of all previous action taken on
the subject of the appeal, a copy of any permits issued, and the appellant’s
written statement. The Appeals Board will then adhere to the following general
process:
   (A)   Within 15 calendar days of receiving a completed application, the
Appeals Board Clerk shall schedule a hearing date before the Appeals Board. The
Appeals Board Clerk shall send a written notice specifying the time, date, and
place of the Appeals Board hearing to the appellant and to all land owners
within 300 feet of the subject parcel and shall publish a copy of the hearing
notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city where the subject
property is located. The notice shall be mailed and published no less than 15
days before the scheduled hearing. The Appeals Board shall hold the hearing
within 60 calendar days from receipt of a completed application.
   (B)   The appellant shall deposit with the Appeals Board Clerk when the
appeal is filed the required fee, as specified in the fee schedule adopted
under §
155.039(A) of this chapter. The fee shall be used to cover the cost of handling
said appeal including compensation for Appeals Board members and associated
administrative costs.
   (C)   If the Appeals Board Clerk determines that the basic fee will not
cover the actual costs of the appeal, then the appellant shall deposit with the
Appeals Board Clerk such additional fees in an amount determined to be equal to
the estimated additional costs, including costs which may be incurred by the
agent. The additional fees shall be held in escrow in the appellant’s name and
shall be used solely to pay these additional costs. If the amount held in
escrow becomes less than 10% of the initial escrow deposit or less than 10% of
the latest additional escrow deposit and the appeal is not completed, the
Appeals Board Clerk may require the appellant to deposit additional fees into
escrow in an amount determined to be equal to the estimated costs to complete
the appeal. Failure of the appellant to make any required deposits shall be
deemed to make the appeal incomplete thereby justifying denial of the appeal.
Any unexpended funds held in escrow shall be returned to the appellant
following final action on the appeal. Any actual costs incurred in excess of
the amount held in escrow shall be billed to the appellant and shall be paid by
the applicant prior to the release of a final decision on the appeal.
   (D)   The Appeals Board may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, a decision
of the agent. In deciding an appeal, the Appeals Board shall determine:
      (1)   Whether the agent properly interpreted and applied this chapter in
making the decision.
      (2)   Whether the specific situation has circumstances that warrant a
variance from the standards of this chapter. Where the Appeals Board has
determined that a variance from the standards of this chapter may be warranted,
the Board may grant the appellant a variance from any design standard, setback,
or other provision contained within this chapter, provided that such variance
complies with the following general standards:
         (a)   The variance will not adversely impact adjacent property owners
or downstream properties in any material way.
         (b)   The variance is necessary to grant the appellant substantial
relief from a hardship that would otherwise be imposed by strict enforcement of
this chapter.
         (c)   The variance granted is the minimum deviation from the
requirements of this chapter necessary to do substantial justice to the
appellant. The Appeals Board may include such conditions or limitations on any
variance issued to ensure that granting the relief requested will not
substantially prevent, nor result in less, effective management of storm water
runoff.
         (d)   Granting of the variance would not knowingly be in conflict with
other regulatory requirements.
         (e)   The need for the variance is due to circumstances that are
unique to the property in question and not due to any act or omission of the
property owner, a prior property owner, or a past or present occupant of the
property.
   (E)   The decisions of the Appeals Board shall in all instances be final
administrative decisions, shall be in writing, and shall include specific
findings of fact by the Board, and further, shall be subject to such judicial
review as by law may be provided.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
REVISIONS
§ 155.130 REVISIONS.
   The agent shall review this chapter at least biannually, and make
recommendations for amendments if needed. The recommendations of the agent
shall be transmitted to the legislative body of the City of Charlevoix.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
APPENDIX A
City of Charlevoix Storm Water Ordinance Design Standards
Temporary Storm Water Management Standards
   (A)   Temporary storm water management facilities shall be installed by the
applicant and inspected by the agent before grading, filling or grubbing is
initiated.
   (B)   Where permanent storm water management facilities, such as detention
or retention basins are proposed for use during construction as a temporary
storm water management measure, the construction sequence and grading plan
shall be designed for the proper and effective implementation of these
facilities.
   (C)   Temporary storm water management measures shall be maintained
throughout the duration of the earth change, including the later stages of
development. Maintenance activities may include, but are not limited to removal
of accumulated sediment, structural repairs, and reseeding or replacement of
temporary vegetative covers.
   (D)   Temporary storm water management facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy
(EGLE) Best Management Practices (BMP) Guide Book for Michigan Watersheds.
   (E)   At a minimum, during construction all regulated earth changes shall be
required to provide temporary storm water management that either contains the
volume of runoff generated from a 10-year, 24-hour design storm on-site for all
disturbed area, or to provide silt fencing or other permeable barriers that
will manage the flow of storm water discharging off-site, diffusing it and
releasing it at reduced velocities, where such discharge will not adversely
impact downstream properties.
Permanent Storm Water Management Standards - General
   (A)   Storm Water Management Plan Preparation.
      (1)   For regulated activities on sites that exceed one acre, the agent
may require the Storm Water Management Plan is prepared by a registered
professional as defined by this chapter.
      (2)   For regulated activities on sites that exceed one acre, the agent
may request that the submitted site plan be reviewed by one or more registered
professionals contracted by the agent. The costs incurred for such review(s)
shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The applicant shall deposit with
the agent such fees in an amount determined by the agent equal to the estimated
costs. The fees shall be held in escrow in the applicant’s name and shall be
used solely to pay these costs. If the amount held in escrow becomes less than
10% of the initial escrow deposit or less than 10% of the latest additional
escrow deposit and review of the application is not completed, then the agent
may require the applicant to deposit additional fees into escrow in an amount
determined by the agent to be equal to the estimated costs to complete the
review. Failure of the applicant to make any escrow deposit required under this
chapter shall be deemed to make the application incomplete, thereby justifying
denial of the application. Any unexpended funds held in escrow shall be
returned to the applicant following final action on the application. Any actual
costs incurred in excess of the amount held in escrow shall be billed to the
applicant and shall be paid by the applicant prior to the release of a final
decision on the application.
      (3)   If the applicant disputes the agent’s need for outside professional
assistance in the review of the submitted plans, or the professional(s)
selected, the applicant has the right to appeal the agent’s decision to the
Appeals Board, who shall be responsible for making the final decision.
   (B)   On-site storm water management facilities which minimize adverse
impact to downstream properties shall be required for all sites unless a
proposal for off-site storm water management has been approved. Storm water
management facilities may include, but are not limited to: retention basins/
ponds, detention basins/ponds, wet basins, storm water treatment units,
controlled outfall structures, and rain gardens or other bio-filtration
systems.
   (C)   The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality “Urban Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual” will be used as a reference as well as the
following manuals: “Controlling Urban Runoff” by the Metropolitan Washington
Council of Governments; “Designing Stormwater Quality Management Practices” by
the University of Wisconsin, Madison; and the “Design of Stormwater Filtering
Systems” by the Center for Watershed Protection.
   (D)   Retention and detention basins shall have an emergency overflow
system. The overflow system shall be designed to accommodate flow from a 100-
year storm event, or as otherwise required by the appropriate State of Michigan
agency.
   (E)   If the storm water facilities for a 50-year storm cannot discharge to
a stream, lake or wetland without causing scouring, flooding or pollution on
site or downstream, then the basin shall be designed to hold or infiltrate
storm water from a 100-year, 24-hour frequency storm event.
   (F)   Sites that are located in areas serviced with a municipal storm
system, and that have the prior approval of the municipal system owner, may
discharge storm water to that system after it has been treated with an approved
separator system that removes 60% of sediments. The applicant shall be
responsible for all costs incurred to the municipal system to accommodate any
storm water discharged to the system from the site.
   (G)   The rainfall amounts for Charlevoix County shall be the numbers given
by the Natural Resources Conservation Service for a 24-hour duration and are as
follows: one-year storm equals 1.8 inches; two-year storm equals 2.2 inches;
five-year storm equals 2.7 inches; ten-year storm equals 3.0 inches; 25-year
storm equals 3.5 inches; 50-year storm equals 3.9 inches; 100-year storm equals
4.2 inches.
   (H)   The maximum grade for the side slopes of any storm water retention or
detention basin shall be no greater than 3:1 (horizontal to vertical) for
vegetated basins. Where, due to site limitations, this maximum side slope grade
cannot be met, the agent may grant an increase in the slope, provided
additional stabilization (beyond seed and mulch) is proposed.
   (I)   Storm water basins with permanent pools of water of three foot depth
or greater with side slopes steeper than one on six shall have one or more of
the following safety features:
      (1)   Safety ledges at the basin perimeter which are at least ten feet
wide.
      (2)   Aquatic vegetation surrounding the basin which discourages wading.
      (3)   Fencing to prevent unauthorized access to the basin.
   (J)   Storm water detention basins shall not be constructed in regulated
wetlands unless approved by the appropriate State of Michigan agency and/or the
Army Corps of Engineers.
   (K)   Storm water detention basins which impound five acres or more and have
a head of six feet or more shall meet dam construction permit requirements in
Part 315 of Act 451 of 1994, as amended, administered by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.
   (L)   Whenever possible, a created wetland or other bio-filtration area
shall be incorporated into storm water management facilities to assist removal
of soluble pollutants that cannot be removed by conventional settling. Sediment
carried off by runoff shall be required to settle out prior to discharge into
the created wetland or other bio-filtration area.
   (M)   Storm water management basins designed for retention, detention or
infiltration shall be isolated from septic systems and water wells by 50 feet
or more. Variations in the required setback may be granted by the Health
Department of Northwest Michigan prior to the issuance of a Charlevoix County
Storm Water Management Permit.
   (N)   New fueling stations will be required to install an approved separator
system for sites that discharge storm water off-site. Existing fueling stations
that are modifying more than 25% of their existing impervious surfaces will be
required to install an approved separator system if they discharge storm water
off-site.
Retention Basin Design
   (A)   Small projects in areas that have less than one-half (0.5) acre of
impervious surface shall be allowed to have runoff retention stored at two
inches of runoff from all impervious surface areas in lieu of detailed
hydrologic calculations.
   (B)   At a minimum, retention basins created in soils with permeability
greater than 1.3 inch per hour shall have the storage capacity to hold the
increase in runoff volume generated by the earth change.
      (1)   The required volume shall be calculated by comparing the
undeveloped conditions for a two-year, 24-hour frequency storm event to the
developed condition for a 25-year, 24-hour frequency storm event. Soil
permeability rates are listed in the following table:
 
Soil Texture & Structure                             Permeability (Inches/Hour)
Coarse sand and medium sand                          6 or more
Fine sand and loamy sand                             3 - 6
Sandy loam                                           2 - 3
Loam, sandy clay loam                                1.3 - 2
Clay loam, silt loam, clays, silts, muck, peat, marl Less than 1.3
 
         The retention basin shall be designed to drain within 72 hours.
   (C)   At a minimum, retention basins, which are created in soils with
permeability less than 1.3 inch per hour, shall be designed to store runoff
from back-to-back 50-year, 24-hour rainfall events.
Detention Basin Design Standards
   (A)   When using the Natural Resource Conservation Service Method, the
volume of a detention pond is to be calculated based upon a 50-year, 24-hour
storm with the developed site conditions and with an allowable outflow of a
ten-year, 24-hour storm based upon the pre-existing site conditions or 10% of
the flow rate calculated by the 50-year developed site conditions analysis.
[The TR-55 program does not accept lower values than 10% of the developed
rate.]
   (B)   The allowable peak discharge rate from a permanent storm water
management measure may be a staged rate. The maximum allowable peak discharge
rate shall not exceed the peak discharge rate from the project site prior to
the proposed development for all of the following 24-hour storm events: two-
year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, and 50-year. In no event shall the
discharge exceed the ability of the downstream condition to convey the flow
without damage to abutting properties.
   (C)   All sites with greater than one acre of impervious surface will
require the detention outflow to be directed to approved storm systems or have
the approval of adjacent property owners, with documented easements, or one can
release at a two-year before construction rate if it can be determined that
there is not a flooding hazard on the adjacent property. Low porosity in the
soils in the area of discharge and depressions in the land would be examples of
reasons to deny detention out-flowing at a two-year rate. Sites that have three
acres or more of parking area must in addition have an approved separator
system to remove impurities before discharging to the detention/retention pond
or install an approved treatment forebay.
Storm Water Separator Design Standards
   (A)   Approved separators are to remove a minimum of 60% of sediments.
   (B)   Treatment forebay criteria - the treatment forebay is designed to
store the “first flush” of pollutants typically found in urban storm water
runoff, and to capture initial flush pollutant loads.
      (1)   The treatment forebay shall be a wet basin or approved structure
with an impermeable bottom and sides to the design high water level.
      (2)   Sizing - the treatment forebay shall be sized to store the water
quality volume (Vwq) defined as one-half (0.5) inch of runoff from the directly
connected impervious area. This volume can be included in the overall flood
control volume.
      (3)   The minimum required water quality volume is given by the equation:
         Vwq = 1815 A 1
         Where:   Vwq   =   Water quality volume (cft)
            1815   =    0.5 inch of runoff x 3,630 to convert ac-in to cft
            A   =   Contributing drainage area (ac)
            1   =   Percent impervious expressed as a ration
      (4)   Capacity for the water quality volume shall be provided above the
normal water level.
      (5)   The overflow structure from the treatment forebay shall be sized
for the peak inflow from the design rainfall event.
      (6)   The top-of-berm elevation between the treatment forebay and the
infiltration basin shall be a minimum of one foot below the outer berm
elevation.
      (7)   The treatment forebay shall have a minimum one-foot-deep sump below
the inlet pipe for sediment accumulation.
      (8)   The outlet structure from the treatment forebay shall be designed
to draw water from the central portion of the water column with the forebay to
trap floatables and contain sediments. The top of the inlet structure shall be
located a minimum of one foot below the normal water level, and the invert
shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) feet above the bottom of the
treatment forebay.
      (9)   Material - treatment forebays shall be lined with impermeable
materials extending up to the design high water elevation. A minimum 18-inch-
thick clay layer, or an impermeable liner protected with a minimum of 12 inches
of soil cover are acceptable alternatives. Maximum allowable permeability shall
be 0.0001417 inch/hour as determined by a geotechnical engineer for clay
placement, or manufacturer’s certificate for line products.
Underground Storm Water Management Facilities
   (A)   If the use of storm water retention or detention basins, either on-
site or off-site is not feasible and the permeability of the soils is greater
than 1.3 inch per hour, the installation of underground drainage systems (catch
basins / manholes with open bottoms with stone and/or run(s) of perforated
piping) may be allowed if they provide for detention or retention volumes as
stated in these Charlevoix County Storm Water Ordinance guidelines. The
perforated piping and dry basin structure(s) cannot be considered to provide
for any outflow when calculating volumes for the detention system design. All
underground drainage systems must provide the following:
      (1)   Catch basins or separator systems, sediment basins, silt traps for
storm water flowing to the underground drainage system.
      (2)   An approved overflow system.
      (3)   Adequate provisions for maintenance.
   (B)   The required detention volume may be reduced by the agent by an amount
not to exceed 50% if rain gardens are implemented and demonstrate the ability
to accommodate an equivalent amount of storm water.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-18-2019)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   HISTORIC DISTRICTS
      
II.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: HISTORIC DISTRICTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Charlevoix Train Depot Historic District; 307 Chicago
-        - -         Avenue
                     (Prior Code, § 1.550)
                     Earl Young Historic Buildings District; 300 Park Avenue,
                     302 Park Avenue, 304 Park Avenue (non-contributing), 306
778      4-18-2016   Park Avenue, 308 Park Avenue, 310 Park Avenue, 101 Grant
                     Street, 103 Grant Street, 303 Clinton Street, 305 Clinton
                     Street and 316 Park Avenue
                     (Prior Code, § 1.551)
                    
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Gas system franchise with Michigan Consolidated Gas
-        - -         Company
                     (Prior Code, §§ 11.1.1 through 11.3.10)
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Cites Code Section
M.C.L.A. Cites      Code Section
                    32.109;
15.231—15.246     35.04;
                    35.06
                    32.109;
15.261—15.275     35.04;
                    35.06;
                    153.037
15.342 et seq.      36.03
24.201—24.328     70.01
28.451—28.471     94.22
54.211—54.213     154.05
117.1—117.38      30.02
117.3(k)            91.72
123.161—123.167   50.08
125.401 et seq.     91.03
125.521 et seq.     91.08
125.539             91.03
125.541             91.11
125.651 et seq.     32.035;
                    32.038
                    35.10;
125.1501—125.1531 35.11;
                    150.01
125.1509            150.01
125.3101 et seq.    150.01
                    153.001;
125.3101—125.3702 153.005;
                    153.006;
                    153.117
125.3801 et seq.    32.105
125.3833(2)         32.110
125.3839 —125.384532.110
                    32.071—
                    32.076;
125.4201—152.4230 34.02;
                    34.03;
                    34.14
125.4205            32.074
141.101—141.138   50.07
141.153             33.10
168.10              32.112
168.11              32.112
168.44e             Charter
                    4.4
211.1 et seq.       91.11
211.1—211.157     10.99
211.27a(6)(a)—(k) 114.02
211.60              10.99
247.61—247.72     91.62;
                    91.63 
257.1—257.923     70.01;
                    91.02
254.741             70.10
257.742             70.10
280.1 — 280.630   153.125
                    51.01;
324.101 et seq.     51.06;
                    51.07;
                    51.08
324.11501 et seq.   51.02;
                    153.005
324.80101—324.801994.09;
                    94.99
330.1001—330.2106 32.112
333.2010 et seq.    153.005
333.6101—333.6523 153.116
333.12601 et seq.   98.02;
                    98.03
333.12701—333.127753.02
333.27951 et seq.   97.02;
                    97.03
339.2501 et seq.    91.03
399.201a            35.02
399.203             35.04
399.204             35.03
399.205—399.215   35.05
399.205(2)          35.07
399.211             35.07
399.215             35.06
400.701 et seq.     153.005
436.1521a(1)(b)     113.16
460.1301 et seq.    153.125
460.6g              153.125
462.109             153.125
484.310             153.125
559.101 et seq.     155.030
559.101—559.272   153.005
560.101—560.293   153.005
560.101 et seq.     153.005
                    52.99;
600.101—600.9939  95.99 ;
                    155.101
600.101—600.9948  10.99
600.113(c)          10.99
600.3201—600.3280 50.10
600.8395            70.10
701.1—713.6       153.005
722.111—722.128   153.005
722.673             113.01
752.362             113.01;
                    130.03
722.673             130.03
                    
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2018 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2018 Code Section
1.21               151.60
1.22               151.61
1.23               151.62
1.24               151.63
1.25               151.64
1.26               151.64
1.41               32.090
1.42               32.091
1.43               32.092
1.52               31.02
1.53               31.03
1.54               31.04
1.55               31.05
1.58               31.07
1.59               31.08
1.60               31.09
1.61               31.10
1.62               31.11
1.151              31.08
1.152              31.08
1.201              32.015
1.202              32.016
1.203              32.017
1.205              32.018;
                   32.019
1.206              32.020
1.207              32.021
1.241              32.001
1.242              32.001
1.243              32.001
1.244              32.001
1.251              32.035
1.252              32.036
1.253              32.037
1.254              32.038
1.255              32.039
1.256              32.040
1.257              32.041
1.258              32.042
1.261              32.055
1.262              32.056
1.263              32.057
1.264              32.058
1.271              32.070
1.272              32.071
1.273              32.072
1.274              32.073
1.275              32.074
1.276              32.075
1.277              32.074
1.278              32.074
1.279              32.074
1.280              32.074
1.281              32.076
1.284              34.01
1.285              34.02
1.286              34.03
1.287              34.04
1.288              34.05
1.289              34.06
1.290              34.07
1.291              34.08
1.292              34.09
1.293              34.10
1.294              34.08
1.295              34.11
1.296              34.12
1.297              34.13
1.298              34.14
1.299              34.15
1.300              34.15
1.301              34.15
1.302              34.15
1.303              34.15
1.304              34.15
1.400              32.105
1.401              32.106
1.402              32.107
1.403              32.108
1.404              32.109
1.405              32.110
1.406              32.111
1.407              32.112
1.550              TSO I
1.551              TSO I
1.600              33.01
1.601              33.02
1.602              33.02
1.603              33.02
1.604              33.03
1.605              33.04
1.606              33.05
1.607              33.06
1.608              33.07
1.609              33.08
1.610              33.09
1.611              33.10
1.612              33.10
1.613              33.10
1.614              33.10
1.615              33.10
1.616              33.10
1.617              33.11
1.618              33.12
1.619              33.13
1.620              33.14
1.621              33.15
1.622              33.16
1.623              33.17
1.624              33.18
1.701              30.01
1.702              30.02
2.1                51.01
2.2                51.02
2.3                51.03
2.4                51.04
2.5                51.05
2.6                51.06
2.7                51.07
2.8                51.08
2.9                51.99
2.51               52.01
2.52               52.02
2.53               52.03
2.54               52.04
2.55               52.05
2.56               52.06
2.57               52.07
2.58               52.07
2.59               52.08
2.60               52.09
2.61               52.10
2.62               52.11
2.63               52.12
2.64               52.13
2.65               52.14
2.71               52.25
2.72               52.26
2.73               52.27
2.74               52.28
2.75               52.29
2.76               52.30
2.77               52.31
2.78               52.99
2.81               53.01
2.82               53.02
2.83               53.02
2.84               53.02
2.85               53.02
2.88               53.03
2.89               53.03
2.92               53.15
2.93               53.16
2.94               53.17
2.95               53.18
2.96               53.19
2.100              53.30
2.101              53.31
2.102              53.32
2.103              53.33
2.104              53.34
2.105              53.35
2.106              53.36
2.107              53.36
2.108              53.36
2.109              53.36
2.110              53.36
2.111              53.36
2.112              53.36
2.113              53.37
2.114              53.37
2.115              53.37
2.116              53.38
2.117              53.39
2.118              53.40
2.119              53.41
2.120              53.42
2.131              50.01
2.132              50.02
2.133              50.03
2.134              50.04
2.135              50.03
2.136              50.05
2.137              50.03
2.138              50.06
2.139              50.07
2.141              50.08
2.142              50.09
2.143              50.10
2.144              50.11
2.161              50.25
2.162              50.26
2.163              50.27
2.164              50.28
2.181              95.01
2.182              95.02
2.183              95.03
2.184              95.04
2.185              95.05
2.186              95.06
2.187              95.07
2.188              95.08
2.189              95.09
2.190              95.10
2.191              95.11
2.192              95.12
2.193              95.25
2.194              95.26
2.195              95.27
2.196              95.28
2.197              95.29
2.198              95.30
2.199              95.31
2.200              95.99
2.300              95.45
2.301              95.46
2.302              95.47
2.303              95.48
2.304              95.49
2.305              95.50
3.1                94.20
3.2                94.21
3.3                94.22
3.5                94.23
3.6                94.24
3.8                94.25
3.9                94.26
3.10               94.27
3.11               94.28
3.13               94.29
3.51               93.01
3.52               93.02
3.53               93.03
3.54               93.04
3.55               93.05
3.56               93.06
3.57               93.07
3.58               93.08
3.81               94.01
3.82               94.02
3.83               94.03
3.84               94.04
3.85               94.05
3.86               94.06
3.87               94.07
3.88               94.08
3.89               94.09;
                   94.99
4.1                151.04
4.2                151.04
4.3                151.04
4.4                151.04
4.5                151.04
4.6                151.04
4.7                151.04
4.8                151.04
4.9                151.04
4.10               151.04
4.11               151.04
4.20               151.20
4.21               151.21
4.22               151.22
4.23               151.23
4.24               151.24
4.25               151.25
4.26               151.26
4.27               151.27
4.35               151.28
4.40               151.01
4.41               151.01
4.42               151.01
4.43               151.01
4.50               151.02
4.55               151.03
4.56               151.03
4.58               151.29
4.59               151.29
4.60               151.29
4.61               151.40
4.62               151.41
4.64               151.42
4.65               151.43
4.66               151.44
4.67               151.45
4.68               151.46
4.69               151.47
4.70               151.48
4.91               152.01
4.92               152.02
4.93               152.03
4.94               152.04
4.95               152.04
4.96               152.05
4.97               152.06
4.98               152.07
4.99               152.08
4.100              152.09
4.101              152.10
4.102              152.11
5.1                153.001
5.2                153.002
5.3                153.003
5.4                153.004
5.5                153.005
5.6                153.005
5.7                153.005
5.8                153.005
5.9                153.005
5.10               153.005
5.11               153.005
5.12               153.005
5.13               153.005
5.14               153.005
5.15               153.005
5.16               153.005
5.20               153.055
5.21               153.056
5.22               153.057
5.25               153.070
5.26               153.071
5.27               153.072
5.30               153.085
5.31               153.086
5.33               153.088
5.40               153.100
5.41               153.101
5.42               153.102
5.43               153.103
5.45               153.115
5.46               153.116
5.47               153.117
5.48               153.118
5.49               153.119
5.50               153.120
5.51               153.121
5.52               153.122
5.53               153.123
5.54               153.124
5.55               153.125
5.60               153.140
5.61               153.141
5.62               153.142
5.63               153.143
5.64               153.144
5.65               153.145
5.66               153.146
5.67               153.147
5.68               153.148
5.69               153.149
5.70               153.150
5.71               153.151
5.72               153.152
5.73               153.153
5.74               153.154
5.75               153.155
5.76               153.156
5.77               153.157
5.78               153.158
5.79               153.159
5.80               153.170
5.82               153.172
5.83               153.173
5.84               153.174
5.90               153.185
5.91               153.186
5.92               153.187
5.93               153.188
5.94               153.189
5.95               153.190
5.100              153.205
5.101              153.206
5.102              153.207
5.103              153.208
5.104              153.209
5.105              153.209
5.106              153.210
5.107              153.211
5.108              153.212
5.109              153.213
5.110              153.214
5.111              153.215
5.112              153.216
5.113              153.217
5.114              153.218
5.115              153.219;
                   153.230
5.116              153.231
5.117              153.232
5.118              153.234
5.119              153.235
5.120              153.237
5.121              153.238
5.122              153.239
5.123              153.241
5.124              153.242
5.130              153.250
5.131              153.251
5.132              153.252
5.133              153.253
5.134              153.254
5.135              153.255
5.136              153.256
5.137              153.257
5.140              153.270
5.141              153.271
5.142              153.272
5.143              153.273
5.144              153.274
5.145              153.275
5.146              153.276
5.147              153.290
5.150              153.290
5.151              153.291
5.152              153.292
5.153              153.293
5.154              153.294
5.160              153.020
5.161              153.021
5.162              153.022
5.163              153.023;
                   153.999
5.164              153.024
5.175              153.035
5.176              153.036
5.177              153.037
5.178              153.038
5.179              153.039
5.180              153.040
5.181              153.041
5.182              153.042
5.190              153.006
5.191              153.006
5.192              153.006
5.193              153.006
5.194              153.006
5.295              150.15
5.296              150.16
5.297              150.17
5.300              154.01
5.301              154.02
5.303              154.03
5.304              154.04
5.305              154.05
5.306              154.06
5.307              154.07
5.308              154.08
5.309              154.09
5.310              154.99
5.311              154.10
5.312              154.11
5.313              154.99
6.1                91.01
6.2                91.02
6.3                91.03
6.4                91.04
6.5                91.05
6.6                91.06
6.7                91.07
6.8                91.08
6.9                91.08
6.20               91.25
6.21               91.26
6.22               91.27
6.30               91.99
6.41               91.40
6.42               91.41
6.43               91.42
6.44               91.43
6.45               91.44
6.46               91.45
6.47               91.46
6.48               91.47
6.49               91.47
6.71               91.60
6.72               91.61
6.73               91.62
6.74               91.63
6.91               96.01
6.92               96.02
6.93               96.03
6.100              91.64
6.101              91.64
6.102              91.64
6.103              91.99
7.1                110.01
7.2                110.02
7.3                110.03
7.4                110.04
7.5                110.05
7.6                110.06
7.7                110.07
7.8                110.08
7.9                110.09
7.10               110.10
7.11               110.11
7.12               110.12
7.13               110.13
7.14               110.14
7.15               110.15
7.16               110.16
7.17               110.17
7.18               110.18
7.19               110.13
7.20               110.19
7.21               110.19
7.22               110.19
7.23               110.17
7.24               110.17
7.31               110.30
7.32               110.31
7.33               110.32
7.34               110.33
7.35               110.34
7.51               111.01
7.52               111.02
7.53               111.03
7.54               111.04
7.55               111.05
7.56               111.06
7.57               111.07
7.58               111.08
7.59               111.09
7.60               111.10
7.61               111.11
7.62               111.12
7.63               111.12
7.64               111.13
7.65               111.14
7.66               111.15
7.67               111.16
7.101              112.01
7.102              112.02
7.103              112.03
7.104              112.04
7.105              112.05
7.301              113.01
7.304              113.04
7.302              113.02
7.303              113.03
7.305              113.15—
                   113.21
8.1                150.01
9.1                130.03
9.2                130.03
9.3                130.99
9.4                130.03
9.5                130.03
9.91               130.04
9.92               130.04
9.93               130.04
9.94               130.99
9.95               130.99
9.96               130.04
9.121              90.01
9.122              90.02
9.123              90.03
9.124              90.01
9.125              90.04
9.135              90.05
9.136              90.05
9.137              90.05
9.181              92.01
9.182              92.02
9.183              92.03
9.184              92.04
9.185              92.05
9.186              92.06
9.187              92.07
9.188              92.08
9.189              92.09;
                   92.99
9.190              92.99
9.221              130.01
9.222              130.01
9.223              130.99
9.230              130.02
9.231              130.99
10.81              71.01
10.82              71.02
10.83              71.03
10.84              71.04
10.85              71.05
10.86              71.06
10.87              71.07
10.88              71.08
10.89              71.09
10.90              71.10
10.91              71.11
10.92              71.99
11.1.1—11.3.10   TSO II
12.1               10.99
12.2               10.99
12.3               10.99
12.4               10.99
12.5               10.99
12.6               10.99
12.7               10.99
12.8               10.99
12.9               10.99
12.10              10.99
12.11              10.99
12.12              10.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         TSO I
-        - -         TSO II
397      4-19-1982   32.070—
                     32.076
411      8-16-1982   110.34
413      10-4-1982   151.48
420      12-6-1982   30.01
426      5-16-1983   34.01—
                     34.14
442      1-21-1985   31.08
448      4-15-1985   32.074
463      6-2-1986    32.075
488      3-21-1988   94.09;
                     94.99
489      4-4-1988    151.45;
                     151.47
490      4-18-1988   71.09
513      4-17-1989   50.27
                     151.04;
515      7-3-1989    151.20—
                     151.28
520      11-6-1989   150.15
548      6-3-1991    31.08
555      8-5-1991    151.29
595      4-6-1992    30.01
598      5-4-1992    96.01—
                     96.03
599      8-17-1992   96.01
605      4-19-1993   130.03
616      9-6-1994    31.08
621      3-20-1995   50.08—
                     50.11
630      12-4-1995   91.60—
                     91.63
641      6-2-1997    50.09
647      11-16-1998  93.01—
                     93.08
651      4-5-1999    90.01—
                     90.03
                     10.11,
                     10.99;
                     31.02;
                     53.40;
                     90.01—
                     90.03;
                     91.46;
                     91.47;
                     91.99;
658      3-6-2000    94.24;
                     94.28;
                     96.01;
                     96.03;
                     111.16;
                     130.01;
                     130.03;
                     130.99;
                     151.04;
                     152.10
661      4-1-2000    113.04
                     90.01;
665      2-19-2001   90.03;
                     130.03;
                     130.99
672      2-18-2002   30.01
                     52.25—
673      5-20-2002   52.31;
                     52.99
674      9-3-2002    130.04
676      9-16-2002   151.64
                     154.01—
680      11-18-2002  154.11;
                     154.99
681      12-2-2002   32.075;
                     34.05
687      5-19-2003   150.15;
                     150.16
697      1-15-2004   90.05
696      8-2-2004    32.017
                     90.01—
702      5-16-2005   90.03;
                     90.05
706      10-17-2005  33.18
707      11-7-2005   50.09
730      7-7-2008    90.04
731      7-21-2008   52.14
732      7-21-2008   52.25
735      11-17-2008  90.01;
                     90.02
750      7-18-2011   30.01
751      7-18-2011   34.05
                     95.01—
                     95.12;
                     95.25—
755      2-20-2012   95.31;
                     95.45—
                     95.50;
                     95.99
                     113.01—
758      1-7-2013    113.04;
                     113.15—
                     113.21
765      6-2-2014    91.99
                     91.01—
                     91.08;
                     91.40—
767      9-15-2014   91.47;
                     91.60—
                     91.63;
                     96.01—
                     96.03
768      12-15-2014  151.04
772      6-4-2015    94.22
773      9-21-2015   130.03
774      10-19-2015  52.02
778      4-18-2016   TSO I
                     113.01—
779      1-16-2017   113.04;
                     113.15—
                     113.21
784      10-16-2017  153.125
787      3-19-2018   130.02;
                     130.99
788      3-19-2018   52.11—
                     52.14
789      3-19-2018   153.205—
                     153.219
                     91.02;
790      3-19-2018   91.03;
                     91.09—
                     91.11
                     153.001;
                     153.005;
                     153.071;
791      3-19-2018   153.116;
                     153.145;
                     153.151;
                     153.231
                     51.01—
792      3-19-2018   51.08;
                     51.99
                     36.01—
793      6-18-2018   36.05,
                     36.99
                     153.005;
                     153.072;
                     153.117;
                     153.118;
794      9-17-2018   153.125;
                     153.188;
                     153.234;
                     153.239;
                     153.271—
                     153.274
                     153.005—
                     153.007;
                     153.035;
                     153.037;
                     153.072;
                     153.086;
795      11-5-2018   153.116—
                     153.118;
                     153.122;
                     153.141;
                     153.149;
                     153.151;
                     153.158
                     97.01—
796      1-7-2019    97.04;
                     98.01—
                     98.06
799      2-18-2019   Adopting Ordinance
                     153.005;
                     153.116;
801      4-15-2019   153.153;
                     153.158;
                     153.207
                     153.070—
802      4-15-2019   153.072;
                     153.117;
                     153.187
                     153.005;
                     153.070;
805      9-3-2019    153.071;
                     153.086;
                     153.117
806      9-3-2019    153.153
807      9-3-2019    153.186—
                     153.189
808      11-18-2019  32.055;
                     32.058
809      11-18-2019  152.02;
                     152.03
                     155.001—
                     155.005;
                     155.015—
                     155.017;
                     155.030—
                     155.040;
                     155.055—
                     155.057;
810      11-18-2019  155.070—
                     155.073;
                     155.085—
                     155.087;
                     155.100—
                     155.102;
                     155.115—
                     155.117;
                     155.030
811      11-18-2019  91.26
815      2-17-2020   114.01—
                     114.08
816      4-13-2020   153.055
                     51.06;
818      6-1-2020    151.02;
                     151.22
819      6-1-2020    94.22
820      6-1-2020    153.125
821      10-19-2020  153.005;
                     153.118
822      10-19-2020  153.230 —
                     153.243
                     150.01;
                     153.005;
                     153.040;
823      1-4-2021    153.116;
                     153.158;
                     153.170;
                     153.274
826      6-21-2021   94.30
828      1-17-2022   91.70 —
                     91.77
829      1-17-2022   32.055
                     Charter
832      5-16-2022   1.2,  
                     30.01
834      1-2-2023    153.215;
                     153.219
                     153.005;
                     153.072;
835      1-2-2023    153.116;
                     153.117;
                     153.146;
                     153.152
836      1-2-2023    31.02
839      6-19-2023   153.116,
                     153.187
                     153.071,
840      6-19-2023   153.072,
                     153.116
                     52.40 —
841      10-16-2023  52.46,
                     52.99
                     153.005,
                     153.055,
                     153.070 —
                     153.072,
842      12-18-2023  153.102,
                     153.117,
                     153.125,
                     153.237 ,
                     153.272,
                     153.272
846      3-4-2024    114.02—
                     114.06
                     153.101,
                     153.116,
                     153.117,
                     153.145,
848      4-1-2024    153.149,
                     153.151,
                     153.152,
                     153.158,
                     153.189
849      6-3-2024    153.215
850      7-1-2024    153.005,
                     153.153
853      11-18-2024  130.03
854      12-16-2024  153.172,
                     153.207
855      12-16-2024  32.106
856      1-6-2025    10.99
                     35.01—
859      3-17-2025   35.07;
                     35.99
860      8-18-2025   114.04
                     71.01—
                     71.08,
861      8-18-2025   71.10,
                     71.11,
                     71.99
862      8-18-2025   90.06,
                     91.03
864      1-19-2026   153.118,
                     153.160
865      1-19-2026   153.171
                     153.087,
866      1-19-2026   153.089,
                     153.090, Repeals 153.104
867      1-19-2026   70.01—
                     70.10
                    
 
 
Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Charlevoix beginning in 2019. The table includes links to the ordinances (as
maintained in PDF format) and to the code sections affected (where applicable).
For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to 2019, please
contact the City of Charlevoix.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out and are not available in a PDF format for viewing.
 
Jump to:
2019 Ordinances
2020 Ordinances
2021 Ordinances
2022 Ordinances
2023 Ordinances
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2026 Ordinances
2019 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. Adopt. Short Title and Code Sections Affected
No.  Date
            Prohibiting Recreational Marihuana Establishments
796- 1-7-    
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            97.01—97.04; 98.01—98.06
797- 1-7-   Budget Amendment
2019 2019
798- 2-18-  Budget Appropriation
2019 2019
            Adopting the Code of Ordinances
799- 2-18-   
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            Adopting Ordinance
            Amending Historic Preservation chapter
800- 4-15-   
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            35.03, 35.04, 35.10, 35.11
            Planning and Zoning definitions
801- 4-15-   
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            153.005; 153.116; 153.153; 153.158; 153.207
            Residential Uses and Parking Regulations
802- 4-15-   
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            153.070 - 153.072, 153.117, 153.187
803- 5-6-   Designating Flood Hazard Areas
2019 2019
804- 5-6-   Designating Flood Hazard Areas
2019 2019
            Amending Zoning Code
805- 9-3-    
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            153.005; 153.070; 153.071; 153.086; 153.117
            Amending Zoning Code
806- 9-3-    
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            153.153
            Amending Zoning Code
807- 9-3-    
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            153.186; 153.187; 153.188; 153.189
            Amending Ch. 32, Organizations
808- 11-18-  
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            32.055; 32.058
            Amending Ch. 152, Trees
809- 11-18-  
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            152.02; 152.03
            Amending Title XV, adding Stormwater Management Ordinance
810- 11-18-  
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            155.001—155.005; 155.015—155.017; 155.030—155.040; 155.055—155.057;
            155.070—155.073; 155.085—155.087; 155.100—155.102; 155.115—155.117; 155.030
            Amending Ch. 91, Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
811- 11-18-  
2019 2019   Sections Affected:
            91.26
 
2020 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
813-2020 2-17-2020   Budget Appropriation
814-2020 2-17-2020   Budget Amendment
                     Short Term Rentals
815-2020 2-17-2020    
                     Sections Affected:
                     114.01—114.08
                     Amending Zoning Code
816-2020 4-13-2020    
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.055
                     Regulating placement of construction waste, construction
                     within the public right-of-way, and construction parking
818-2020 6-1-2020    and traffic
                      
                     Sections Affected:
                     51.06, 70.04, 151.02, 151.22
                     Amending Chapter 94, Section 94.22: Fireworks
819-2020 6-1-2020     
                     Sections Affected:
                     94.22
                     Amending Chapter 153: Small Wireless Communications
                     Facilities Deployment
820-2020 6-1-2020     
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.125
                     Amending Chapter 153: Planning and Zoning
821-2020 10-19-2020   
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.005, 153.118
                     Amending Chapter 153: Planning and Zoning
822-2020 10-19-2020   
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.230 - 153.243
                     Revisions to City Charter
Charter  11-3-2020    
                     Sections Affected:
                     Charter
 
 
2021 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Amending Section 150.01 and Chapter 153: Planning and
                     Zoning
823-2021 1-4-2021     
                     Sections Affected:
                     150.01; 153.005; 153.040; 153.116; 153.158; 153.170;
                     153.274
                     Alcoholic Beverages
826-2021 6-21-2021    
                     Sections Affected:
                     94.30
                     All Night Parking
827-2021 9-20-2021    
                     Sections Affected:
                     70.04
                     Revisions to City Charter
Charter  11-2-2021    
                     Sections Affected:
                     Charter
 
 
2022 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Property Maintenance Code
828-2022 1-17-2022    
                     Sections Affected:
                     Adding 91.70
                     Shade Tree and Park Commission
829-2022 1-17-2022    
                     Sections Affected:
                     32.055
830-2022 2-21-2022   2021-2022 Budget amendment
831-2022 2-21-2022   Budget appropriation
                     Amending Ward Boundaries
832-2022 5-16-2022    
                     Sections Affected:
                     30.01
 
 
2023 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     CBD Zoning District
834-2022 1-2-2023     
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.215; Table 153.219
                     Planning and Zoning
                      
835-2022 1-2-2023    Sections Affected:
                     153.005, 153.072, 153.087, 153.116, 153.117, 153.146,
                     153.152
                     City Manager and Purchasing Agent
836-2023 1-2-2023     
                     Sections Affected:
                     31.02, Repeal 31.06
837-2023 3-6-2023    Budget amendment
838-2023 3-6-2023    Adopting 2023-24 budget
                     Allowed accessory dwelling units
839-2023 6-19-2023    
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.071, 153.072, 153.116
                     Allowed accessory dwelling units
840-2023 6-19-2023    
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.071, 153.072, 153.116
                     Work in Environmentally Impaired Area
841-2023 10-16-2023   
                     Sections Affected:
                     Adding 52.40 - 52.46, 52.99
                     Amending Zoning Code
                      
842-2023 12-18-2023  Sections Affected:
                     153.005, 153.055, 153.072, 153.102, 153.117, 153.125,
                     153.171, 153.237
                     Amending Zoning Code
843-2023 10-16-2023   
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.055
                    
 
 
2024 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
844-2024 2-19-2024   Budget Amendment #1 (2023-2024)
845-2024 2-19-2024   Budget Appropriation Act
                     Amending Short Term Rentals:
846-2024 3-4-2024     
                     Sections Affected:
                     Chapter 114: 114.01 - 114.06
847-2024 3-4-2024    Rezoning
                     Amending Planning and Zoning (Ch 153)
                      
848-2024 4-1-2024    Sections Affected:
                     153.101, 153.116, 153.117, 153.145, 153.149, 153.152,
                     153.158, 153.189
                     Amending CBD zoning district
849-2024 6-3-2024     
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.215
                     Amending Land Usage (Ch 153)
850-2024 7-1-2024     
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.005 and 153.153 
851-2024 8-7-2024    Payment in lieu of tax ordinance for Pinebridge Place
852-2024 10-14-2024  Rezoning
                     Amending code regarding Disorderly Conduct
853-2024 11-18-2024   
                     Sections Affected:
                     130.03
                     Amending code regarding lighting
854-2024 12-16-2024   
                     Sections Affected:
                     153.172, 153.207
                     Amending code regarding membership of Planning Commission
855-2024 12-16-2024   
                     Sections Affected:
                     32.106
 
 
2025 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Amending general penalty
856-2025 1-6-2025     
                     Sections Affected:
                     10.99
857-2025 2-17-2025   2024 - 2025 Budget Amendment #1
858-2025 2-17-2025   Budget Appropriation Act
                     Amending Ch. 35 Historic Preservation in its entirety
859-2025 3-17-2025    
                     Sections Affected:
                     Chapter 35
                     Amending Ch. 114 regarding Short-Term Rentals
860-2025 8-18-2025    
                     Sections Affected:
                     114.04
                     Amending Ch. 71 regarding traffice and parking:
                      
861-2025 8-18-2025   Sections Affected:
                     71.01, 71.02, 71.03, 71.04, 71.05, 71.06, 71.07, 71.08,
                     71.10, 71.11, 71.99
                     Amending Ch. 90 and Ch. 91 regarding feeding wild animals
862-2025 8-18-2025    
                     Sections Affected:
                     Adding 90.06; 91.03
 
 
2026 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Amending Ch. 153, regarding lodging, dining, and
864-2026 1-19-2026   entertainment uses
                      
                     153.118, 153.160
                     Amending Ch. 153 regarding landscaping
865-2026 1-19-2026    
                     153.171
                     Amending Ch. 153 regarding Planning and Zoning
866-2026 1-19-2026    
                     153.087, 153.104, Adding 153.161
                     Amending Ch. 70 and Ch. 71 regarding traffic and parking
867-2026 1-19-2026    
                     Ch 70; renaming Ch 71
                    
 
 
 
 
