CITY OF DEARBORN, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council
Adopted: February 20, 1996
Effective: March 1, 1996
 
Updated through: September 9, 2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
2024
 
Abdullah Hammoud
Mayor 
____________
Michael Sareini, President
Leslie Herrick, President Pro Tem
Robert Abraham
Kamal Alsawafy
Gary Enos
Mustapha Hammoud
Ken Paris
City Council 
____________
Jeremy Romer
Corporation Attorney 
____________
George T. Darany
City Clerk 
____________
Megan Lizbinski
Deputy City Clerk 
Adopting Ordinance
Ordinance No. 96-661
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Dearborn;
Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing
a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such
Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Section 1. Title. Adoption. 
The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances—City of Dearborn," published by Municipal
Code Corporation, consisting of Chapter 1 through Chapter 19, each inclusive,
is hereby adopted.
Section 2. Repeal. 
A.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before
December 31, 1990, and not included in the "Code of Ordinances—City of
Dearborn," or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are
hereby repealed.
B.   The following ordinances have not been included, recognized, nor continued
in force, in the "Code of Ordinances—City of Dearborn":
1.   81-54 Readoption Ordinance
2.   81-62 Radio Interference
3.   81-63 Trailer Camps and Trailers
4.   81-71 An Ordinance to Provide Sewage Disposal to Premises Outside the City
Limits (Note: Amendment 85-326 to 81-71 has been included in the Code.)
5.   81-78 Sale of Perishable Food
6.   81-80 Parking Meters
7.   81-93 Swimming Pools
8.   81-107 Local Officers Compensation Commission
9.   81-128 Food Establishments
10.   81-131 Plumbing Code
11.   81-136 Aircraft Noise Ordinance
12.   81-139 Establish an Unemployment Compensation System
C.   The repeal provided for in subsection A above shall not be construed to
revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
D.   Those ordinances recognized and continued in force are as follows:
1.   93-553 - Zoning Ordinance
2.   All Employee and Retirement Plans
3.   81-112 - Sign Ordinance
4.   85-323 - High Pressure Boiler Code (delete sections 5-311 through 5-429 of
proposed Code of Ordinances - City of Dearborn)
5.   85-347 - An Ordinance To Grant A Franchise to Detroit Edison
6.   90-475 - An Ordinance To Provide For The Construction, Installation, And
Equipping Of Improvements To The Sewage Disposal Sale Of A Revenue Bond To Pay
The Cost Thereof; To Prescribe The Form Of The Bond; To Provide For The
Collection Of Revenues From The System Sufficient For The Purpose Of Paying The
Costs Of Operation And Maintenance Of The System And To Pay The Principal Of
And Interest On The Bond; And To Provide For The Establishment Of Funds And
Accounts To Provide For The Segregation And Distribution Of The Revenues; To
Provide For The Rights Of The Holders Of The Bond In Enforcement Thereof; And
To Provide For Other Matters Relating To The Bond And The System
7.   81-18 - An Ordinance Granting A Franchise To Teleprompter Of Dearborn,
Inc. To Construct, Operate And Maintain A Cable Telecommunication System In The
City Of Dearborn, Michigan
Section 3. Technical Codes. 
The adoption, inclusion, recognition, or continuation in force by reference in
the "Code of Ordinances—City of Dearborn" of technical codes shall include
subsequent amendments and/or supplements to said technical codes.
Section 4. Penalty. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of the "Code of Ordinances—City of Dearborn," or any
ordinance, rule, or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars or by
imprisonment in the discretion of the Court. Each act of violation and each day
upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such
penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty
prescribed above, the City of Dearborn may pursue other remedies such as:
abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5. Additions or Amendments to the Code. 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the
intention of the City of Dearborn to make the same a part of the Code shall be
deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes
the additions and amendments.
Section 6. Ordinances Adopted After January 1, 1991. 
Ordinances adopted after January 1, 1991 that amend or refer to ordinances that
have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to
like provisions of the Code.
Authentication
This is to certify that the undersigned do hereby authenticate the foregoing
Ordinance adopted on February 20, 1996 and published on February 29, 1996,
effective the day following publication. True copies of this ordinance may be
inspected or obtained in the Office of the City Clerk.
              
 
  /s/ Michael A. Guido
  Mayor
  
  /s/ Duane Wydendorf
  City Clerk
  
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Dearborn, in order to provide a government
which recognizes that human life and talent is our most important resource, and
the development and enrichment of these our most important task, do adopt this
charter. We acknowledge that political power is inherent in the people. We
desire a framework of government in which all people can participate, by which
policy objectives reflecting the people's goals can be fashioned and through
which officials can be chosen in a democratic manner and held accountable for
their actions.
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the City of Dearborn,
Michigan, adopted by the electors on November 6, 2007. For a complete history
of the former Home Rule Charter of the city, see the Charter Comparative Table.
Amendments are indicated by a history note in parentheses following the amended
section. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions
made for clarity are enclosed by brackets.
State Law reference— Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071
et seq.; power to amend or adopt Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22.
CHAPTER 1. - NAME, BOUNDARIES AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS OF THE CITY
Section 1.1. - Name.
   The official name of the City governed by this charter shall be the City of
Dearborn.
Section 1.2. - Boundaries.
   The boundaries of the City existing when this charter takes effect shall
continue in force until changed in accordance with law.
State Law reference— Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration
of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.61 et seq., MSA 5.2085 et seq.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-25.png]
boundaries
   Footnote: Technical and exact descriptions of the boundaries of the City and
its subdivisions may be obtained from the City Engineer or the State boundary
Commission. This map shows the general boundaries of the City.
Section 1.3. - Political subdivisions.
   The City shall consist of one ward and such election precincts as are
established in accordance with law.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL
117.3(e), MSA 5.2073(e); election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq., MSA 6.1654 et
seq.
CHAPTER 2. - DECLARATION OF RIGHTS
Section 2.1. - Declaration of rights.
   City government shall serve the people of Dearborn. The City shall provide
for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property.
   The people have the right to expect the dedicated and efficient performance
of duties by all officers and employees.
   The people have the right to expect that the quality of the services
rendered by the City will be protected, maintained and improved within the
capabilities of the City's human and capital resources.
   The business of the legislative body shall be conducted at a public meeting
held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act. All records of the City shall be
made available to the general public in compliance with the Freedom of
Information Act.
   The protection, maintenance and improvement of the quality of the
environment of the City shall be a goal of paramount concern to the government
of the City.
   The enumeration of the foregoing rights shall not be construed to deny or
diminish other rights retained by the people.
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Act, MCl 15.243 et seq.; Open
Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; Home Rule Cities Act, MCL 117.3(1).
CHAPTER 3. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
Section 3.1. - Conflict of interest.
   Except for public contracts governed by MCL 15.321 et seq., an officer or
employee who has a conflict between a personal interest and the public interest
shall fully disclose in writing to the Board of Ethics the nature of the
conflict. Except as provided by law, no officer or employee of the City may
participate in, act upon or vote upon any matter if a conflict exists.
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA
4.1700(71) et seq.
Section 3.2. - Conflict involving financial interest.
   Except for public contracts governed by MCL 15.321 et seq., an officer or
employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, in any
corporation or business association doing business with the City shall make
that interest known and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise
participating in transacting any business with such corporation or business
association. A substantial financial interest of an officer or employee shall
include any known substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, of the
officer's or employee's spouse, or parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
brother or sister or the spouse of any of them. Violation of this section with
the knowledge of the person doing business with the City shall render the
business transaction voidable by the Mayor or the Council.
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.,
MSA 4.1700(51) et seq.
Section 3.3. - Anti-nepotism.
   No person shall hold an appointive office or employment in which that person
would work under the immediate supervision or control of a spouse or a parent,
grandparent, child, grandchild, brother or sister or the spouse of any of them.
This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are
officers or employees of the City at the time of the election or appointment of
said official.
Section 3.4. - Board of ethics.
   A Board of Ethics is created consisting of the Corporation Counsel and the
Human Resources Administrator, either of whom may serve by deputy, and five
private persons appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Members of
the Board shall serve without compensation.
   The primary function of the Board of Ethics is to render advisory opinions
to officers and employees and conduct investigations with respect to the
meaning and application of provisions of the Charter and ordinances
establishing standards of conduct for the City service. The Board shall
establish procedure to register an inquiry. During the course of an
investigation, the identity of persons concerned shall not be disclosed unless
such disclosure is required by law. The Board may authorize the issuance of
subpoenas through the Office of Corporation Counsel for documents and witnesses
but only after a written request to appear or provide documents has not been
complied with. Advisory opinions shall be rendered upon written request by an
officer or employee and shall be published by the Board.
   The Board of Ethics may recommend improvement in the standards of conduct
for the City service or in the organization and procedures related to the
administration and enforcement of those standards.
Section 3.5. - Political activity.
   An officer or employee may not personally, or through an agent, command,
coerce or attempt to coerce any person holding a position in the classified
service of the City to pay, lend or contribute anything of value to a party,
committee, organization, agency or person for the benefit of a person seeking
or holding elected office or for the purpose of furthering or defeating a
proposed law, ballot question or other measure that may be submitted to a vote
of the electors.
   While on duty, no political activity shall occur during working hours by
appointive officers or employees.
State Law reference— Political activities by public officers and employees, MCL
15.405 et seq., MSA 4.1702(1) et seq.
Section 3.6. - Private use of city property.
   No officer or employee of the City shall devote any City property or labor
for their own personal or political benefit or for the personal or political
benefit of others.
Section 3.7. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 4. - DEFINITIONS
Section 4.1. - Definitions.
   The following definitions are applicable to this charter:
City:           City of Dearborn
Compensation:   Salary and remuneration.
Council:        The City Council, the legislative body of the City.
Day:            Calendar day.
Law:            The Constitution and Acts of the United States and of the State
                of Michigan.
Number:         The singular number includes the plural and the plural number
                includes the singular.
Person:         Bodies corporate and politic as well as individuals or other
                types of business associations.
Private Person: A resident of the City who is not an officer or employee of the
                City.
Publish:        Making something public in the manner stated in or authorized
                by this charter.
Remuneration:   Benefits, fringe or otherwise, cost of living adjustments,
                other than salary resulting from services rendered.
                The amount of money paid for services rendered exclusive of
Salary:         cost of living adjustments and exclusive of benefits, fringe or
                otherwise.
State:          State of Michigan.
                This charter is to be regarded as speaking in the present tense
Tense:          and continuously, for example: the phrase "as provided by law"
                will incorporate the provisions of the law as they change from
                time to time.
 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS
Section 5.1. - Powers of the city.
   The City and its officers shall have all of the powers and immunities
permitted by law unless a power or immunity is specifically denied them by this
charter. These powers may only be exercised to promote the public peace and
health and for the safety of persons and property and to advance the interests
of good government and the prosperity of the City and its people.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide that the City may
exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal
property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3),
MSA 5.2083(3).
CHAPTER 6. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING OFFICERS OF THE CITY
Section 6.1. - Elective officers.
   Elective officers of the City shall be a mayor, clerk, and seven
councilmembers elected from the City at large.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election of certain
officers, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a).
Section 6.2. - Qualifications of elective officers.
   No person shall become a candidate or hold elective office under this
charter unless that person is a resident for one year, has never been convicted
of a felony and is a registered voter of the City.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of
officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d).
Section 6.3. - Time of election and terms of office.
   Elective officers of the City shall be elected on the first Tuesday
following the first Monday of November 2009 and every fourth year thereafter on
that date, for a term commencing at twelve noon on January first of the year
immediately following the election and extending for a period of four years
thereafter.
State Law reference— Time for regular elections, MCL 168.644a, MSA 6.1644(1).
Section 6.4. - Vacancies in elective office.
   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor and the unexpired term is
less than one year, the President of the Council will temporarily fill the
vacancy as Mayor and if that person declines to do so then the Council
President Pro Tem may fill the vacancy. If both the Council President and the
Council President Pro Tem decline to fill the vacancy, then it may be filled by
the councilmember receiving the highest number of votes in the preceding
election who will accept the position. If no councilmember will accept the
position, then the vacancy will be filled by the Chief of Staff if approved by
the Council. If the Chief of Staff is not approved, the Council shall appoint
some other qualified individual to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. A
vacancy on the Council shall not be created by any councilmember serving
temporarily as Mayor hereunder.
   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor and the unexpired term is one
year or more, the Council President shall serve as Mayor until an election to
fill the unexpired term of office shall be held within one hundred twenty (120)
days, but no sooner than ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the vacancy or
as soon thereafter as permitted by state election laws. If another election is
to be held in the City within ninety days of the date of the election called by
the Council, the election shall be held over until such other election. There
shall be no primary election. The candidates shall be nominated by petitions
signed by not less than 100 or more than 200 registered electors. The petitions
must be filed at the City Clerk's office 70 days prior to the election. A
vacancy on the Council shall not be created any councilmember serving
temporarily as Mayor hereunder.
   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Clerk, the deputy shall serve as the
Clerk for the remainder of the unexpired term. If there is no such person, the
Council shall appoint some other qualified individual to fill the vacancy for
the unexpired term.
   If a vacancy occurs on the Council then the candidate not elected receiving
the highest number of votes for the office of councilmember in the preceding
election who is qualified and will accept the position shall be appointed to
fill the vacancy. Each successive vacancy that occurs on the Council shall be
filled in the same manner. If there is no such person, the Council shall
appoint some other qualified individual to fill the vacancy for the unexpired
term.
Section 6.5. - Appointive officers.
   Appointive officers shall be the Treasurer, Assessor, Corporation Counsel,
Chief of Staff, Chief Labor Negotiator, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and the
directors of departments and the members of multi-member bodies.
Section 6.6. - Compensation of officers and employees.
   The Council shall fix the compensation of appointive offices prior to
appointments to the office. The persons so appointed shall receive only one
salary which shall, together with such other remuneration as specified in the
resolution of the Council, be in full compensation for the appointees' services
to the City and shall not receive any other compensation from the City.
   Any elective or appointive officer of the City who receives payment of any
kind, other than that specified in this charter, for services rendered in the
performance of official duties shall immediately surrender such payment to the
general fund of the City.
   There is hereby created a Local Officials Compensation Commission who shall
determine the compensation of elective officials based upon standard
compensation principles and procedures. The meetings, membership, terms and
manner of filling vacancies of the Local Officials Compensation Commission
shall be as provided in Public Act No. 8 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1972 as
amended by MCL 117.5c.
   The determination of the commission, with respect to the compensation of the
Councilmembers, shall be voted upon within 30 days following its filing with
the City Clerk and shall be effective when approved by a 2/3 majority vote of
the members elected to and serving on the City Council. If the determination is
rejected, the current compensation shall continue.
   Any change in compensation for the Mayor will go into effect when the
recommendation of the Local Officials Compensation Commission is affirmed
within 30 days to the Human Resources Administrator by the Mayor. Any change in
compensation for the Clerk will go into effect when the recommendation of the
Local Officials Compensation Commission is affirmed within 30 days to the Human
Resources Administrator by the Clerk.
   The compensation of other employees shall be as provided in the applicable
collective bargaining agreement. If there is not a collective bargaining
agreement, compensation shall be as determined by the City Council.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of its
officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d).
Section 6.7. - Reimbursement of authorized expenses.
   The Council shall establish conditions for authorizing travel and expenses
of officers and employees of the City.
Section 6.8. - Change in compensation.
   The compensation for appointive offices shall not be increased or decreased
during the term of office to which each officer was appointed. Such
compensation may include an annual adjustment to salary equal to the average
percentage of increases or decreases in salary paid to all full-time employees
of the City and adjustments to benefit programs as received by all full-time
employees of the City.
Section 6.9. - Oath of office.
   An elective or appointive officer shall not take office or perform the
duties of office until the following oath of office has been taken:
      "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of
the United States and the constitution of this state and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of the office of __________ according to the best of my
ability."
   Failure to take the oath of office within ten days after election or
appointment, unless the time shall be extended by the Council, shall result in
a vacancy in the office to which the officer was appointed or elected. An
elective or appointive officer must support and uphold the Charter of the City
of Dearborn.
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. XI, § 1.
Section 6.10. - Bonds of officers and employees.
   Elective and appointive officers shall be bonded in accordance with law, and
in a manner acceptable to the Council after consultation with the Corporation
Counsel. The Treasurer and any employee handling funds of the City in the
regular course of business shall be bonded in accordance with law. The Council
shall be empowered to set further conditions for bonding of officers and
employees, and shall review such conditions at least once every four years.
Bond premiums shall be paid by the City.
Section 6.11. - City property.
   All books, papers, records or other City property shall be the exclusive
property of the City, and shall not become the property of any officer or
employee at any time. All City property in the possession of any elective or
appointive officer, or any employee, shall be surrendered to the City upon the
termination of the officer's term of office or the employee's employment.
Section 6.12. - Person in default to the city.
   The City shall not contract with, or give an appointive position to, one who
is in default to the City. No person who is in default to the City may accept
or hold an elective or appointive position unless the default is resolved.
Section 6.13. - Resignations.
   Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing to the Council.
Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appropriate
appointing authority and shall be acted upon immediately.
Section 6.14. - Proceedings for removal of city officers.
   When the Council shall have reason to believe that any elective or
appointive office should be declared vacant, the Council shall hold a special
public hearing to investigate the matter. A majority of the members of the
Council thereafter may vote to declare such office vacant based on one or more
of the following grounds:
   (a)   Absence of the officer from the City for a period of ninety
consecutive days;
   (b)   Substantial inability of the officer to perform the functions of
office due to physical or mental incapacity;
   (c)   Failure of the officer to meet any of the requirements of this charter
for holding office;
   (d)   Conviction of the officer of a felony, or conviction of a misdemeanor
which is a lesser included offense of a felony which was initially charged
against the officer. A plea of guilty or no contest to any such offense shall
constitute a conviction for purposes of this section;
   (e)   Wilful violation by the officer of the provisions of this charter or
the ordinances of the City;
   (f)   Habitual intoxication of the officer, which shall not be limited to
alcohol intoxication;
   (g)   Wilful malfeasance or corruption of the officer in the course of
duties;
   (h)   Wilful misconduct of the officer resulting in substantial impairment
of public service;
   (i)   Use of public property or labor by any officer for the officer's own
personal benefit or for the personal benefit of others.
   If the Council shall receive a petition signed by two councilmembers or by
no less than two hundred electors of the City stating the substance of
allegations sufficient for the declaration of a vacancy in an office, the
Council shall be required to hold a public hearing within thirty days to
consider the allegations. Such petition shall be made upon oath or affirmation.
   Prior to any public hearing by the Council of allegations against any
officer, the officer shall be notified of the charges in writing at least ten
days prior to the hearing. The officer shall be permitted to prepare written
responses to the allegations, give testimony, to call witnesses and to cross
examine adverse witnesses. Thereafter, the complaining councilmembers or
petitioners may offer a rebuttal. The findings of the Council shall be
submitted to the officer in writing following the hearing.
Section 6.15. - City officers to hold no other office.
   No City officer may simultaneously serve in a policy making or
administrative capacity in another unit of government, unless permitted by law
and approved by a vote of five members of the Council.
Section 6.16. - Residency.
   All appointive officers shall be residents of the City, or shall become
residents within one year of appointment, except as otherwise provided in this
charter or by law.
Section 6.17. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 7. - THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Section 7.1. - General powers of the council.
   The Council shall have full power and authority to exercise all the
legislative powers conferred upon the City by law.
Section 7.2. - Judge qualification of members.
   The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members, subject
only to review by the courts on facts and law.
Section 7.3. - Organization of the council.
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the candidate for Council
receiving the highest number of votes in the regular City election shall serve
as president of the Council. The candidate for Council receiving the second
highest number of votes in the same election shall serve as president pro tem
of the Council and shall act as president of the Council during the absence or
disability of the President or when the President is serving as Mayor Pro Tem
(Section
10.3) or as Mayor on a temporary basis (Section
6.4). The term of office for Council officers shall correspond to their term of
office as members of the Council to which they were elected. The President or
President Pro Tem of the Council may decline to serve in such office in which
event that candidate having received the next highest number of votes in the
same City election shall serve in their stead. Each successive vacancy in the
office of Council President or Council President Pro Tem shall be filled in the
same manner. Other duties of the Council President and Council President Pro
Tem shall be set forth in rules adopted by the Council.
Section 7.4. - Meetings of the council.
   All meetings of the Council shall be held in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act and the Council Rules of Order. An agenda shall be required and
available at all meetings of the Council.
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.
Section 7.5. - Regular meetings of the council.
   The regular meeting schedule shall be determined prior to the deadline for
printing the City calendar for the upcoming year and published in the City
calendar, if a calendar is to be printed.
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.
Section 7.6. - Special meetings.
   Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on request of the Mayor or any
two Councilmembers. Written notice stating each matter to be considered at a
special meeting shall be given each Councilmember and the Mayor, as provided by
Council rules, unless the entire Council and the Mayor are present and waive
notice.
Section 7.7. - Rules of order.
   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business except as
otherwise provided by this charter and shall keep a journal of all of the
proceedings of such meetings in the English language and in accordance with
this charter which shall be signed by the President of the Council and the
Clerk.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal,
MCL 117.3(m).
Section 7.8. - Restriction on powers of the council.
   The Council shall not approve a contract with a person or business
organization which is in default to the City. No ordinance or resolution shall
be adopted except by the affirmative vote of at least four members of the
Council, except as otherwise provided by law.
Section 7.9. - Attendance at council meetings.
   The Council shall compel the attendance of its members, unless excused for
good cause, at its meetings and shall enforce orderly conduct therein. The
Council may require the attendance at council meetings of the Mayor and any
other officer of the City. In the event of illness or absence from the City the
Mayor may satisfy such a request by the Council for attendance at meetings by
sending a personal representative.
Section 7.10. - Official newspaper.
   At or prior to its second regular meeting in February of each year, the
Council after receiving bids in accordance with established specifications
shall designate a newspaper of general circulation in the City qualified to
print legal notices under the laws of the State of Michigan as the official
newspaper of the City for the following year.
Section 7.11. - Publication of council proceedings.
   The proceedings of the Council meetings shall be available for public
inspection in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.269 et seq.
Section 7.12. - Investigations.
   The Council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the
production of books, papers and other evidence in order to conduct an
investigation into the operation of any department or office, or the conduct of
any officer of the City.
   The Council may appoint a research assistant to the Council who shall not be
a member of the classified service. The research assistant shall be responsible
to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and may make investigations as
directed by the Council and perform other duties as the Council may direct.
Section 7.13. - Depositories of city funds.
   The Council shall select depositories in which the funds of the City may be
deposited.
State Law reference— Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12; deposit of public
monies, MCL 211.43b.
Section 7.14. - Annual appropriation; collection and return of taxes.
   The Council shall provide for an annual appropriation of money for municipal
purposes and for the levy, collection and return of state, county and school
taxes in conformity with the general laws of the state. The subjects of
taxation for City purposes are the same as for the State, County and School
purposes under the general laws of the State.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and
collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(i).
Section 7.15. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 8. - POWERS OF THE COUNCIL
Section 8.1. - Public peace, health and safety.
   The Council shall provide for the public peace and health and safety of
persons and property.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for police powers, MCL
117.4i(9).
Section 8.2. - Streets and alleys.
   The Council shall have the power, to the extent permitted by law, to
establish, vacate and control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys,
bridges and public places and the space above and beneath them.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public
ways, MCL 117.4h(1).
Section 8.3. - Licenses.
   The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions upon
which licenses and permits may be granted, suspended or revoked and may require
payment of reasonable sums for any license or permit.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades
and occupations, MCL 117.4i(4), MSA 5.2082(4).
Section 8.4. - Rights as to property.
   The Council shall have the power to acquire for the City by purchase, gift,
condemnation, lease, construction and to make alterations to all structures and
property, real and personal, necessary for the proper performance of the
operations of the City. Any purchase or sale of real property located more than
five miles outside city limits shall be approved by the electorate.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for maintenance and
disposition of City property, MCL 117.4e(1), MSA 5.2078(1).
Section 8.5. - Trusts.
   The Council may receive and hold any property or funds in trust for any
municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trusts and
for no other purpose. All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be
used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trusts and law. The
Council may terminate any trust for which the asset valuation and annual income
total less than five thousand dollars and apply the principal and income to any
special or general fund of the City.
Section 8.6. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided for in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 9. - CITY LEGISLATION
Section 9.1. - Ordinances and resolutions of the council.
   The Council shall act only by ordinance or resolution. The word "resolution"
as used in this charter shall be an official action in the form of a motion and
such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted by law and to
matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government.
All other acts of the Council and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation
thereof shall be by ordinance.
   Resolutions shall become effective on the day succeeding the date of the
next regular meeting of the Council. The Council may give a resolution
immediate effect by a vote of at least five councilmembers providing the Mayor
shall waive the right of veto.
Section 9.2. - Ordinance enactment.
   Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing by a member of the
Council. A synopsis of each proposed ordinance shall be contained in the agenda
of each meeting at which a proposed ordinance is considered.
   Except for emergency ordinances, no proposed ordinance shall be finally
passed by the Council at the same meeting at which the proposed ordinance is
introduced. After introduction, the proposed ordinance shall be published in
full in the official newspaper of the City.
   All ordinances when enacted shall be immediately recorded and filed by the
Clerk. The Mayor and the Clerk shall authenticate such record by their
signatures thereon. Except for emergency ordinances that are published by
posting pursuant to Section
9.3, all ordinances shall be published in the official newspaper within ten
days after enactment and shall become effective the day after publication.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3
(k), MSA 5.2073(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich.
Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22.
Section 9.3. - Emergency ordinances.
   To meet public emergencies affecting only life, health, property or the
public peace an emergency ordinance may be enacted. An emergency ordinance may
not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise or regulate, establish or
adjust the rate charged for service of any kind.
   An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner required
for ordinances generally except that it shall contain a declaration stating
that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An
emergency ordinance may be introduced and enacted at the same meeting.
   An emergency ordinance may be given immediate effect upon publication when
enacted by five members of the Council and when so enacted shall not be subject
to the veto of the Mayor. Publication of emergency ordinances shall be
effective by posting in three (3) prominent places in the City. Every emergency
ordinance shall also be published in the official newspaper within ten days
after enactment. Every emergency ordinance is automatically repealed on the
sixty-first day after its enactment unless it is reenacted as an ordinance in
accordance with the provisions of this charter.
Section 9.4. - Amendment and revision of ordinances.
   The Council shall have power to amend or revise any existing ordinance in
whole or in part in the manner provided for ordinance enactment.
Section 9.5. - Repeal and continue ordinances.
   The Council shall have power to repeal or continue any existing ordinance in
the manner provided for ordinance enactment except that an ordinance may be
repealed or continued by reference.
Section 9.6. - Veto by mayor.
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the Mayor shall have the power
to veto any ordinance or resolution of the Council. The veto must be written or
printed giving the reasons for veto and filed with the Clerk at least thirty-
six hours prior to the time of the next regular meeting of the Council after
such ordinance was enacted or such resolution adopted.
   In the event a resolution is adopted at a special meeting of the Council and
there is less than seventy-two hours before the next regular meeting, the Mayor
may veto the resolution by four o'clock in the afternoon of the date of the
next regular meeting of the Council.
   The Clerk shall present such veto to the Council at the next regular meeting
after which it is received and the Council shall reconsider the vote and may
readopt the ordinance or resolution by the affirmative vote of five members and
the Mayor shall have no further right to veto the ordinance or resolution.
   Ordinances which are adopted over the veto of the Mayor shall continue in
effect as if there were no veto and ordinances which are not so adopted shall
be removed from ordinance records.
Section 9.7. - Ordinance penalties.
   The Council shall provide in each ordinance for punishment of up to 90 days
imprisonment, a $500 fine, or both, or as otherwise permitted by law for those
who violate its provisions.
Editor's note— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(10), MSA 5.2082(10).
Section 9.8. - Technical codes.
   The Council may adopt any provision of state law or any detailed technical
regulations as a city ordinance or code by citation of such provision which has
been promulgated by the State of Michigan, or by any department, board, or
other agency thereof, or by any organization or association which is organized
and conducted for the purpose of development of such code by reference thereto
in an adoptive ordinance without publishing such code in full. The purpose of
such code shall be published with the adoptive ordinance and copies of such
code shall be made available to the public in the office of the Clerk for sale
to the public at cost.
Editor's note— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k),
MSA 5.2073(k).
Section 9.9. - Codification.
   Copies of all ordinances which are in effect, all resolutions, this charter
and all amendments thereto shall be prepared and kept on hand in the office of
the Clerk and made available for public distribution at cost. Codification
shall be arranged by the City Clerk on an as needed basis.
Editor's note— Authority to codify, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2).
Section 9.10. - Citizen initiative.
   Any ordinance which may be legally adopted by the Council, except an
appropriation, may be proposed by a petition signed by five percent of the
registered electors of the City. Such petition shall be addressed to the
Council and shall set forth the proposed ordinance in a form permitted by law.
Editor's note— Permissible that Charter provide for initiative, MCL 117.4i(6),
MSA 5.2082(6).
Section 9.11. - Petitions; when sufficient; council procedures.
   Within ten days from the date of the filing of the petitions, the Clerk
shall determine the sufficiency of the petitions and report this fact to the
Council.
   If the petitions are found to be sufficient, the Council shall consider the
ordinance contained in the petition at its next regular meeting and if it does
not pass the ordinance within three successive regular meetings after its
receipt from the Clerk, the Council shall provide for the submission of such
ordinance to the electors of the City at the next election in the City. No
separate election shall be held for the purpose of initiative except as
provided by law.
Section 9.12. - Referendum on ordinance passed by the council.
   Within ninety days after the publication of any ordinance passed by the
Council, except on appropriation, petitions may be presented to the Council
protesting such ordinance continuing in effect. Such petitions shall be in the
same form generally as that specified for initiative petitions and signed by
registered electors of the City not less in number than ten percent of all
votes cast for the office of mayor at the preceding election. Such ordinance
shall be suspended from operation upon receipt of petitions by the Council. If
the ordinance is not repealed within four weeks from the date of receipt of
petitions from the Clerk, the Council shall submit the question to a vote of
the electors of the City.
Editor's note— Permissible that Charter provide for referendum, MCL 117.4i(6),
MSA 5.2082(6).
Section 9.13. - Referendum may be made by council without petition.
   The Council may submit to a referendum, for adoption or rejection by the
electors of the City, any ordinance, proposed ordinance, measure or proposal
for the repeal or amendment of any ordinance.
Section 9.14. - Referendum elections.
   The ordinance or other measure or proposal to be submitted to the electors
shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City and
electronic media if available at least forty-five days prior to the election at
which it is to be submitted. If the majority vote of the electors voting at the
election is in favor of the ordinance or other proposition, the same
proceedings shall be taken after the canvass of the returns and declaration of
results by the Board of Canvassers, as would be necessary if the same action
upon such proposition had been taken by the Council, except that in the case of
ordinances no further publication shall be required.
Section 9.15. - When referendum fails.
   If at such election the ordinance shall fail, a similar ordinance on the
same subject shall not be submitted to the electors for two years after the
date of such election.
Section 9.16. - Review of ordinances adopted or repealed by referendum.
   No ordinance adopted or repealed under this charter by initiative or
referendum vote shall be adopted, repealed or amended except by the vote of the
electorate; however, such ordinance shall be subject to review as provided for
in this chapter only after five years time has elapsed from the date of its
passage.
Section 9.17. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as provided
in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 10. - THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
Section 10.1. - Administrative officers.
   The administrative officers of the City shall be the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, Assessor, Corporation Counsel, Chief of Staff, Chief Labor
Negotiator and all directors of departments and members of multi-member bodies
of the city government. The Mayor, with Council approval may combine any
administrative offices and departments, or separate, or eliminate them, in any
manner it considers advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the
City, except as may be otherwise provided by law.
Section 10.2. - Duties of the mayor.
   The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the City. The Mayor shall
be the conservator of the peace and shall exercise within the City, the powers
as necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety of
persons and property. The power and duties of the Mayor shall include the
following:
   (a)   Enforcement of all laws and ordinances;
   (b)   Appointment and removal of appointive officers and members of multi-
member bodies except as otherwise provided for in this charter or by law. The
appointment of the person as Corporation Counsel shall be subject to the
confirmation of the Council;
   (c)   Enforcement of all terms and conditions of any franchise, contract or
other agreement entered into by the City;
   (d)   Authentication by signing such instruments as are required by law, the
Council and this charter;
   (e)   Attendance at any meeting of the Council which the Mayor has been
requested by the Council to attend, however, in the event of illness or absence
from the City, the Mayor may satisfy such a request by the Council for
attendance at meetings by sending a personal representative;
   (f)   Preparation and administration of the annual budget of the City;
   (g)   Submission to the Council and to the citizens on or before the first
day of September of each year, of a complete report on the activities, during
the prior fiscal year, for those departments not under the jurisdiction of any
other elected official;
   (h)   Recommendation to the Council for adoption of measures deemed to be
necessary and beneficial to the City and its citizens;
   (i)   Ensuring the efficient administration of all departments and functions
of the city government not under the jurisdiction of any other elected
official; or the Civil Service Commission. The Mayor may create, eliminate, or
privatize any administrative department, or any or all of its functions, that
are deemed appropriate in order to deliver necessary services and for the city
government to function efficiently, with prior approval of the Council, except
there shall be a Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor.
Section 10.3. - Mayor pro tem.
   When the Mayor is absent, the President of the Council shall act as Mayor
Pro Tem.
   The Mayor Pro Tem shall not have the power to remove the appointive officers
who have been appointed by the Mayor, until the Mayor Pro Tem shall have acted
in the capacity of the Mayor for a period of thirty consecutive days. Such
removal by the Mayor Pro Tem shall be only for just cause, based on one or more
of the grounds set forth in Section
6.14 and approved by a majority of the members of the Council before becoming
effective.
   Appointments made by the Mayor Pro Tem shall be confirmed by a majority of
the members of the Council. These appointments shall be temporary until such
appointee shall have served in the appointed capacity for a period of sixty
days following the appointment, and thereafter shall extend for the balance of
the unexpired term.
   The Mayor Pro Tem shall attend all the meetings of the Council but shall not
take an active part in the Council proceedings except to vote in the case of a
tie vote. Increased compensation for the Mayor Pro Tem shall be at the
discretion of the Council.
Section 10.4. - City clerk.
   The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal, chair the Election Commission, and
perform the following functions:
   (a)   Attendance at all Council meetings as Clerk of the Council and
maintenance of a permanent journal of the proceedings in the English language;
   (b)   Maintenance of all documents, papers, files and records not entrusted
to some other officer by this charter or by ordinances or resolutions of the
Council;
   (c)   Recording and maintenance in books of all the ordinances of the City;
   (d)   Affixing of the corporate seal to all documents and instruments
requiring the seal;
   (e)   Maintenance of a record of any franchise, contract or agreement
entered into by the City;
   (f)   Issuance and registration of all licenses granted after the license
fee has been paid to the Treasurer;
   (g)   Administration of all oaths and affirmations, except as provided in
this charter, in matters pertaining to the City, without charge;
   (h)   Efficient administration of the affairs of the office of Clerk and
Election Commission;
   (i)   Preparation and submission to the Council and to the citizens of a
complete report on the activities of the office of Clerk and the Election
Commission on or before the first day of September of each year;
   (j)   Provision of copies, certified under the seal of the City when
requested, of public documents and records of the City as required by law;
   (k)   Approval by the signing of any standard operating procedures adopted
by the office of Clerk or Election Commission;
   (l)   Performance of other duties required by law, this charter or ordinance
or resolution of the Council.
Section 10.5. - City treasurer.
   The City Treasurer shall be the general accountant of the City and shall
have custody of City funds, money, and securities, and be responsible for the
deposit and safekeeping of City funds money and securities. The Treasurer shall
have all powers and immunities for the collection of taxes as provided by law.
The Treasurer shall maintain a uniform system of accounts as required by law.
Editor's note— Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3
(d).
Section 10.6. - City assessor.
   The City Assessor shall be certified and shall possess all qualifications
for the position required by law. The assessor shall have all power vested in
and shall be charged with all duties imposed upon assessing officers by general
laws of the State. The Assessor shall prepare all regular and special
assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance or by
the general laws of the State.
Editor's note— Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3
(d).
Section 10.7. - Administrative departments.
   Upon recommendation of the Mayor, the Council may establish by ordinance
administrative departments to provide the most effective and efficient services
to the community, including, but not limited to: public safety; health and
welfare; the maintenance, expansion, and improvement of public infrastructure;
financial operations; legal representation; assessment of properties;
collection of taxes and fees; community master planning and zoning;
redevelopment; historical preservation, cultural and recreational activities;
employee/labor relations; and municipal services as mandated by State law.
Section 10.8. - Mayoral appointees and directors of departments.
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all appointive officers, other
than members of multi-member bodies, and directors of departments shall be
appointed by the Mayor and such appointees or reappointees shall be certified
in writing to the Clerk on or before the third Monday in January following each
regular City election, or within 90 days following a special election to fill
the vacancy of the office of the Mayor, or at such other times as may be
required to fill vacancies. All directors of departments must possess the
necessary qualifications related to the operation of the department to which
they are appointed. The deputy director of a department shall act as the
director of a department until an appointment is made. The term of office of
all appointive officers, other than members of multi-member bodies, and
directors of departments shall begin immediately upon appointment and continue
until the term of office of the appointing authority ends, or until
replacement, whichever occurs later.
   The Council may by a vote of five members taken within four weeks after the
certification to the Clerk of any person to the position of appointive director
of a department, remove from office any person so appointed. The person so
removed may not again receive an appointment to the same office during the
current term of the Mayor. When the Council shall so remove any appointee of
the Mayor, the term of office of such appointee shall terminate immediately.
Section 10.9. - Multi-member bodies.
   Except as provided in this charter, the Council may by ordinance create or
discontinue multi-member bodies to assist the officers, departments and
agencies of the City in the execution of their duties. Unless otherwise
provided by law, the Mayor shall appoint members of multi-member bodies for
terms of three years commencing on the first day of July. Unless otherwise
provided by law, all appointees of the Mayor to multi-member bodies shall be
subject to confirmation by the Council. Members of multi-member bodies shall
possess the qualifications required by this charter for holding office, unless
the Mayor shall state reasons for an exception at the time the appointment is
made. Every attempt shall be made to make multi-member bodies as widely
representative of the people of the City as possible. The Clerk shall report to
the Mayor, Council or other appointing authority prior to the first Council
meeting in March of each year, a list of the terms of office on multi-member
bodies which shall end on the thirtieth day of June. Terms of office shall be
staggered so that an equal number as possible of terms shall expire each year
of each multi-member body. The Mayor shall establish and make public a
procedure which shall provide for receiving applications and recommendations of
individuals for appointment to multi-member bodies. Vacancies on multi-member
bodies shall be filled immediately upon occurrence and persons so appointed
shall take office immediately and shall serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term. The provisions of this charter shall not be construed to
prevent the Council from establishing, by resolution, committees to assist the
Council in its study of any matter of concern to the City.
   Each multi-member body shall establish its rules of order and its officers
shall be elected from among its members no later than the thirty-first day of
August of each year.
   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the appointments made to
the Board of Canvassers, the Election Commission, the Board of Review or the
Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall be made in accordance with state law or
City Charter; or to appointments made to the governing boards of the City
retirement systems which shall be made in accordance with Chapter Seventeen.
Section 10.10. - Council not to interfere.
   No member of the Council shall interfere directly or indirectly with the
conduct of any department except as provided for in this charter.
Section 10.11. - Officers and employees seeking city office.
   An appointive officer or an employee of the City may be granted a leave of
absence without pay, benefits or accrued time towards promotion or retirement,
to seek a City elective office in accordance with MCL 15.403 et seq.
   No elected officer shall become a member of the classified service or an
appointive officer during the term for which elected.
Section 10.12. - Deputy directors.
   The Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor shall appoint a deputy in accordance with
the civil service provisions of this charter. Each director of a department may
appoint a deputy, except as otherwise provided in this charter, with the
approval of the Mayor, in accordance with the civil service provisions of this
charter. The deputy shall act in the absence or disability of the Clerk or
director.
Section 10.13. - Chief of staff.
   The Mayor may appoint a Chief of Staff who shall be an appointive officer to
aid in the performance of the administrative duties of the office of Mayor. The
Chief of Staff shall be an officer of the City and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor.
Section 10.14. - Operating procedures.
   Operating procedures required for the organization and conduct of the
departments of the City shall be formulated by the director or multi-member
body in charge of such departments.
Section 10.15. - Appointing authority.
   Unless otherwise provided in this charter, each director or multi-member
body in charge of a department and each elective officer in charge of a
department shall be the appointing authority of all officers and employees of
the department subject to the civil service provisions of this charter.
Section 10.16. - Police department.
   There shall be a separate police department, the director of which shall be
the Chief of Police, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be educated,
skilled and qualified by experience in law enforcement and police
administration. The Chief of Police shall be the executive officer of the
department and shall be responsible for the administration of the department.
The Chief of Police shall organize and carry out the duties and functions of
the department. The City shall employ no less than 2.1 fulltime paid sworn
police officers for each 1,000 person residing in the City of Dearborn, as
indicated by the most recent United States Census.
Section 10.17. - Fire department.
   There shall be a separate fire department, the director of which shall be
the Fire Chief, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be educated,
skilled and qualified by experience in fire science and the administration of a
fire department. The Fire Chief shall be the executive officer of the fire
department and shall be responsible for the administration of the department.
The Fire Chief shall organize and carry out the duties and functions of the
department. The City shall employ no less than 1.24 full-time paid professional
firefighters for each 1,000 persons residing in the City of Dearborn as
indicated by the most recent United States Census.
Section 10.18. - Legal counsel.
   There shall be a Corporation Counsel who shall be licensed to practice law
in the State of Michigan. A deputy corporation counsel, who shall be a member
of the classified service, may be appointed by the Corporation Counsel. The
Corporation Counsel shall not engage in the practice of law directly or
indirectly other than in the fulfillment of his/her responsibilities to the
City. The Corporation Counsel shall act as legal advisor to and attorney and
counsel for all the members of the Council in matters relating to their
official duties. The Corporation Counsel shall give written opinions to any
official or department of the City when requested in writing by the Mayor or
Council, and shall file copies of the same with the Clerk. The Corporation
Counsel shall prepare, or officially pass upon, all contracts, bonds and other
instruments in writing in which the City is concerned, and shall certify before
execution as to their legality and correctness of form. The Corporation Counsel
shall perform such other duties of a legal nature pertaining to the affairs of
the City as may be prescribed by this charter, by the Council or by the Mayor.
Section 10.19. - Special counsel.
   Upon recommendation of the Corporation Counsel, approved by the Mayor, the
Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter to which the City
is a party or in which the City has an interest, or to assist and co-counsel
with the Corporation Counsel therein, for such limited time and purpose as the
Mayor shall specify.
   The Council may retain an attorney of its own selection other than and in
addition to the Corporation Counsel on such matters and for such periods of
time as it may deem necessary for the best interests of the City.
Section 10.20. - Department of libraries.
   The Department of Libraries shall be under the general management and
control of a Library Commission consisting of nine members appointed by the
Mayor. The Commission shall determine the policies of the Department of
Libraries and shall select a Library Director who shall be a member of the
classified service and who shall administer the activities of the Department of
Libraries and be the appointing authority for all other library employees.
Section 10.21. - Plan commission.
   There shall be a City Plan Commission which shall exercise its authority in
accordance with State law and shall consist of nine private persons appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
Section 10.22. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 11. - HUMAN RESOURCES
Section 11.1. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a civil service system based on
merit principles and scientific methods, thereby providing the basis for
establishing effective human resource policies and practices as guides to
administrative action. All appointments and promotions to positions in the
classified service shall be made from appropriate eligible registers of persons
who have demonstrated their fitness in competitive examination for the
positions sought to be filled.
Section 11.2. - Administration.
   There shall be established a Civil Service Commission of five members to
administer the provisions of this chapter. The Commission shall appoint a Human
Resources Administrator in accordance with the terms of this charter with the
approval of the City Council who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission.
   All officers and employees of the City shall grant to the Commission or its
authorized representative free access to premises and records under their
control and shall furnish them such facilities, assistance or information as
may be required to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
Section 11.3. - Appointment of the commission.
   Members of the Commission shall be appointed as follows: two members by the
Mayor, two by the Council, and the four so chosen shall appoint the fifth
member. At least two of the five members shall have a background in human
resources or executive management experience. Not more than one member shall be
a former City employee. Members of the Commission shall be residents of the
City, shall not be current City employees, and shall be sympathetic to merit
principles as applied to public human resource policies and practices. Members
of the Commission shall serve four-year terms without compensation. The Mayor
shall not have authority to veto the Council's appointment to the Commission.
Members of the Commission may only be removed in the manner provided in Section
6.14 of this charter.
Section 11.4. - Three votes required to act.
   Three concurring votes shall be required for a decision of the Commission.
Section 11.5. - Appointment of the human resources administrator.
   The Human Resources Administrator shall be trained and experienced in human
resource administration. With the approval of the City Council, any vacancy in
the position shall be filled by the Commission within ninety days after such
vacancy occurs from among the three highest-rated candidates whose names appear
on an employment list established as the result of an open competitive
examination conducted by a committee of three qualified examiners appointed by
the Commission. Each of the three members of the examining committee shall be
either (a) a responsible administrative officer of a civil service or central
human resources agency administering a merit system in the federal government,
in a state, or in a city, township, or a county of over seventy-five thousand
population, or (b) the director of human resources of a business or industrial
establishment known to have an effective and well-rounded human resources
program and which employs at least two thousand employees, or (c) an educator
in an accredited college or university. At least one of the members of the
examining committee shall fall in the first of the foregoing categories. The
Human Resources Administrator shall be in the classified service and may be
removed by the Civil Service Commission. The Human Resources Administrator's
salary shall be set by the Commission with approval of the City Council.
Section 11.6. - Duties of the commission.
   The Commission shall have the following duties:
   (a)   Representation of the public interest in personnel administration in
the City service;
   (b)   Issuance of an annual report and special reports upon the request of
the Mayor or Council on the quality and status of human resource administration
in city government and recommendation of improvements, including a review of
national Human Resources best practices and Civil Service reforms;
   (c)   Enforcement of the merit principle in all aspects of human resources
administration in the City, and consistent therewith, to receive, investigate
and decide disputes between the City and its classified employees and to
protect classified employees from political pressures;
   (d)   Maintenance and revision of a classification plan based on the duties,
authority and responsibilities of positions in the City service;
   (e)   Preparation of a salary plan for the positions in the City service
together with regulations for the administration of such plan. This suggested
plan shall be submitted by the Civil Service Commission to the Council for
approval and shall when adopted constitute the official salary plan for
positions in the City service. This may include a plan for sick benefits;
   (f)   Establishment of policies and practices, governing full-time,
temporary and emergency appointments to positions in the classified service and
promotions therein, including the certification of the three highest-rated
persons on the open competitive employment list for original entry to City
service;
   (g)   Establishment of policies and practices regarding transfers within or
between departments, promotions or demotions, performance ratings, training
programs, health, welfare and recreation programs, leave provisions and other
matters of human resources administration;
   (h)   Establishment of policies and practices governing the separation of
employees from City service, including rejection of employees during the
probationary period, layoffs due to lack of work or available funds,
resignation, death, retirement or suspension for disciplinary purposes and
dismissals for cause;
   (i)   Establishment of policies and practices for appeals by classified
employees to the Commission regarding proceedings or circumstances bearing upon
the employment status or conditions of employment of such employees;
   (j)   Establishment of policies and practices governing the use of human
resource records and forms containing the employment history of each officer
and employee of the City. Such records and forms shall not be open to public
inspection, except as required by law;
   (k)   Subject to an approved budget appropriation, appointment to the
classified service of such employees as may be necessary to assist the Human
Resources Administrator in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, and the
employment of such experts and special assistants as may be necessary to assist
the Commission or the Human Resources Administrator in the performance of their
duties;
   (l)   Undertaking of such other actions as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter;
   (m)   Adoption, amendment and repeal of rules, with approval of the Mayor,
necessary to carry out the foregoing duties of the Commission. The rules and
amendments thereto shall promote the efficiency and good of the City service,
improve employee morale and provide for the use of scientific personnel methods
and standards which will assist in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
Section 11.7. - Veterans preference.
   War veterans who have passed original entrance examinations for City service
shall be awarded ten additional points if they are not at that time eligible
for disability compensation from United States Department of Veterans Affairs
or any successor agency or fifteen additional points if they are eligible for
such compensation. Such veterans shall earn a place on the eligible register in
accordance with their augmented scores. The term "veteran," as used herein,
shall mean any person, or the unremarried surviving spouse of such person, who
is credited by the United States government or any of its agencies with war
time military service for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
federal civil service veterans preference, or who has been awarded a campaign
badge for expeditionary military service.
Section 11.8. - Duties of the human resources administrator.
   The Human Resources Administrator shall act as secretary to the Commission,
and shall carry out the functions necessary to fulfill the Human Resources
provisions under the direction of the Commission.
Section 11.9. - Unclassified service and classified service.
   The unclassified service shall comprise the offices and positions held by
elected City officers, appointive officers, election inspectors, directors of
departments except as provided in this charter, members of multi-member bodies,
and part-time, provisional, seasonal, emergency, and temporary employees, and
such other unclassified offices and positions as designated by the City
Council. The classified service shall include all other positions, now existing
or hereafter created, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply thereto.
Section 11.10 - Administration of oaths.
   For the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, any member
of the Commission or the Human Resources Administrator shall have the power to
administer oaths.
Section 11.11. - Prohibitions.
   No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be
appointed, promoted, demoted, dismissed, or in any way favored or discriminated
against because of sex, race, national origin, political or religious opinions
or affiliations. No person, officer or employee shall willfully or corruptly,
individually or in cooperation with one or more persons, defeat, deceive or
obstruct any person in respect to his/her right of examination, or corruptly or
falsely mark, grade, estimate or report upon examination or proper standing of
any person examined or aid in so doing, or willfully or corruptly make any
false representation concerning the same or concerning the person examined, or
willfully or corruptly furnish to any person any special or secret information
for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any
person so examined, being appointed, employed, promoted or reinstated. No
person seeking appointment to or promotion in the classified service of the
City shall either directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service
or other valuable thing to any person for or on account of or in connection
with the test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed
promotion.
   No member of the Commission shall continue in such office after becoming an
officer of any political party or a member of any local, state or national
political party committee, nor take any part in the management, operation or
conduct of any political party or political campaign. Any person in the
classified service violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the disciplinary action of the Commission in addition to any other
penalties provided in this chapter.
Section 11.12. - Certification of pay rolls.
   The Human Resources Administrator shall certify that the classified
employees named in pay roll vouchers are employed in accordance with this
chapter and Commission policies and rules.
   No officer shall make or approve or take any part in making or approving any
payment to any classified employee unless the pay roll voucher bears the
certification of the Human Resources Administrator.
   Any sum knowingly or wilfully paid contrary to this chapter or any
Commission policy or rule may be recovered in an action brought by any person
from any officer who made or approved the payment, or from the sureties on the
official bond of the officer. All monies recovered shall be paid into the
general fund of the City.
   If the Commission finds that the name of any classified employee has been
omitted from any pay roll, the agency involved shall correct the pay roll and
the classified employee shall be paid as directed by the Commission.
Section 11.13. - Labor relations.
   The Mayor shall have overall responsibility for the labor relations
functions of the City. The Mayor shall designate the chief labor negotiator for
the City with the advice and consent of the Council. The chief labor negotiator
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor as negotiator and shall represent the
City in collective bargaining. Collective bargaining contracts shall become
effective when ratified by the City Council in accordance with law.
Section 11.14. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 12. - ELECTIONS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et
seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding
elections, MCL 117.3(c), MSA 5.2073(c).
Section 12.1. - State laws to govern.
   The election laws of the state shall apply to and control all procedure
relating to the qualifications and registration of electors and nomination of
candidates for elective offices in the City, and to the conduct of primary,
regular and special City elections.
State Law reference— Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et
seq.
Section 12.2. - Record of nominating petitions.
   The Clerk shall keep a record of all persons who request nominating
petitions for elective offices in the City, and shall keep a record of the
persons on whose behalf nominating petitions are requested.
Section 12.3. - Nominating petitions.
   The nomination of candidates for elective offices in the City shall be by
nominating petitions therefor signed by not less than one hundred or more than
two hundred registered electors of the City. Nominating petitions shall be
filed with the City Clerk by 4 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday prior to the primary
election.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for nominations of elective
officers, MCL 117.3(b), MSA 5.2073(b). Michigan election laws, MCL 168.644(f).
Section 12.4. - Election commission.
   The Election Commission shall have charge of all activities and duties
required of it by law, and shall consist of the Clerk, who shall chair the
Commission, the Corporation Counsel and a private person appointed by the
Council for a term to expire June Thirtieth, Two Thousand and Ten and every
four years thereafter.
Section 12.5. - Primary and general elections.
   A City primary election, when required by state law, shall be held on the
Tuesday following the first Monday in August in each year in which a regular
City election is held.
   The City general election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the
first Monday in November 2009 and every four years thereafter.
Section 12.6. - Nonpartisan elections.
   All City elections shall be nonpartisan.
State Law reference— Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a, MSA 6.1544
(1).
Section 12.7. - Political material prohibited on city property.
   No sign, literature or other political material which advocates a candidate
or cause may be attached to any City property nor distributed within 100 feet
of a City building entrance.
Section 12.8. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 13. - FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section 13.1. - Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the City shall be the first day of July through the
thirtieth day of June of the following year unless set otherwise by City
Council to coincide with the State or Federal fiscal year.
Section 13.2. - Limitation on taxation.
   The Council shall have the power to and shall raise annually by taxation,
such sum of money as may be necessary to defray the general expenses and
liabilities of the City and to carry into effect the powers in this Charter
granted, subject to the limitations of this section. The total tax rate
limitation in any fiscal year, beginning July 1, 2008, for municipal purposes
shall not exceed 16 mills on all the taxable real and personal property in the
City, according to the assessment roll last confirmed prior to the beginning of
such fiscal year, as such tax rate may be reduced from time to time by
operation of law; provided that the total amount of all taxes which the Council
shall have the power to raise in any fiscal year for municipal purposes shall
not exceed the lesser of the foregoing rate, as reduced from time to time or 15
mills on all the taxable real and personal property in the City, according to
the assessment roll last confirmed prior to the beginning of such fiscal year.
Section 13.3. - Preparation of the budget.
   The preparation of the annual budget shall be under the direction of the
Mayor and the Treasurer and shall contain such items as are required by law.
The budget shall be prepared and submitted to the Council in a manner and at
such time as the Council shall determine. The proposed budget shall show the
amount for each item of the budget, the amount budgeted for each item of the
current fiscal year, and the amount actually expended or received for each item
of the just completed fiscal year.
State Law reference— Uniform budgeting and accounting, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA
5.3228(21) et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation,
MCL 117.3(h), MSA 5.2073(h).
Section 13.4. - Council consideration of the budget.
   Within the limits of taxation provided in this charter, the Council may
revise, alter, increase or decrease the budget submitted by the Mayor. The
budget may provide for a contingency reserve appropriation of no more than
three percent of the annual estimated revenues. The budget shall provide all
sums necessary for payment of bonds and the interest thereon. The Mayor and the
departments shall provide the Council access to all persons and information
necessary for budget deliberations as the Council may direct. The Council shall
hold a public hearing on the proposed budget each year prior to its adoption.
   Within fifteen days of the adoption of the budget by the Council, the Mayor
shall have the power to veto the entire budget, or any item therein, and shall
return the budget to the Council for its consideration of any part of the
budget that shall have been vetoed. Within ten days after the receipt of the
veto, the Council shall reconsider any part of the budget that has been vetoed.
If five members of the Council shall vote to override the veto as to the whole
or any part of the budget, the Council's decision shall be final. The Council
shall consider each veto separately.
Section 13.5. - Determining the tax levy.
   When the budget is adopted, the Treasurer shall make an itemized statement
of the amounts to be raised by taxation and shall report the same to the
Council. The Council shall by resolution set the amounts of money to be raised
by taxation in the next fiscal year and shall inform the Assessor thereof.
Section 13.6. - Budget transfers.
   Neither the Council or any other officer or agency of the City shall have
the authority to transfer budgeted funds from one departmental budget to
another. An emergency appropriation may be made by the Council from the
contingency reserve within the general fund when any budgeted appropriation
shall be exhausted. Emergency appropriations shall be made by a vote of at
least five council members and shall not be subject to veto. Appropriations
from the contingency reserve may be made to provide for unforeseen and unusual
expenditures.
Section 13.7. - Assessment rolls.
   The Assessor shall be responsible for the preparation of the assessment roll
of all property in the City to be assessed.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of
assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et
seq., MSA 7.24 et seq.
Section 13.8. - Board of review.
   There shall be a Board of Review established in accordance with law
consisting of three persons experienced in real property values: one member to
be appointed by the Council, one member to be appointed by the Mayor, and the
third member to be appointed by the Treasurer. The Mayor may appoint an
alternate member to be a private person experienced in real property values.
The Board of Review shall meet in the council room on dates determined by the
Council or as otherwise required by law at times convenient to the general
public. At least one evening session shall be held. Notice of the meetings of
the Board of Review shall be made by the Clerk at least ten days prior to the
first meeting of the Board of Review in the manner required by law. Changes in
the assessment rolls made by the Board of Review shall be communicated to the
Assessor and the assessment rolls corrected accordingly. The Assessor or deputy
shall attend all meetings of the Board of Review.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL
117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a).
Section 13.9. - Assessment and collection of taxes.
   Following the review of the assessment rolls by the Board of Review, the
Assessor shall spread thereon all taxes to be collected by the City in
accordance with law. Thereafter, the Assessor shall certify the rolls and the
budget to the Treasurer, who shall apportion tax monies collected to the
various funds provided in the budget.
State Law reference— Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday
in April required, MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1).
Section 13.10. - Reappraisal and reassessment.
   All property in the City subject to general ad valorem taxation shall be
reappraised and reassessed according to State laws.
Section 13.11. - Taxes, when due.
   Except for installment payments, property taxes shall be paid without
penalty on or before the fourteenth day of September each year. A person liable
for taxes on any property may pay such taxes in three equal installments, the
first being due on or before the fourteenth day of September; the second being
due on or before the fourteenth day of November; the third being due on or
before the fourteenth day of January of the fiscal year in which the tax is
payable, without penalty or interest thereon provided such payments are made
when specified herein.
State Law reference— Collection off taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq., MSA 7.87 et seq.
Section 13.12. - Tax penalties, fees and interest.
   All tax penalties, fees and interest shall be as established by the Council
and when received by the City shall be placed in the general fund.
Section 13.13. - Tax collection procedures.
   Procedures for collection of taxes by the City, including requirements for
notice of taxes due, shall be governed by law. The Treasurer shall be empowered
to take any action necessary and lawful for the collection of taxes. All taxes
shall become a lien on the property assessed at the time they are levied and
until they are paid.
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and
return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i).
Section 13.14. - Borrowing in anticipation of taxes.
   The City may borrow in anticipation of collection of taxes for the same or
next succeeding fiscal year, such sums as may be permitted by law. Money so
borrowed shall be repaid from such taxes when collected.
State Law reference— City authority to borrow money on the credit of the City
and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1) and 141.2405(2), MSA 5.2074(1).
Section 13.15. - Expenditures procedures.
   No money may be disbursed from the treasury except in pursuance of an
appropriation by the Council and upon the approval of the Treasurer.
Disbursements shall specify the fund from which it is payable and shall not be
paid from any other fund. No disbursement shall be drawn upon the treasury
after the fund from which it should be paid has been exhausted.
Section 13.16. - Bidding and purchasing procedures.
   The Council shall, by ordinance, establish procedures to protect the
interest of the City and to assure fairness in procuring or the sale of
property and services.
Section 13.17. - Certification of contracts.
   The Treasurer shall encumber the amount of all purchase orders at the time
of their issuance and shall certify that funds are available to make payments
required by any proposed contract before the City becomes a party thereto.
State Law reference— Restriction on making contracts with persons in default to
city, MCL 117.5(f), MSA 5.2084(f).
Section 13.18. - Independent audit.
   The Council shall provide for an independent audit of all accounts of the
City within thirty days of the end of each fiscal year. The audit may also
include the amounts of the District Court. The audit shall be conducted by
certified public accountants experienced in municipal accounting and shall be
completed within six months of the close of each fiscal year. Copies of the
audit shall be placed in all public libraries in the City.
Section 13.19. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 14. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section 14.1. - General authority to acquire or dispose of public improvements.
   The City may acquire, extend or alter by any means permitted by law, any
public improvement necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
Section 14.2. - Acquiring and disposing of public utility.
   The City may not acquire or dispose of any public utility unless approved by
three-fifths of the electors of the City voting thereon.
Section 14.3. - Public disclosure of costs of public improvements.
   Prior to a vote of the Council or the electorate upon the acquisition,
extension, alteration or disposal of any public improvements, the Council shall
direct the preparation of and shall receive and publish an estimate of the cost
of the construction, acquisition or disposal and shall determine in what manner
and from what funds the cost of the public improvement shall be paid and shall
require an estimate to be prepared of the cost of operating the public
improvement for the following three years.
Section 14.4. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided for in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 15. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5;
MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084.
Section 15.1. - Power to make special assessments.
   The City shall have the power to make special assessments for public
improvements and other purposes in accordance with law. Special assessments
shall be made on a pro rata basis according to the benefit to be derived by
affected property owners within each special assessment district. That portion
of the benefit to be derived from each public improvement that shall accrue to
the general public and not to individual property owners shall be determined by
the Council prior to the levy of a special assessment, and that percentage of
the cost of the public improvement shall be paid by taxpayers of the City at
large. The method of determining the special assessments in each district shall
be in accordance with applicable legal requirements, and the City shall have
the authority to adjust any unjust, incorrect or inequitable special
assessment. The Assessor shall certify the special assessment rolls as lawfully
prepared, and such rolls shall be open to public inspection during regular
business hours.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of
public improvements, MCL 117.4d, MSA 5.2077.
Section 15.2. - Review of special assessment roll.
   A meeting of the Council to review each special assessment roll and to hear
objections to the special assessments shall be held. The Assessor or deputy
shall attend any such meeting. The public notice of such a meeting shall advise
all persons having objections to the special assessment roll that objections
must be filed with the Clerk in writing at/or prior to the meeting of the
Council. In either event, objections will be considered at the meeting of the
Council. All affected property owners shall be notified of the proposed special
assessment against their properties by mail at least fifteen days prior to the
meeting of the Council.
Section 15.3. - Objections to proposed improvement.
   If, at or prior to the meeting of the Council to review the special
assessment roll, owners of more than fifty percent of the assessed value of
privately owned property to be assessed, or in the case of paving or similar
improvements, owners of more than fifty percent of the frontage to be assessed
shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the special assessment may
not be made unless it is supported by five members of the Council.
Section 15.4. - Confirmation of special assessment roll.
   Following the public meeting of the Council at which the special assessment
roll is reviewed, the Council may make such corrections and changes in the
special assessment roll as it determines to be necessary or appropriate. All
owners of property affected by such corrections and changes shall be notified
in the same manner required for the original assessment and the same procedure
required for review by the Council of the original assessments shall be used in
reviewing the corrections and changes. When all corrections and changes in the
special assessment roll have been made and reviewed by the Council, the Council
shall confirm the special assessment roll by the required vote and shall notify
the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall determine the amount of the special
assessments, or installment payments thereon, for each property assessed, and
shall file a list of such assessments and installment payments with the Clerk.
Section 15.5. - Special assessments as lien.
   Special assessments shall constitute a lien upon the properties assessed
from the date of confirmation until paid, and shall be of the same character
and priority as to City taxes. All assessments or installments thereof which
shall be unpaid and delinquent on the first Tuesday in May of each year, and
which shall not have been previously reassessed by the Council upon the general
tax roll, shall on the said first Tuesday in May of each year be reported to
the Council by the Treasurer as delinquent and the Council shall order the
amount due, including penalties and interest to the first day of August of such
year, to be reassessed and spread by the assessor upon the general tax roll for
such year with such information as may be required by law; and said special
assessment shall then be collected and paid as provided in collecting City
taxes.
Section 15.6. - Limitation on contests of special assessments.
   A contest of any special assessment made hereunder shall be legally barred
unless timely instituted in accordance with law.
State Law reference— Tax Tribunal Act, MCL 205.735(a)(b).
Section 15.7. - Payment of installments.
   The Council shall set the number of annual installments of any special
assessment, which shall not exceed 30, and terms of payment of special
assessments and the interest to be paid thereon.
Section 15.8. - Default on special assessments.
   When any payment on a special assessment is in default, the Treasurer may
take whatever legal action is necessary to collect the payment.
Section 15.9. - Additional assessments and refunds.
   Bonds may be issued to pay the costs of improvements in a special assessment
district. Should any special assessment prove insufficient to pay for the
improvement or work or to retire the bonds issued therefore, the Council may,
in the same manner provided for original special assessments, make an
additional assessment to supply the deficiency. When a special assessment
yields a larger amount than is necessary to pay for the improvement or to
retire bonds issued therefor, and if the excess is less than five percent, the
Council may place the excess in the City general fund, but if the excess is
more than five percent, the Council shall order a pro rata refund to property
owners of record.
   Should any special assessment, or proceedings therefor, be held invalid by a
court or by the Council, the Council may order a reassessment for the same
purposes as the original special assessment and in the same manner provided for
original special assessments. Any sums paid prior to the invalidation of the
special assessments shall be credited to the new assessments.
Section 15.10. - Special assessments for legally rendered city services.
   The Council may levy a special assessment against any parcel of land in
order to recover the cost of providing any City service or making any necessary
improvement including but not limited to sidewalks, lighting, nuisance
abatement, parking lot maintenance and improvements. The Council shall not make
such assessment unless the affected taxpayer or predecessor taxpayers have been
notified of the providing of such service or the making of such improvement.
Section 15.11. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 16. - BONDS[4] 
Footnotes:
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et
seq.
Section 16.1. - Issuance of bonds.
   The City may, within the limits provided by law, authorize the borrowing of
money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City; and
may provide for the issuance of bonds of the City or other evidence of
indebtedness therefore; and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of
the City for the payment of the obligations created thereby.
State Law reference— City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city
and issue bonds therefore, MCL 117.4a(1), MSA 5.2074(1).
Section 16.2. - Proceeds of bonds.
   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and it shall be
unlawful to use the proceeds for any other purpose, provided that, whenever the
proceeds of any bond issue or any part thereof shall remain unexpended and
unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue is made the Council
shall use such unexpended and unencumbered funds for the retirement of said
bond issue. The remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the
City as provided by law.
Section 16.3. - Emergency bonds.
   In case of fire, flood or other calamity, the Council may issue emergency
bonds in accordance with law, which may be general obligations of the City, to
provide relief for the residents of the City, and for the preservation or
restoration of municipal property.
Section 16.4. - Special assessment bonds.
   The Council may provide for the borrowing of money and issuing of bonds in
anticipation of the payment of the special assessments, or in anticipation of
the payment of any combination of special assessments. Such special assessment
bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district, or may be both
an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of
the City as provided by law. All collections on each special assessment roll or
combination of rolls, to the extent that the same are pledged for the payment
of the principal of and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of the payment
thereof, shall be set apart in a separate fund for the payment of such
principal and interest and shall be used for no other purpose.
State Law reference— City authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in
anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2), MSA 5.2074
(2).
Section 16.5. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others, wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 17. - RETIREMENT PLANS
Section 17.1. - Establishment of retirement plans.
   The three retirement plans of the City shall continue in existence. The
accrued financial benefits of active and retired City employees, being
contractual obligations of the City, shall in no event be diminished or
impaired. Financial benefits arising on account of services rendered in each
fiscal year shall be funded during that year and that funding shall not be used
for financing unfunded accrued liabilities.
   Retirement plans and benefits are subject to collective bargaining. Pursuant
to state law, collectively bargained agreements supersede Charter provisions.
Subject to the protections set forth in the Michigan Constitution, benefits for
employees not subject to a collective bargaining agreement are as adopted by
and may be modified from time to time by City Council.
Section 17.2. - Changes in retirement benefits.
   The Council shall by ordinance adopt the benefit schedules, terms and
conditions for the City's retirement plans and may include the revision of
benefits for those employees who have already retired or their beneficiaries
who are eligible for City pension benefits. Before final action on any proposed
change in retirement benefits is taken, the Council shall obtain a report as to
the immediate and long-term costs of the change from a qualified actuary of its
choosing and may not take final action until at least three months after the
report of the actuary is made public at a meeting of the Council.
Section 17.3. - Governing bodies.
   Not more than three governing bodies for administering the City's retirement
plans may be established. The governing bodies shall have all powers necessary
to administer the retirement systems. The Treasurer shall be treasurer of the
retirement systems, shall serve as secretary to the pension systems' Boards of
Trustees, and shall maintain the financial and membership records of the
pension systems. The governing bodies shall appoint an attorney, who may be the
Corporation Counsel, to serve as legal advisor to the Board. The governing
bodies shall appoint an actuary who shall be the technical advisor to the
governing bodies. Members of the governing bodies shall serve without
compensation. The Mayor and Council appointees shall serve terms equal to the
appointing authority's term of office. The terms of the other members of the
governing bodies shall be as established in this chapter. Existing terms of
members shall continue in accordance with the terms of their original election
or appointment. All meetings of the governing bodies shall be held in
accordance with the Open Meetings Act.
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for retirement system for
employees, MCL 117.4j, MSA 5.2083.
Section 17.4. - Membership; administration.
   (A)   The membership of the Policemen's and Firemen's Retirement System
shall include police and fire employees, other than temporary or civilian
employees, who were employed by the City prior to July first, Nineteen Hundred
and Fifty-Six. The administration of the System shall be vested in a Board of
Trustees which shall consist of seven members, as follows:
      1.   The Mayor of the City shall appoint a person who shall serve as
chairperson.
      2.   The City Council shall appoint a person who shall serve as vice-
chairperson.
      3.   The Mayor shall appoint, with the confirmation of the Council, a
citizen who is an elector in the City and who is not an employee of the City
and who is not eligible to receive benefits under the Retirement System. The
citizen-member term shall be three years.
      4.   Two active policemen who are members of the Retirement System to be
elected by the policemen members of the Retirement System for a period of three
years.
      5.   Two active firemen who are members of the Retirement System to be
elected by the firemen members of the Retirement System for a period of three
years.
   Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote in the meetings of the Board.
Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. At least five concurring
votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees at any meeting of the
Board.
   When there are insufficient active policemen and firemen members qualified
and willing to serve as trustees, vacancies shall be filled by the election of
retired members who have signed and filed with the Board a Notice of Intent to
be a Candidate, and who have permanent residences within a 100-mile radius of
Dearborn. Both active and retired policemen and firemen members shall be
eligible to vote for the policemen and firemen trustees, respectively.
   In the event there should not be an eligible retired policeman member
qualified and willing to fill a policeman trustee vacancy, or an eligible
retired fireman qualified and willing to fill a fireman trustee vacancy, then
any eligible retired member shall be elected by the total active and retired
members of the System.
   At such time as there shall be insufficient eligible active and retired
members qualified and willing to fill the member trustee positions, then the
administration of the System shall become the responsibility of the City of
Dearborn to be administered pursuant to the provisions of the City of Dearborn
Policemen and Firemen Retirement System.
   (B)   The membership of the City of Dearborn Retirement System shall include
all officers except as provided in this charter and only full-time employees
and officers of the City who are not active members of another public
retirement system or eligible to receive benefits from another City retirement
system. The administration of the System shall be vested in a Board of Trustees
which shall consist of five trustees, as follows:
      1.   A Mayoral appointee who shall serve as chairperson;
      2.   A Council appointee who shall serve as vice chairperson; and
      3.   Two members of the Retirement System to be elected by the members of
the Retirement System under such rules and regulations as the Board shall adopt
to govern such elections, provided, that no more than one member trustee shall
be from any one City department. The term for the member trustees shall be four
years.
      4.   A member of the Civil Service Commission to be selected by the
members of the Civil Service Commission.
   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of
its proceedings. Three trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the
Board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote in the meetings of the Board
and at least three concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision by the
trustees.
   Vacancies shall be filled by the election of active members or retired
members who have signed and filed with the Board a Notice of Intent to be a
Candidate, and who have permanent residences within a 100-mile radius of
Dearborn. Both active and retired members shall be eligible to vote for the
trustees.
   At such time as there shall be insufficient eligible active and retired
members qualified and willing to fill the member trustee positions, then the
administration of the System shall become the responsibility of the City of
Dearborn to be administered pursuant to the provisions of the City of Dearborn
Employees Retirement System.
   (C)   The membership of the Police and Fire Revised Retirement System shall
include police and fire employees, other than temporary or civilian employees,
who were employed on or after July first, Nineteen Hundred and Fifty-Six. The
administration of the System shall be vested in a Board of Trustees which shall
consist of seven trustees, as follows:
      1.   A Mayoral appointee who shall serve as chairperson.
      2.   A Council appointee who shall serve as vice chairperson.
      3.   The Mayor shall appoint, with the confirmation of the Council, a
citizen who is an elector in the City and who is not an employee of the City
and who is not eligible to receive benefits under the Retirement System. The
citizen member term shall be three years.
      4.   Four persons to be elected by the members of the System. Two member
trustees shall be elected by the police officer members and must be active
police officer members. Two member trustees shall be elected by the fire
fighter members and must be active fire fighter members. The member trustees
shall be elected by the members of the Retirement System in accordance with
such rules and regulations as the Board shall adopt to govern such elections.
The member trustees shall serve for a term of four years.
   Five trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Board. Each
trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each question before the Board and at
least five concurring votes shall be required for a decision by the Board at
any meeting. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a
record of its proceedings.
   When there are insufficient active police and fire members qualified and
willing to serve as trustees, vacancies shall be filled by the election of
retired members who have signed and filed with the Board a Notice of Intent to
be a Candidate, and who have permanent residences within a 100-mile radius of
Dearborn. Both active and retired police and fire members shall be eligible to
vote for the police and fire trustees, respectively.
   In the event there should not be an eligible retired police member qualified
and willing to fill a police trustee vacancy, or an eligible retired fire
member qualified and willing to fill a fire trustee vacancy, then any eligible
retired member shall be elected by the total active and retired members of the
System.
   At such time as there shall be insufficient eligible active and retired
members qualified and willing to fill the four member trustee positions, then
the administration of the System shall become the responsibility of the City of
Dearborn to be administered pursuant to the provisions of the Police and Fire
Revised Retirement System.
Section 17.5. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided for in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 18. - CITY LIABILITY
Section 18.1. - Notice to city of claims.
   Any person claiming to have been injured by or through the negligent action
of the City or its agents, shall serve a notice in writing upon the Clerk
within one hundred and twenty days of the claimed injury. This notice shall set
forth the time, date, place, witnesses known and specific nature of the injury
claimed. Failure to give such notice may act as a bar to any action based upon
that injury.
CHAPTER 19. - MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITION
Section 19.1. - When certain days are saturdays, sundays or holidays.
   When the day upon which some action or thing shall be done under the
provisions of this charter or the last day of a period within which such action
or thing to be done falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the
City, then such Saturday, Sunday or holiday shall be excluded in computing
time, and such action or thing shall be done on the next regular work day.
Section 19.2. - Seal of the city.
   Until otherwise provided by the Council, the present seal of the City shall
remain the seal of the City and be maintained by the City Clerk.
Section 19.3. - Headings.
   The chapter and section headings used in the charter are for convenience
only and shall not be considered part of this charter.
Section 19.4. - Effect of illegality of any part of charter.
   If any provision of this charter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of the charter.
Section 19.5. - Amendments and revision.
   This charter may be amended or revised at the time and in the manner
provided by law. At the City primary election to be held in Two Thousand
Twenty-One and in each twelfth year thereafter and at such times as may be
provided by law, the question of general revision of the charter shall be
submitted to the electors of the City. If the general revision is approved, the
election of charter commissioners shall be held at the City general election
the same year. The candidates shall be nominated by petitions signed by not
less than 100 or more than 200 registered electors filed 70 days prior to the
general election with the City Clerk's office.
State Law reference— Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art.
VII, § 22; Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.21 et seq., MSA 5.2100 et seq.
Section 19.6. - Penalties for violation of charter.
   Any person found guilty of an act constituting a violation of this charter
may be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment
for not to exceed ninety days, or both, or as otherwise provided by law.
   The Council shall provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this
charter.
   This section shall not operate to limit or prejudice the power to remove
officers or discharge employees as provided in this charter.
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(10), MSA 5.2082(10).
Section 19.7. - City ordinances and regulations.
   All departments, ordinances, resolutions and rules and regulations of the
City in force on the effective date of this charter which are not inconsistent
with this charter, shall continue in full force until repealed, terminated or
amended as provided by this charter or by action of the proper authorities.
Section 19.8. - Rights, liabilities, remedies.
   All rights and properties of any kind and description which were vested in
the City on the effective date of this charter shall be deemed and held to be
vested in the City; and no franchise or licenses granted or right or
liabilities, either in favor of or against the City on the effective date of
this charter, and no suit or prosecution of any kind shall be in any manner
affected by the adoption or taking effect of this charter, but the same shall
stand or progress as if no such change had been made, and all debts and
liabilities of the City under its previous charter shall be deemed to be debts
and liabilities of the City under this charter, and all taxes, and special
assessments levied and uncollected on the effective date of this charter shall
be collected as if such change had not been made; provided, that when a
different remedy is given in this charter which can be made applicable to any
rights existing on the effective date of this charter, it shall be deemed
cumulative to the remedies before provided and may be used accordingly.
Section 19.9. - Continuance in office.
   Elective officers holding office at the time of the effective date of this
charter and except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall remain in
office until their terms expire following the first regular election held under
this charter. Appointive officers holding office at the time of the effective
date of this charter and except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall
remain in office until their current term of office expires or until their
successors have been appointed and qualified.
Section 19.10. - Council confirmation of appointees.
   If this charter shall require Council confirmation of mayoral appointments,
and if the Council shall fail to reject the appointment within four weeks, it
shall be automatically confirmed.
Section 19.11. - Mayor and council to provide for transition.
   On or before the effective date of this charter, the Council shall provide
by ordinance or resolution for the orderly transition of the city government.
Section 19.12. - Penalties.
   Any person who alone or with others wilfully violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this charter punishable as
provided for in Section
19.6 of this charter.
CHAPTER 20. - SCHEDULE
Section 20.1. - Status of schedule chapter.
   The purpose of this chapter is to inaugurate the government of the City of
Dearborn under this charter and it shall constitute part of this charter only
to the extent of the time necessary to accomplish this purpose.
Section 20.2. - Election to adopt charter.
   This charter shall be submitted to the people for adoption at the special
election to be held November 06, 2007, in the manner and with the effect
prescribed by law as follows:
"SHALL THE CHARTER PROPOSED BY THE DEARBORN CHARTER COMMISSION BE ADOPTED?"
   YES
   NO
Section 20.3. - Effective date of charter.
   Except as otherwise provided, this charter shall become effective January 1,
2008.
Section 20.4. - First regular election.
   The first regular election under this charter shall be in 2009.
   David Bazzy, Chairman
   Thomas Patrick Korte, Vice Chairman
   Mary M. Bugeia
   Paula Hamilton-Stokes
   John Jay Hubbard
   Gerard McMahon
   Susan Moran
   Mary K. Petlichkoff
   Raymond Thomas Trudeau
Charter Commission of the City of Dearborn,
Wayne County, Michigan
   Kathleen Buda
Clerk of the Commission
   Debra A. Walling
Corporation Counsel
   Lola T. Isiminger
Secretary of the Commission
 
STATE OF MICHIGAN )
COUNTY OF WAYNE   ) SS.
CITY OF DEARBORN  )
 
   I, Kathleen Buda, City Clerk of the City of Dearborn, do hereby certify that
the foregoing document is a true copy of the Charter of the City of Dearborn
which was approved on September 11, 2007 by the Charter Commission, which
Commission consisted of the following persons: David Bazzy, Chairman, Thomas
Patrick Korte, Vice Chairman, Mary M. Bugeia, (Stephen S. Dobkowski, Jr. 11/22/
2005—08/15/2006), Paula Hamilton-Stokes, John Jay Hubbard, Gereard McMahon,
Susan Moran, Mary K. Petlichkoff, (Ganelle Shooshanian 11/22/2005—06/27/2007)
and Raymond Thomas Trudeau, and approved by thevoters of the City of Dearborn
at a general election held on Tuesday, November 06, 2007.
 
  Kathleen Buda
  
 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 30th day of November 2007.
 
Lola Isiminger
               
 
Notary Public, Wayne County, Micnigan
My Commission Expires: January 21, 2009
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
   This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any
amendments thereto.
Date Section Section
             this Charter
Date            Section     Section
                            this Charter
11- 3-79        1.1—20.6  1.1—20.6
8- 5-86         10.7        10.7
8- 5-86         10.18       10.18
8- 5-86         10.19       Deleted
8- 5-86         10.29       10.29
9-15-81; 8-5-86 13.2        13.2
11- 5-96        6.1         6.1
                6.4         6.4
                6.10        6.10
                10.1, 10.2  10.1, 10.2
                10.5, 10.6  10.5, 10.6
                10.12       10.12
                10.20       10.20
                13.8, 13.9  13.8, 13.9
                13.13       13.13
                15.4, 15.5  15.4, 15.5
                15.8        15.8
                17.3        17.3
11- 5-96        6.4         6.4
11- 3-98        3.4         3.4
                10.7        10.7
                11.1—11.3 11.1—11.3
                11.5, 11.6  11.5, 11.6
                11.8        11.8
                11.10—11.111.10—11.12
                11.14       11.14
                19.10       19.10
11- 3-98        6.6         6.6
11- 3-98        10.7        10.7
                10.20       10.20
11- 7-01        10.17       10.17
11- 4-03                    7.5
11- 3-04                    10.16
11- 6-07        Rpld        1.1—20.6
                Added       1.1—20.4
 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - Citing code.
   This Code shall be cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Dearborn,
Michigan."
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117 5b, MSA 5.2084(2).
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise provided for in this
Code:
   Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Dearborn.
   City. The word "city" means the City of Dearborn, Michigan.
   Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Dearborn, Michigan, as designated in section
1-1.
   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided
in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in
days, shall be computed as prescribed by state statute.
State Law reference— Computing period of days, MCL 8.6, MSA 2.217.
   Council. The word "council" or the words "city council" means the
legislative body of the City of Dearborn, Michigan.
   County. The word "county" means the County of Wayne.
   Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to firms, associations,
partnerships and corporations, and may apply to females if the intent of the
ordinance or Code provision so requires.
   Health department. The phrase "health department" shall mean the health
department, or any department assigned the duties of a health department.
   Health officer. The phrase "health officer" shall mean the director of the
health department or his authorized representative, or any person hereinafter
appointed to such position by the city.
   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or
more public officers or other persons, shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the provision granting the authority.
   MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" shall mean the Michigan Compiled Laws, as
amended.
   Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month.
   MSA. The abbreviation "MSA" shall mean the Michigan Statutes Annotated, as
amended.
   Number. Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall include either
or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person or
persons.
   Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to
include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed
to include the word "affirmed."
   Officers, departments, divisions, boards, commissions, employees or
agencies. The several titles of any officer, department, division, board,
commission, employee or agency shall mean such officer, department, division,
board, commission, employee or agency of the city or any authorized subordinate
or designee.
   Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships,
corporations, clubs, and all associations or organizations of natural persons,
either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named, and whether
acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all
legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof.
   Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following," when used by
way of reference to any title, chapter or section of any ordinance of the city,
shall be construed to mean the title, chapter or section next preceding or next
following that in which such reference is made, unless when some other title,
chapter or section is expressly designated in such reference.
   Public place. Any place to or upon which the public resorts, or travels,
whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the
State of Michigan, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels
by custom, or by invitation, express or implied.
   References, history notes. The charter references, cross references, state
law references, editor's notes and history notes are inserted for convenience
and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to
limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code.
   Seal. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be
required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the word
"seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such paper
alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a
wafer or wax.
   Shall, may. The word "shall" means imperative or mandatory; the word "may"
means permissive.
   Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines
and the right-of-way lines which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
   Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include a
mark when the person cannot write.
   State. The word "state" means the State of Michigan.
   Street, highway and alley. The entire width subject to an easement for
public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way
or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word
"alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress
and egress from a property.
   Sundays, legal holidays. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to
the provisions of any ordinance or Code section falls on a Sunday or legal
holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day.
   Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as
including the future as well as the present or past.
   Time. Whenever time is referred to, it means eastern standard time or the
time officially in force in the city.
   Titles, headings and catchlines. The key words used in the Code as headings,
titles or catchlines for chapters, sections and subsections are inserted for
convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be
construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code.
   Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days.
   Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" may include any
form of reproduction or expression of language.
   Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the
word "year," alone, shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord."
   All ordinances of the city shall be interpreted and construed in accordance
with the above provisions, unless such interpretation and construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council.
State Law reference— Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq.
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of ordinances.
   (a)   Whenever an ordinance, or any part thereof, is repealed by a
subsequent ordinance, such ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not
be revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance.
   (b)   Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict therewith, shall to the extent of such conflict, be
repealed.
   (c)   The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall not release or
relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance
or any part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provide, and
such ordinance and part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force
for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution
for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability.
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 8.4, 8.4a, MSA 2.213, 2.214.
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code.
   (a)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Dearborn, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as
follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (b)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Dearborn, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
____________ , which shall read as follows: …." The new section shall then be
set out in full as desired.
   (c)   If a section is to be repealed, the following language shall be used:
"That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dearborn, Michigan, is hereby
revised by repealing section ____________ ." The repealed section number shall
then be set out.
Charter reference— Amendment and revision of ordinances, §
9.4.
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code.
   (a)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles.
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers.
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or
to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the Code).
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Charter reference— Codification, §
9.9.
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any
ordinance when not inconsistent with this Code:
      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's
indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city.
      (2)   Granting any right or franchise.
      (3)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city.
      (4)   Making any appropriation.
      (5)   Levying or imposing annual taxes.
      (6)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the city.
      (7)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.
      (8)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city.
      (9)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city.
      (10)   Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any
city officers or employees.
      (11)   Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to
specific streets.
      (12)   Affecting any urban renewal project.
      (13)   Pertaining to rezoning.
      (14)   Regulating the procedure controlling the subdivision of land.
      (15)   Controlling the placement and erection of signs.
      (16)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general
and permanent nature.
   All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. The ordinances
are on file in the city clerk's office.
Sec. 1-7. - Severability.
   If any part of this Code or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall
not affect the remaining parts or applications of this Code which can be given
effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining parts
are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end all
provisions of this Code are declared to be severable.
Sec. 1-8. - Retirement plans.
   The following chapters of the former city charter are specifically saved
from repeal: chapter 21, Policemen's and Firemen's Retirement System; chapter
22, City of Dearborn Employees' Retirement System and, chapter 23, Police and
Fire Revised Retirement System. All ordinances amending the substantive
provisions of the retirement systems are also specifically saved from repeal.
These ordinances are not set forth in this Code. Chapter 22, the City of
Dearborn Employees' Retirement System, was finally closed to new general
employees employed on or after July 1, 2002 and existing members of the City of
Dearborn Employees' Retirement System were given an opportunity to convert to a
defined contribution plan effective July 1, 2003. The system is closed to
former employees who are rehired after the effective date of this section.
Council has adopted by ordinance the defined contribution and deferred
compensation plans available to general city employees. The plans and
amendments to them adopted by ordinance are not set forth in this Code.
(Ord. No. 03-975, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 06-1093, 9-5-06)
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty.
   (a)   Whenever in this Code or in any rule, regulation or order made
pursuant to this Code or any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is
made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act
is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the
violation of any such provision by any person shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 93 days, or both, except whenever a specific penalty is otherwise
provided.
   (b)   Any person under the age of 17 years who violates any provision of
this Code or any ordinance of the city shall be dealt with by the juvenile
division of the probate court or as prescribed by the laws of the state.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this
section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a new and separate
offense for each day that such condition continues to exist.
   (d)   In addition to any penalty under this section, the city may seek
injunctive relief, abate the condition as a nuisance, revoke any permit or
license, and/or seek any other available remedy.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the failure of city
officers and employees to perform duties required in this Code.
(Ord. No. 01-863, 11-20-01)
Charter reference— Penalties, §
9.7.
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082.
Sec. 1-10 License appeal or nuisance abatement board hearing by city council.
   (a)   Notice of hearing. Whenever in this Code a hearing for an appeal of a
license    denial or revocation is to be held by the City Council, or for a
hearing with the City    Council sitting as the Nuisance Abatement Board, the
fee for such appeal hearing shall be $1,000.00. The fee for a hearing to appeal
the denial or revocation of a license is due upon request for the appeal or
hearing. Inasmuch as a Nuisance Abatement Board hearing may be initiated by any
employee, officer, or resident of the City, the City Council may impose the
hearing fee on a business owner at the time of the hearing. The City Council
shall serve notice upon the licensee or business owner by certified mail,
within the timeframe established for the applicable type of hearing. The notice
shall state:
      1)    The date, time and place of the hearing.
      2)    A statement that the licensee or business owner may present
evidence and testimony, and may be represented by an attorney.
   (b)    Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the City
Council and shall be open to the public. The City Council shall, by resolution,
decide the appeal at the public hearing. After the hearing the City Council
shall provide the licensee or business owner with a copy of its resolution
which shall include the specific grounds for its decision and, if relevant, a
statement that the decision may be appealed to the circuit court.
   (c)    Withdrawal and refund. If the request for a license appeal hearing is
withdrawn no less than 10 business days before the scheduled hearing, the
appeal fee shall be refunded in full. Such withdrawal shall be made in writing
by the appellant(s) or business owner and filed with the offices of the City
Clerk and City Council during normal business hours between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m.
Monday through Friday. The City Council may, in its sole discretion, determine
before, during or after the hearing that all or a portion of the fee may be
refunded or otherwise modified.
(Ord. No. 19-1667, 12-10-19)
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Charter reference— General municipal powers,
Ch. 5; the legislative department,
Ch. 7; the executive department,
Ch. 10.
Cross reference— Community development,
Ch. 7; elections,
Ch. 8; offenses affecting governmental functions, §
14-36 et seq.; recreation commission, §
15-51 et seq.
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; Open
Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et
seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. - Employment.
   Persons applying for employment with the city shall be subject to a full and
complete background check conducted by, or on behalf of, the human resources
department.
(Ord. 02-896, 5-21-02)
Secs. 2-2—2-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.;
Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-51. Chief Operating Officer.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city the
position of Chief Operating Officer, who shall be appointed by the mayor in
accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to mayoral appointees, and
shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council.
   (b)   Functions and duties: The Chief Operating Officer shall be responsible
for developing, supervising, and managing day-to-day administrative operations
of the city. Areas of focus shall include, but are not limited to, strategy and
innovation, human resources, finance, budget, information and technology,
internal audit, and communication. Specific job duties shall include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Direct and supervise administrative functions.
      (2)   Determine and implement performance metrics.
      (3)   Compile and assemble data, information, and records related to
departmental activity. Maintain personnel records and other documents as
necessary and ensure record handling and reporting functions are conducted
according to city policy and applicable law.
      (4)   Prepare regular status and special reports as requested by the
mayor or council, and a required by other entities.
      (5)   Attend council meetings, complete special projects, and make
presentations as requested.
      (6)   Provide project management support on cross-city strategies such as
the budget and communications initiatives.
      (7)   Prepare and submit the annual department budget to the mayor.
      (8)   Submit to the mayor and make available to the council and public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the department
at the end of each fiscal year.
      (9)   Maintain cooperative relationships with other departments, peer
agencies, and other governmental units, and coordinate departmental activities
with outside agencies and authorities as necessary.
      (10)   Perform additional duties as required and requested by the mayor
as may be consistent with the provisions of the charter and code of ordinances.
(Ord. No. 22-1726, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-52. Strategy Officer.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city the
position of Strategy Officer, who shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance
with the charter provisions pertaining to mayoral appointees, and shall receive
such compensation as shall be fixed by the council.
   (b)   Functions and duties: The Strategy Officer shall be responsible for
facilitating comprehensive planning initiatives for the city, working closely
with various departments within the city to understand the strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and challenges facing the city, and to put short-
and long-term initiatives in place that provide the best possible services to
the residents of the city. Specific job duties shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Develop innovation and continuous improvement initiatives.
      (2)   Coordinate and provide leadership on special projects and new
initiatives.
      (3)   Build partnerships with various community organizations and other
stakeholders.
      (4)   Provide direction and input on communications strategy and
messaging.
      (5)   Prepare regular status and special reports as requested by the
mayor or council, and as required by other entities.
      (6)   Attend council meetings, complete special projects, and make
presentations as requested.
      (7)   Maintain cooperative relationships with other departments, peer
agencies, and other governmental units, and coordinate departmental activities
with outside agencies and authorities as necessary.
      (8)   Perform additional duties as required and requested by the mayor as
may be consistent with the provisions of the charter and code of ordinances.
(Ord. No. 22-1726, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1758, 8-23-22)
Sec. 2-52.1. Senior Advisor.
   The Mayor may designate, at their discretion, one of their director
appointees to act in the capacity of senior advisor, with additional
compensation not to exceed $5,000 annually, based on the appointee's years of
service and expertise. The senior advisor shall not duplicate or supplant the
duties for any other appointees.
(Ord. No. 22-1758, 8-23-22)
Division 1A. Office of Equity and Inclusion
Sec. 2-53. Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as the Office of Equity and
Inclusion, which shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and who shall receive such compensation as shall be
affixed by the council.
   (b)   The city shall provide the necessary appropriations annually to
provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment, and personnel to carry on
the work of the Office of Equity and Inclusion.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department.
   (d)   Functions and duties: The department shall exercise its authority,
functions, and duties in accordance with all ordinances, rules, regulations,
orders, and the city charter. The authority, duties, and responsibilities of
the department shall include the following:
      (1)   Foster mutual understanding and respect among the people of the
city and discourage and prevent unlawful discriminatory practices.
      (2)   Review and analyze conditions, practices, attitudes, policies, and
other factors within the city that contribute to discriminatory impact and
inequities, as well as evaluating the impact of antidiscrimination efforts.
      (3)   Make recommendations to the city administration and mayor on ways
to improve city programs and ordinances to eliminate discrimination and
inequities, or remove effects of past discrimination.
      (4)   Engage in public awareness-building activities to ensure residents
are informed of increased local protections and the role of the department.
      (5)   The department shall provide an annual report to the mayor and
council regarding complaints received, actions taken, and awareness building
activities described in subsection 4. This report shall be made available to
the public.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Division 1B. Office of Philanthropy and Grants
Sec. 2-54. Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as the Office of Philanthropy and
Grants, which shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and who shall receive such compensation as shall be
affixed by the council.
   (b)   The city shall provide the necessary appropriations annually to
provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment, and personnel to carry on
the work of the Office of Philanthropy and Grants.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department.
   (d)   The director of this department shall work in conjunction with the
City Treasurer to achieve the goals and purpose of this department.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-55. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this division the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   Entitlement grant means a grant where, prior to the time set by law or
by the grantor agency for filing the grant application, the city is entitled,
by law or by rule or regulation of the grantor agency, to receive an already-
determined definite amount of money.
   (b)   Formula grant means a grant where, prior to the time set by law or by
the grantor agency for filing the grant application, the city is ensured, by
law or by rule or regulation of the grantor agency, of receiving an amount of
money, such amount of money to be determined at the time the grant is approved
by the grantor agency and to be determined based on a formula set by law, or by
rule or regulation of the grantor agency, prior to the time required for the
filing of the grant application.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-56. Approval of city council and mayor required.
   (a)    Approval of the council, through adoption of a resolution, and the
mayor or their designee, shall be required prior to the filing by the
department of an application for a federal, state, or other grant to be used,
in whole or in part, to fund any city programs, services, or activities.
   (b)   Any request for approval by the council and mayor, or their designee,
of such application shall include a description of all programs, services, or
activities to be funded by the grant, the amount of funding requested for each,
the priorities of such programs, services, or activities if setting of
priorities has been included in the grant application, and the key performance
indicators that will be used to measure the programs, services, or activities
funded in whole or in part by the grant. The intended grant-recipient
authority, department, or division shall provide this information to the mayor
or their designee. The mayor or their designee shall approve such application
no later than two business days after receiving a complete application package
in accordance with grantor requirements as set forth in the grant notice.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-57. Approval of supplements and amendments.
   The city may not file without approval of council, through adoption of a
resolution, and approval of the city’s chief financial officer, a supplement or
an amendment to a grant application requiring approval under section
2-54 of this code and previously approved by the council and the mayor, or
their designee, if the supplement or amendment would change the number of
programs, services, or activities to be funded in the approved application;
significantly change the scope or content of any approved program, service, or
activity; substitute a program, service, or activity different from a program,
service, or activity already approved; significantly change the amount of
funding requested; change any previously approved priorities; or include
setting of priorities as to any programs, services, or activities in a
previously approved grant application where setting of priorities had not been
included in the initial application.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-58. Approval required after change in governing law.
   Where the city submits an application for a federal, state, or other grant
that is neither an entitlement grant nor a formula grant and, subsequently,
because of a change in governing law or rule or regulation of the grantor
agency, the city will be entitled, by law or by rule or regulation of the
grantor agency, on the filing of an supplement or amendment to the initial
application, to receive either a definite dollar amount of money or an amount
of money to be determined by the application of a formula, then approval of
council, through adoption of a resolution, and approval of the mayor or their
designee shall be required prior to the submission of any such supplement or
amendment.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-59. Time for submittal of application.
   A grant application requiring approval by council and the mayor, or their
designee, under section
2-54 of this code or a supplement or an amendment to a grant application
requiring approval by council and the mayor, or their designee, under section
2-55 or section
2-56 of this code shall be submitted, whenever practicable, to the council and
the mayor, or their designee, for approval at least two weeks before the date
by which approval is required.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-60. Report to city council of grants approved.
   The mayor, or a person or persons designated in writing by the mayor or the
city’s chief financial officer, shall file with council by the 20th day of each
month, a report of all grant applications, supplements, and amendments filed
during the past calendar month. The report shall show for each grant
application, supplement, or amendment so filed:
   (1)   The name of the grantor agency;
   (2)   The date the application, supplement, or amendment was filed;
   (3)   The programs, activities, or services requested to be funded;
   (4)   The amount of funding requested for each such program, activity, or
service.
   (5)   The expected date on which the grantor agency will approve or
disapprove the grant application; and
   (6)   The nature of any amendment or supplement.
(Ord. No. 22-1738, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-61—2-75. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-806, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, changed the designation
of div. 2 from "department of citizen resources and information" to "department
of public information."
Sec. 2-76. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-806, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, repealed § 2-76, which
pertained to definitions, and derived from Ord. No. 81-28, § 8, adopted June
25, 1981.
Sec. 2-77. Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city governmental to be known as the Department of
Communications which shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
by the council.
   (b)   The city shall provide the necessary appropriations annually to
provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry on
the work of the Department of Communications.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department. Department of Communications shall
consist of the following divisions:
      (1)   Video programming and production.
       (2)   Photographic/microfilm services.
(Ord. No. 81-28, § 1, 6-25-81; Ord. No. 00-806, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 22-1728, 1-
25-22)
Sec. 2-78. Functions and duties.
   The director of the Department of Communications shall supervise and control
the department. The director shall be a person having management experience in
municipal government, including the field of public relations. Functions and
duties of the director shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   To assemble facts concerning the affairs of the city government and
to prepare those facts in suitable form for publication or presentation by
newspaper, television or radio, or from the public platform.
      (2)   To prepare or direct the preparation of information for the public
in various forms.
      (3)   To provide a location where citizens may secure information on all
services, rights and benefits available to them.
(Ord. No. 81-28, § 2, 6-25-81; Ord. No. 00-806, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 22-1728, 1-
25-22)
Sec. 2-79. Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-806, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, repealed § 2-79, which
pertained to the division of senior citizen service, and derived from Ord. No.
81-28, § 5, adopted June 25, 1981.
Sec. 2-80. Division of photographic/microfilm services.
   There shall be within theDepartment of Communications a division of
photographic/microfilm services. This division shall be responsible for
providing microfilming and photographic services to all city departments and
maintaining a file of negatives for institutional and community promotional
purposes.
   The division may provide these services using mediums other than
microfilming, including but not limited to digital-based mediums, as
technological advances are made and as approved by the director of the
department. Any change to a different medium shall comply with all applicable
laws.
(Ord. No. 00-806, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 22-1728, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-81. Reserved.
   Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-806, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, repealed § 2-82,
which pertained to the senior citizens commission and derived from Ord. No. 81-
28, § 7, adopted June 25, 1981.
Secs. 2-82-2-87. Reserved.
DIVISION 2A. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND FACILITIES
Sec. 2-88. - Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as theDepartment of Public Works
and Facilities.
   (b)   The Department of Public Works and Facilities shall be under the
direction of the director of public works and facilities, who shall be
knowledgeable and experienced in public administration and shall be appointed
by the mayor in accordance with the Charter provisions pertaining to directors
of departments, and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by
council. The director of public works and facilities shall be the executive
officer of the department and shall be responsible for the administration of
the department. The director of public works and facilities shall organize and
carry out the duties and functions of the department. The division of
engineering shall be under the direction of the city engineer who shall be a
registered civil engineer in the state of Michigan.
   (c)   The city council shall provide the necessary appropriations annually
to provide suitableoffice space, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry
on the work of theDepartment of Public Works and Facilities.
   (d)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department. The Department of Public Works and
Facilities shall consist of such divisions as are necessary to carry out
efficiently the following functions:
      (1)   Construction, repair and maintenance of city buildings;
      (2)   Construction and maintenance of water distribution and sewerage
disposal systems;
      (3)   Repair and maintenance of motor transport equipment;
      (4)   Construction and engineering work required by the city;
      (5)   Maintenance of streets and alleys and related facilities;
      (6)   Maintenance of parks and boulevards;
      (7)   Infrastructure and support;
      (8)   Collection and disposal of refuse;
      (9)   Vector control; and
      (10)   Administration of the functions and duties of the Housing
Division, including but not limited to:
         i.   Providing and establishing a clearing house for information in
connection with available housing, the location of such available housing, and
the opportunities for acquiring additional housing facilities in the city;
         ii.   Assembling, coordinating, and mobilizing all of the resources of
the city with those available outside of the city so far as to provide the
necessary material, facilities, and assistance to enable the residents of the
city to acquire adequate housing;
         iii.   Maintaining and implementing existing housing programs;
         iv.   Being responsible for the general management of all low- and
moderate-income housing developments operated by the city;
         v.   Working with the Housing Commission on all matters properly
within its purview pursuant to Secs.
2-471 to
2-475 of this Code; and
         vi.   Identifying and pursuing housing programs and opportunities to
serve unmet housing needs within the city.
(Ord. No. 09-1225, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 16-1521, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 22-1730, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-88.1. Assignment of duties and responsibilities.
   Any reference in the Dearborn Code of Ordinances to the department of public
works, as previously constituted, shall be applicable instead to the Department
of Public Works and Facilities.
(Ord. No. 22-1730, 1-25-22)
DIVISION 2B. - CITY BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION
Sec. 2-89. - Established.
   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a commission to
be known as the city beautiful commission, which shall consist of not more than
30 members, to be appointed by the mayor, in accordance with the City Charter.
Members of such commission shall be appointed in accord with the terms and
conditions under the City Charter for appointment of members of boards and
commissions. The members of the commission shall be compensated at such rate as
the council in its discretion may determine. The commission shall organize by
annually electing a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership, shall adopt
its rules of procedure and shall hold such meetings, either regular or special,
as it may deem necessary to carry on its work. The director of residential
services shall be the executive-secretary of the commission. The commission
shall establish goals to assist in the beautification and improvement of
neighborhoods and business districts in accord with the grant of authority to
the community improvement department.
(Ord. No. 09-1225, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 16-1521, 2-9-16)
Secs. 2-90—2-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. DEPARTMENT OF INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY[4]
Footnotes:
--- (4) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-807, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, changed the designation
of Div. 3 from “department of communications” to “MIS department.” Ord. No. 22-
1736, adopted January 25, 2022, changed the designation of Div. 3 from “MIS
department” to “Department of Technology and Innovation.” Ord. No. 22-1757,
adopted August 23, 2022, changed the designated of Div. 3 to “Department of
Innovation and Technology.”
Sec. 2-101. - Established.
   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a department in
the city government to be known as the Department of Innovation and
Technologywhich shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
by the council. The city council shall provide the necessary appropriations
annually to provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment and personnel
to carry on the work of the Department of Innovation and Technology. The
director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who may be
required to operate the department.
(Ord. No. 80-4, § 1, 7-1-80; Ord. No. 00-807, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 07-1136, 9-17-
07; Ord. No. 22-1736, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1757, - -22)
Sec. 2-102. - Functions and duties.
   The functions and duties of the director shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
   (1)   Administration of local government communications networks for voice,
data, audio and video signals.
   (2)   Police, fire and local government communications support services.
   (3)   Develop, maintain, and manage citywide computer-reliant information
and communications system.
   (4)   Develop, maintain, and manage an internal telephone and public safety
communication system.
(Ord. No. 80-4, § 2, 7-1-80; Ord. No. 86-376, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 00-807, 1-18-
00; Ord. No. 07-1136, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 22-1736, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-103. - Divisions.
   The Department of Innovation and Technology shall be composed of five
divisions with responsibilities as follows:
   (1)   Administration. City-wide information systems and general office
operations.
   (2)   Systems. Installation, maintenance and repair of telephone, radio,
audio and video communications systems.
   (3)   Geographic information systems. Development, maintenance, and
management of a citywide geographic information system.
   (4)   Communications. Development, maintenance and management of an internal
telephone and public safety communication system.
   (5)   Computer services. Development, maintenance and management of a
citywide computer-reliant information and communications system.
(Ord. No. 86-376, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 00-807, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 07-1136, 9-17-
07; Ord. No. 22-1736, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1757, - -22)
Secs. 2-104—2-120. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS
Sec. 2-121. Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as the Department of Community
Relations, which shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and who shall receive such compensation as shall be
affixed by the council.
   (b)   The city shall provide the necessary appropriations annually to
provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment, and personnel to carry on
the work of the Department of Community Relations.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department.
   (d)   Functions and duties: The director of the Department of Community
Relations shall supervise and control the department, and shall be the
appointing authority for all employees who may be required to operate the
department. Functions and duties of the department shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Conduct research of an economic and administrative nature, which may
from time-to-time be requested by the mayor, city council or the directors of
the departments of the city government.
      2.   Compile, study and analyze objectives, functions and results of work
of various departments of the city government.
      3.   Collect, tabulate, file and store statistical data by the various
departments.
      4.   Prepare the city's annual report or such other departmental reports
as may be requested.
      5.   Maintain liaison with the public and the media.
      6.   Make arrangements for the reception of various visiting dignitaries
and distinguished visitors to the government offices of the city.
      7.   Distribute factual information pertaining to the city government to
the public in any manner deemed by the director to be most suitable.
      8.   Assist in the preparation of and coordinate plans and publicity in
connection with the various city-sponsored festivals, pageants and programs.
      9.   Provide and furnish such other services as may be requested by the
mayor or authorized by the city council.
(Ord. No. 22-1727, 1-25-22)
Secs. 2-122-2-230. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH[6] 
Footnotes:
--- (6) ---
Charter reference— Department of health, § 10.23.
Sec. 2-231. Established, purpose and intent.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as the Department of Public
Health, which shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and who shall receive such compensation as shall be
affixed by the council.
   (b)   The city shall provide the necessary appropriations annually to
provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment, and personnel to carry on
the work of the Department of Public Health.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department.
   (d)   Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this department shall be
to promote the public health through organized programs, including prevention
and control of environmental health hazards, prevention of diseases, prevention
and control of health problems of particularly vulnerable population groups,
and health services delivery systems to the extent provided by the law.
(Ord. No. 22-1729, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-232. Functions and duties.
   The director of the department shall supervise and control the department,
and shall be the appointing authority for all employees who may be required to
operate the department. The functions and duties of the department include:
   (a)   To implement the responsibilities that are vested in the department by
law.
   (b)   Protect the rights of people to receive fair, equal, and human
treatment.
   (c)   Improve services, eligibility, and enhance service quality.
   (d)   Ensure adequate funding is made available for valuable services that
improve the lives of all individuals in the city.
   (e)   Utilize vital and health statistics and provide for epidemiological
and other research studies for the purpose of protecting the public health.
   (f)   Make investigations and inquiries as to:
      (1)   The causes of disease and especially of epidemics.
      (2)   The causes of morbidity and mortality.
      (3)   The causes, prevention, and control of environmental health
hazards, nuisances, and sources of illnesses.
      (g)   Plan, implement, and evaluate health education through the
provision of expert technical assistance, or financial support, or both.
      (h)   Have powers necessary or appropriate to perform the duties and
exercise the powers given by law to the local health officer department and
which are not otherwise prohibited by law.
      (i)   Plan, implement, and evaluate nutrition services by provision of
expert technical assistance or financial support, or both.
(Ord. No. 22-1729, 1-25-22)
Secs. 2-233-2-350. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - POLICE RESERVE COMPANY
Sec. 2-351. - Establishment.
   There is hereby authorized the establishment of an organized police reserve
company to be used temporarily in time of emergency and danger, civil unrest,
natural disaster, riot, special events, or on such other occasions as the mayor
or the chief of police may determine that their use is necessary for increased
public safety and the preservation of law and order.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 1, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-352. - Membership.
   (a)   All members of the police organized reserve company shall be residents
of the city. Each applicant must meet minimum requirements of age and physical
condition and be of good moral character and reputation.
   (b)   All prospective applicants will be investigated by a committee to be
appointed by the chief of police, and any applicant not meeting the established
standards shall be rejected.
   (c)   All members of the police organized reserve company shall be appointed
by the chief of police and shall serve without compensation on a temporary
basis, and may be removed with or without cause at any time by the chief of
police.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 2, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-353. - Organization.
   The police organized reserve company will follow a military organization
system and shall be divided into companies, platoons and squads. The total
strength of the police organized reserve company shall be such as in the
opinion of the chief of police shall be necessary to supplement the regular
police force.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 3, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-354. - Scope of duties.
   The police organized reserve company is not intended to replace or supplant
the duly sworn members of the city police department, but will supplement their
efforts temporarily in time of emergency and danger. It is intended that
reservists shall be available for such duties as directing traffic, desk
assignments, aiding at accidents, handling of service type calls and similar
non-critical tasks. In time of dire emergency, reservists may replace regular
police officers for routine police assignments in less critical areas of the
city.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 4, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-355. - Authority.
   When on official duty, members of the police organized reserve company shall
have the same powers as those of a regular city police officer. When any member
of the police organized reserve company is off duty, he shall have no such
power. No member of the police organized reserve company shall be deemed to be
on official duty until such member shall have been specifically ordered to such
duty by the mayor, the director of public safety, the chief of police, or one
of his superior officers in the reserve company acting pursuant to a direct
command from the chief of police or the mayor.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 5, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-356. - Training.
   (a)   The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint, with the approval
of the mayor, instructors, supervisors and commanding officers to train, direct
and supervise the police organized reserve company, for parttime, emergency or
special service.
   (b)   All members of the police organized reserve company shall be required
to attend initially a stipulated number of regular training sessions and shall
be required to attend continued in-service training sessions as long as they
remain members of the company. Unexcused absence from required training
sessions shall be grounds for dismissal.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 6, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-357. - Equipment.
   All necessary police equipment will be furnished by the police department
and shall remain the property of the department and will at all times be
subjected to the rules and regulations set forth by the department for its use.
Members of the police organized reserve company shall be responsible for the
equipment issued to them and liable for its loss or damage, reasonable wear and
tear excepted.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 7, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-358. - Uniform.
   Members of the police organized reserve company shall be outfitted with a
uniform of a design and color to be selected by the chief of police. The
uniform may be the same as that worn by regular police officers, except that a
distinctive badge, patch or insignia shall be worn to designate the wearer as a
member of the police organized reserve company. The original uniform shall be
furnished by the city, but shall be maintained by the individual.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 8, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-359. - Unauthorized use of equipment, uniform or authority.
   It shall be grounds for immediate dismissal for any member of the police
organized reserve company to falsely represent that he has authority or to wear
his uniform or insignia or to use any of the equipment furnished to him except
during the performance of actual authorized duty.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 9, 6-18-68)
Sec. 2-360. - Unlawful to impersonate police organized reserve company.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as a
member of the police organized reserve company to impersonate such officer or
to wear, carry or display the uniform, badge or insignia of such police
organized reserve company.
(Ord. No. 68-1600, § 10, 6-18-68)
DIVISION 7. - DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION AND PARKS[7] 
Footnotes:
--- (7) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1350, adopted February 27, 2012, amended division 7
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 7, §§ 2-361—2-368,
pertained to the department of recreation, and derived from Ord. No. 00-808,
adopted January 18, 2000 and Ord. No. 01-845, adopted March 20, 2001.
Sec. 2-361. - Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as the department of recreation
and parks which shall be under the supervision of a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to
directors of departments, and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
by the council.
   (b)   The city council shall provide the necessary appropriations annually
to provide suitable quarters, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry on
the work of the department of recreation and parks.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department. The department of recreation and
parks shall consist of the following divisions:
      (1)   Sports.
      (2)   Theatre.
      (3)   Fine arts.
      (4)   Ford Community and Performing Arts Center.
      (5)   Special activities.
      (6)   Pools/community centers.
      (7)   Programs/playgrounds.
      (8)   Camp Dearborn.
      (9)   Dearborn Ice Skating Center.
      (10)   Robert Herndon Dearborn Hills Golf Course.
      (11)   Senior citizens services.
   Where deemed appropriate by the director, residents who wish to donate their
time and talent without payment shall be used as volunteers in carrying out its
various activities and programs.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
Sec. 2-362. - Functions and duties.
   The director of the department of recreation and parks shall supervise and
control the department. Functions and duties of the director of the department
of recreation and parks shall include, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   To establish and conduct recreation and leisure time activities for
residents of the city.
      (2)   To develop and maintain recreational facilities in the city.
      (3)   To provide assistance and referrals and develop programs in the
area of health services, transportation, youth services, social services,
consumer affairs, veterans and senior citizen assistance, individual and group
counseling, nutrition and meal programs, visits to shut-ins and recreational
programs.
      (4)   To be familiar with community organizations with special emphasis
upon the organization, objectives and activities of existing social, health and
medical care, welfare, old age assistance, veterans agencies and youth
programs.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
Sec. 2-363. - Division of senior citizen services.
   There shall be within the department of recreation and parks a division of
senior citizen services. The division of senior citizen services shall be
responsible for coordinating all agencies within the city government providing
services to senior citizens and veterans and shall encourage the coordinating
of activities of other governmental as well as private agencies dealing with
senior citizens' needs and activities. The division shall provide information,
direction and assistance to senior citizens on all services available to them
and shall establish programs specifically designed to suit the needs of senior
citizens and veterans. The division shall investigate and attempt to secure
grants of funds from governmental and private sources to aid in the
establishment of senior citizen and veterans programs.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
Sec. 2-364. - Senior citizens commission.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
commission to be known as the senior citizens commission which shall consist of
not less than five or more than nine members appointed by the mayor in
accordance with city charter. Members of the commission shall be appointed from
a wide variety of backgrounds.
   (b)   The senior citizens commission shall organize by annually electing a
chairman and vice-chairman from its membership, shall adopt its rules and
procedures and shall hold such meetings either regular or special, as it may
determine necessary to carry on its work. The director of the department of
recreation and parks shall provide administrative and clerical assistance to
the commission.
   (c)   The senior citizens commission shall act as an advisory body to the
department of recreation and parks making recommendations and suggestions and
aiding and cooperating in carrying out all of the duties of the senior citizens
division; provided, however, the commission shall not, at any time, invade or
supplant the duties and functions of the department of recreation and parks but
at all times shall aid and coordinate such activities.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
Sec. 2-365. - Recreation and parks commission.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
commission to be known as the recreation and parks commission which shall
consist of 21 members appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions
of the charter; 11 shall constitute a quorum. The members of such commission
shall be appointed immediately and shall qualify by taking an oath of office to
be filed with the city clerk. The meetings of such commission shall be
conducted in accordance with the Robert's Rules of Order and the Open Meetings
Act (MCL 15-261, et seq.).
   (b)   The recreation and parks commission shall organize annually by
electing a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary from among their number at
the regular February meeting.
   (c)   The recreation and parks commission of the city shall be charged with
the following duties:
      (1)   It shall act as advisory body and recommend to the department of
recreation and parks sports events and recreational programs that it deems
appropriate to the healthful development of sound bodies and minds of the
children, youths and adults residing in the city.
      (2)   It shall act as the appellate board for any and all disputes which
may arise concerning the interpretation of rules applicable to, and suspensions
for unsportsmanlike conduct arising out of, any sports contest, event or game
in the city, sponsored and conducted under the auspices of the department of
recreation and parks.
      (3)   It shall act as appellate board for any and all allegations of code
of conduct violations that may occur at any of the facilities and/or parks,
including Camp Dearborn, that fall within the jurisdiction of the department of
recreation and parks.
      (4)   It shall recommend to the department of recreation and parks and/or
the Dearborn Community Fund, a comprehensive program of neighborhood
recreation, which may include participation in the establishment of
scholarships and/or fee assistance for the use of recreational facilities by
underprivileged youth.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12; Ord. No. 14-1423, 5-6-14)
Sec. 2-366. - Unsportsmanlike conduct and code of conduct violations.
   (a)   The recreation and parks commission may delegate to the director of
recreation and parks or his designee, the function of settling disputes,
conducting hearings, making determinations and issuing suspensions regarding
unsportsmanlike conduct during the course of or arising out of any sports
activity organized, conducted, or supervised in whole or in part by the
department of recreation and parks.
   (b)   The recreation and parks commission may delegate to the director of
recreation and parks or his designee, the function of settling disputes,
conducting hearings, making determinations, issuing rules of prohibition, and
issuing suspensions regarding any code of conduct violation that may occur at
one of the facilities or parks that fall within the jurisdiction of the
department of recreation and parks.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, the word "participant" includes a
player, coach, manager, spectator, person affiliated with a department of
recreation and parks team or sports activity, or any person using one of the
facilities or parks that fall within the jurisdiction of the department of
recreation and parks.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, the phrase "unsportsmanlike conduct"
includes, but is not limited to, the utterance of profane or vulgar language,
the threatening or intimidation of an official or another participant, the
striking or pushing of an official or another participant, or any other act
which interferes with the orderly conduct of recreational activities.
   (e)   For the purposes of this section, the phrase "violation of the code of
conduct" includes, but is not limited to, the use of vulgar language,
intimidating remarks, disorderly conduct, public intoxication, or any other act
that interferes with the orderly operation of parks and recreational
facilities.
   (f)   After a hearing conducted pursuant to this section, the director of
recreation and parks, or his designee, shall make determinations of fact and
may:
      (1)   Issue a suspension to any participant who is determined to have
committed an act or acts of unsportsmanlike conduct; and/or
      (2)   Issue a rule of prohibition that shall prohibit an individual from
entering a facility and/or park that falls within the jurisdiction of the
department of recreation and parks.
   A suspension shall constitute a prohibition from participating as a player,
coach, manager, or spectator in any sports activity organized, conducted or
supervised in whole or in part by the department of recreation and parks, and a
prohibition from affiliating with a department of recreation and parks team.
   A suspension may be for any period of time or number of games, up to a
maximum of five years, at the discretion of the director of recreation and
parks, or his designee.
   A rule of prohibition may be for any period of time, up to a maximum of five
years, at the discretion of the director of recreation and parks, or his
designee.
   In making his decision, the director of recreation and parks, or his
designee, may consider past indictments of unsportsmanlike conduct and/or code
of conduct violations.
   The decision of the director of recreation and parks, or his designee, shall
be reduced to writing; the written decision shall be kept on file in the office
of the director of recreation and parks with a copy provided to the affected
person.
   (g)   The director of recreation and parks, or his designee, may issue a
suspension to any person who participates, or to a manager or coach who allows
a person to participate, in any sports activity while such person is ineligible
to participate under the rules and regulations of the department of recreation
and parks.
   (h)   Violation of the terms of any suspension or rule of prohibition issued
pursuant to this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 93 days, or both fine and
imprisonment, at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
Sec. 2-367. - Appeal to recreation commission.
   (a)   Any person affected by a decision of the director of recreation and
parks, or his designee, may appeal the decision to the recreation and parks
commission. Such person shall file a written notice of intent to appeal in the
office of the director of recreation and parks within 21 days of the date of
the decision appealed from.
   (b)   An appeal shall be heard by the recreation and parks commission within
45 days of receipt of a notice of intent to appeal. The hearing shall occur at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the recreation and parks commission and shall
be conducted in accordance with the Robert's Rules of Order and the Open
Meetings Act (MCL 15.261, et seq.). The secretary of the recreation and parks
commission, or his designee, shall provide the appellant with written notice of
the date, time and place that his appeal will be heard. If the appellant fails
to appear at the meeting after proper notice, the appeal will be deemed
abandoned.
   (c)   The burden of proving the decision of the director of recreation and
parks, or his designee, is inappropriate shall be on the appellant.
   (d)   After hearing an appeal, the commission may sustain the decision of
the director of recreation and parks, or his designee, or modify the decision,
at its discretion.
   (e)   The decision of the recreation and parks commission shall be reduced
to writing; the written decision shall be kept on file in the office of the
director of recreation and parks with a copy provided to the appellant.
   (f)   The decision of the recreation and parks commission is final.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
Sec. 2-368. - Noninterference.
   In fulfilling and carrying out the duties to be done and performed by the
recreation and parks commission, it shall not, at any time, invade or supplant
the duties or functions of the department of recreation and parks, but shall at
all times supplement and coordinate such activities in the manner set forth in
this article.
(Ord. No. 12-1350, 2-27-12)
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[8] 
Footnotes:
--- (8) ---
Cross reference— Board of safety engineers, §
5-331 et seq.; board of heating examiners, §
5-721 et seq.; heating board of appeals, §
5-766 et seq.; recreation commission, §
15-51 et seq.; traffic commission, §
18-26 et seq.
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA
4.1700(71) et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et
seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-369. - Commission on disability concerns.
   (1)   Findings. The council finds as follows:
      (a)   It is the policy of the city to promote the full integration and
participation of persons with disabilities into all areas of economic,
political and community life.
      (b)   The city is committed to utilizing all available resources and to
coordinating efforts toward removing barriers to full integration and
participation of persons with disabilities.
   (2)   Established, appointment of members. 
      (a)   There is hereby established a commission on disability concerns for
the city. The commission shall have nine members, and two alternates to be
appointed by the mayor for a term of three years. The first appointments to the
commission shall be three commissioners each for one-year, two-year, three-year
terms.
      (b)   Upon recommendation of a majority of the commission the appointment
of any member shall terminate upon such member's unexcused absence from three
consecutive regularly scheduled meetings.
   (3)   Duties and powers. 
      (a)   To actively promote the total integration and participation of
persons with disabilities into all areas of economic, political, and community
life.
      (b)   To serve as a coordinating body for the purpose of receiving input
from citizens on the needs and concerns of the disabled community, to formulate
and recommend solutions to these identified needs and concerns, and to convey
such recommendations to appropriate citizens, businesses and governmental
bodies.
      (c)   To work with the city to identify and eliminate conditions,
policies, or practices that may operate to discriminate against, exclude, or
hinder the full integration and participation of persons with disabilities.
      (d)   To work with the city to create conditions, to establish policies
and practices, and to develop or adapt programs which will facilitate the full
integration and participation of persons with disabilities into all areas of
economic, political, and community life.
      (e)   To render advice, to monitor, and to evaluate all city policies,
practices, and procedures, which immediately or remotely impact upon persons
with disabilities.
      (f)   To assist the city in its efforts to comply with such codes,
ordinances, and statutes that affect disabled persons in the city.
      (g)   To maintain working committees when appropriate to oversee areas of
concern such as, but not limited to, transportation, architectural,
communications, employment and education. These committees may appoint one of
their members to act as a liaison to their respective city commissions and
departments. In addition, the commission may designate one of its members to
act as a liaison representative to any other board, commission or committee of
the city.
      (h)   To coordinate training and public education progress, hold hearings
and workshops, and conduct investigations about the integration of persons with
disabilities.
   (4)   Compensation. The members of the disability concerns commission shall
serve without compensation.
   (5)   Organization, meetings, rules and procedures. 
      (a)   The commission membership shall be primarily persons with
disabilities, or their advocating family members. The commission membership
shall be representatives of different disability groups, including physical,
sensory and mental disabilities, and shall be representative of gender, age and
racial groups in the community. A minimum of five members of the commission
shall be residents of the city, and a maximum four members may work for an
employer located within the corporate boundaries of Dearborn as determined by a
verifiable business address (not a P.O. box).
      (b)   The city shall provide appropriate accommodations for the known
physical, sensory or mental disabilities of commission members and other
participants in commission activities, including, but not limited to,
assistance with transportation, reading, writing, communicating and aids such
as tape-recorded, Braille, large print materials and signing.
      (c)   The commission shall annually elect a chairperson and vice-
chairperson from among its members. An officer or employee of the city
appointed by the mayor and approved by the commission shall serve as an
administrative liaison to the commission.
      (d)   The commission shall establish a regular time and place of meeting
and shall hold one regular meeting at least quarterly. Special meetings may be
called by the chairperson, or by a majority of the members of the commission
upon written notice received by each member at least five days prior to such
meeting. Meeting notices of the commission shall be posted in a conspicuous
public place at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
      (e)   The commission shall make and alter rules and procedures governing
its organization that are not inconsistent with this chapter, or any other city
ordinance.
      (f)   The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and
transactions and shall submit an annual report to the mayor.
      (g)   If the residency or employment status of a member or alternate
member of the commission changes, and as a result they are no longer a resident
of the city or do not work for an employer located within the corporate
boundaries of the city, the member or alternate shall be considered ineligible
to serve on the commission. The member or alternate, upon learning of the
change in their residency or employment status, shall immediately notify the
administrative liaison to the commission and the city clerk. A member of the
commission shall be considered ineligible to serve on the commission
immediately upon a change in eligibility under this subsection.
   (6)   Quorum. Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, and the concurring vote of at least five members
shall be necessary to take action by such commission.
(Ord. No. 00-827, §§ 1-6, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 22- 1783, 1-10-23)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-827, §§ 1—6, adopted July 5, 2000, did not
specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as §
2-369 was at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 2-370—2-375. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[9] 
Footnotes:
--- (9) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-1355, adopted May 8, 2012, amended division 2 in its
entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§
2-376—2-388, pertained to the plan commission, and derived from Ord. No. 81-
127, adopted November 4, 1981.
State Law reference— City planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.
Sec. 2-376. - Generally.
   The city planning commission as created by section 10.27 of the city
charter, shall have the powers and duties as specified in this division.
Whenever the word "commission" is used in this division, such term shall mean
the city planning commission.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-377. Organization.
   The planning commission shall elect annually a chairperson, vice-
chairperson, and secretary from its members and may create and fill other
offices as it considers advisable. The commission shall designate a suitable
and competent employee from the planning staff to act as clerk to the
commission, who shall be charged with the duty of keeping all of the records
and minutes of the commission and shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by the commission and the planning director, or either of them.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-378. Meetings generally.
   The planning commission shall hold regular meetings at least once each month
at such time and place designated in its rules and regulations. It may hold
special meetings at such other times and places as may be designated at the
call of the chairman.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-379. Meetings to be public.
   All regular and special meetings and records of the planning commission
pertaining to the commission and its affairs shall be open to the public.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-380. Quorum.
   Five members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and the concurring vote of at least five members shall
be necessary to take action by such commission.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-381. Rules and regulations.
   The planning commission shall adopt its own rules and regulations of
procedure.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-382. Reports.
   The planning commission shall submit to the mayor and the council, on or
before December 31 of each year, a report summarizing the activities of the
commission for that fiscal year, together with an outline or recommendation of
any proposed projects or objectives. The commission shall also make such other
reports as may from time to time be required by the mayor, the council or by
law.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-383. Powers and duties.
   The planning commission shall have all the powers and duties given to
municipal planning commissions under the provisions of MCL 125.3801 et seq., as
well as such other statutes as may be adopted relating to city planning
commissions, and in addition thereto it shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (1)   To make its recommendations to the council covering any proposed
amendment to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended,
and the proposed changes in the zoning maps in connection therewith.
   (2)   To make and approve a master plan for the city as required by the
terms of MCL 125.3801 et seq., and to approve or disapprove all subdivision
plats in the city prior to such plat being accepted and approved by the
council. If such plat is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be stated by
the commission.
   (3)   To prepare regulations governing the platting of land in the city and
the minimum requirements for the acceptance by the city of such subdivision
plats.
   (4)   To make recommendations to the council concerning the proposed opening
or vacating of any and all streets and alleys in the city.
   (5)   To investigate and make recommendations concerning the multitudinous
details affecting the growth of the city, thereby providing an informative and
constructive clearing house of facts for the guidance of the successive
administrations through a continuing advisory board, thereby effecting a
continuity of program for the city.
   (6)   To recommend to the council an annual capital improvement program and
advise on consistency of the program with the adopted Master Plan goals,
objectives, and policies. The commission shall be exempted from the requirement
of PA 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3865 with the finance director and the economic
development director, or their designees, assuming responsibility for the
annual preparation of the capital improvement program which is subject to input
from a steering committee before final approval and adoption by council.
Members of the steering committee shall be selected by the mayor, but must
include the finance director, economic development director, public works and
facilities director, parks and recreation director, and public health director,
or their designees.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1780, 12-6-
22)
Sec. 2-384. Construction of certain projects in area covered by master plan.
   A street, square, park, playground, public way, ground, or other open space,
or public building or other structure shall not be constructed or authorized
for construction in an area covered by a municipal master plan unless the
location, character, and extent of the street, public way, open space,
structure, or utility have been submitted to the planning commission by the
council and has been approved by the planning commission. The planning
commission shall submit its reason for approval or disapproval to the council.
If the planning commission disapproves, the council may overrule the planning
commission by a two-thirds vote. If the planning commission fails to act within
35 days after submission of the proposal to the planning commission, the
project shall be considered to be approved by the planning commission.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-385. Attendance.
   Any member of the planning commission who fails to attend three or more
meetings within a one year period of time shall be deemed to have vacated their
position on the commission, unless the absence(s) has been excused by the
chairman, or their designee, of the planning commission.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Sec. 2-386. Employees or special services.
   Within the limits of council appropriations, upon recommendation of the
corporation counsel, the commission may also contract with engineers,
architects, or other consultants for such services as it may require.
(Ord. No. 12-1355, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 22-1737, 1-25-22)
Secs. 2-387—2-394. Reserved.
DIVISION 2A. - PARKING ADVISORY COMMISSION[10] 
Footnotes:
--- (10) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1205, adopted Feb. 2, 2009, amended Div. 2A in its
entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Div. 2A
derived from Ord. No. 04-1024, adopted Dec. 21, 2004.
Sec. 2-395. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is to establish a parking advisory commission
consisting of various stakeholders representing the interests of the city,
landowners, business owners, residents, institutions, and users of the city's
user-paid parking system in downtown West Dearborn. The commission shall set
and oversee policies affecting the use, maintenance, enforcement, and future
development of the city's on-street, off-street, and deck parking in downtown
West Dearborn.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-396. - Duties and responsibilities.
   (a)   Through its formal action, the commission will ensure:
      (1)   A proper rate relationship exists between the charges for street
meters, parking lot fees (both short- and long-term), and permit fees.
      (2)   Parking fees that, while maintaining the financial integrity of the
system, are still attractive to users. The parking system must generate
sufficient revenues to cover all costs. Rates should also include a component
for a capital repair and maintenance reserve.
      (3)   The proper ratio between the numbers of short-term, long-term, and
permit parkers in lots and structures.
      (4)   The proper area in each lot and structure assigned for short-term,
long-term, and permit parking.
      (5)   An equitable method of assigning permit-parking spaces.
      (6)   A public relations program that will educate the public to the
location of parking facilities, their ease of use, their close proximity to
many fine businesses, and the benefits of validated parking.
      (7)   Minimal impact to any residential areas abutting facilities in the
parking system.
      (8)   Orderly and responsive answers to future parking needs.
      (9)   Protective measures against unauthorized use for owners of private
parking lots.
   (b)   The commission shall make recommendations to the council regarding
parking rates and hours of operation. The council shall establish parking rates
and hours of operation by resolution.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-397. - Appointment of members.
   (a)   The commission shall have nine members and four alternates appointed
by the mayor for staggered, three-year terms. The members shall include:
      (1)   Mayoral representative and alternate;
      (2)   City Council representative and alternate;
      (3)   Traffic safety officer and alternate;
      (4)   City's parking management contractor and alternate;
      (5)   Downtown West Dearborn representative;
      (6)   Restaurant owner/manager;
      (7)   Bar/entertainment owner/manager;
      (8)   Office/service sector owner/manager;
      (9)   Retail business owner/manager;
      (10)   Downtown district resident.
   (b)   The city planner, city engineer, city assessor, director of public
works, director of economic and community development, director of finance, and
a member of the police department ordinance enforcement division, or their
designees, shall serve as nonvoting advisors of the commission and shall attend
meetings at the commission's request.
   (c)   The commission may consult with parking management firms, parking
consultants, traffic consultants, planning and urban design firms, and other
experts in the area of parking management to assist with achieving the
commission's goals.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-398. - Organization.
   (a)   The commission shall elect a chairperson from its membership annually
at its first meeting after the first Monday of July. A secretary shall be
furnished by the city for the purpose of keeping minutes of commission
meetings.
   (b)   Six members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transacting of business and the concurring vote of at least five members shall
be necessary to take action.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-399. - Meetings.
   The commission shall hold at least one public meeting in each quarter on
such date and at such time and place as may be established by resolution of the
commission. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson of the commission
or by request of any three members of the commission. There shall be at least a
24-hour notice for any special meeting. The commission shall adopt rules for
the conduct of its business by resolution. The commission shall keep a written
or printed record of its proceedings, which shall be a public record and
property of the city.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-400. - Budget.
   Not later than the first day of February of each year, the commission shall
present to the finance director a balanced budget for the user-paid parking
system in downtown West Dearborn that includes a request for funds which the
commission believes are necessary to carry out its functions for the following
fiscal year. Included in this budget will be the recommended parking system
rates necessary to balance the annual operating expenditures for the following
budget year as well as the funding of ongoing capital repair and maintenance
reserves. The budget of the commission shall be processed in the same manner as
all city budgets, moving through the regular administrative and legislative
channels, requiring approval from both the mayor and the city council before it
is adopted.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-401. - Expenditures.
   The commission shall have the power to expend funds appropriated in its
approved budget for the purpose of carrying out its powers and duties. The
manner in which the commission expends funds shall comport the city policies
and procedures. This activity will be accounted for in the west parking fund
accounts. Expending funds for unforeseen items shall be possible pending
adherence to the city's rules and regulations governing unplanned expenses.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Sec. 2-402. - Reports.
   The commission shall make and submit to the mayor and city council an annual
report in June regarding the general activities, operations, and
accomplishments of the commission for the preceding year. The commission shall,
from time to time, as occasion requires, advise the mayor and city council in
writing on recommendations for the improvement of the parking system.
(Ord. No. 09-1205, 2-2-09)
Secs. 2-403—2-405. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - DEARBORN HISTORICAL ADVISORY COMMISSION*
   *State Law references—Authority to create an historical commission, MCL
399.172; historic districts, MCL 399.201 et seq.; state historical commission,
MCL 399.1 et seq.
Sec. 2-406. - Established; appointment of members.
   There is hereby created and established a Dearborn Historical Advisory
Commission, which shall consist of 12 members to be appointed by the mayor. The
purpose of the historical advisory commission is to hold public hearings advise
the Library Commission on the general administration of the museum and all of
its contents.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Sec. 2-407. - Compensation.
   The members of the historical advisory commission shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Sec. 2-408. - Organization.
   The historical advisory commission shall organize by annually electing a
chairman, a vice-chairman and secretary from its membership and shall adopt its
own rules of procedure and shall hold such meetings, either regular or special,
as it may deem necessary to carry on its advisory work.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Sec. 2-409. - Duties and power.
   The historical advisory commission shall be responsible for assisting the
Library Commission through issuing advisory opinions concerning the general
administration of the museum and its contents, subject to the provisions
specified in this division. Within the constraints of the city budget for each
fiscal year, and the conditions specified in this division, the advisory
commission may recommend that the Library Commission acquire, collect and
exhibit in the name of the city, all necessary for the effective operation of
the city's museums. The chief curator shall be authorized to accept and acquire
personal property of historical significance or value upon the recommendation
of the commission. Disposal of personal property of historical significance or
value shall be subject to the approval of the chief curator and the Library
Commission. If the chief curator and Library Commission disagree upon whether
an item shall be disposed of, no item of historical significance or value shall
be released or disposed of until approved by the city council. Acceptance,
acquisition, disposal or lease of real property shall be subject to
recommendation by the mayor and approval by the city council. Any property,
real or personal, received in trust and accepted by the city council shall be
held in the name of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Sec. 2-410. - Museum funds.
   All monies collected or received by the museums from any source whatsoever
shall be paid forthwith to the city treasurer, and such monies shall be used to
offset and defray the expenses of the museum in accordance with the annual
budget.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Sec. 2-411. - Chief curator.
   The position of chief curator is hereby created, which manage all staff
working in the division of the museum under the Department of Libraries. The
position of chief curator shall be within the civil service category. The
curator, subject to the approval of the Library Commission, shall formulate
rules and regulations for the control and management of the museums, including
a schedule of hours and shall prescribe the terms and conditions upon which
historical materials may be used, loaned or taken from the museum.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Sec. 2-412. - Council appropriations.
   The council shall provide for such quarters, equipment and personnel as it
is deems necessary for the proper management and operation of the city museums.
(Ord. No. 81-95, § 7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 23-1792, 6-13-23)
Secs. 2-413, 2-414. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3A. - ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
Sec. 2-415. - Purpose.
   The establishment of the environmental commission is to develop
comprehensive, integrated environmental policies for implementation by the city
to protect and enhance our air, water, land, and public health. It shall help
to set goals and policies for the city and community to continuously improve
the natural and built environment. The commission will only act as an advisory
group, and does not have any regulatory authority. It shall not involve itself
in individual site development reviews, unless its opinion is requested by the
mayor. The creation of this commission shall in no way be interpreted as
diminishing the role, responsibilities, or charge of any currently existing
board, commission, task force, or committee.
(Ord. No. 11-1329, 6-6-11)
Sec. 2-416. - General.
   (a)   The environmental commission shall consist of nine members nominated
by the mayor and approved by the city council for three-year terms. In making
appointments of members of the environmental commission, the mayor shall
appoint persons who, insofar as possible, have an interest in protecting and
enhancing the well-being of the environment and public health of the community.
The terms of office of the first environmental commission appointed shall be
fixed by the city council so that the terms of three members will be for one
year, three members will be for two years, and three will be for three years.
After the initial commission is formed, all members thereafter will be
appointed for three years. To help coordinate an integrated environmental
policy, two members of the environmental commission shall be appointed to the
commission from the following city committees or commissions: planning
commission and city beautiful commission.
   (b)   The commission shall organize by annually electing a chairman, a vice-
chairman and secretary from its membership and shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and shall hold such meetings, either regular or special, as it may
deem necessary to carry on its work.
   (c)   Six members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transacting of business and the concurring votes of at least five members shall
be necessary to take action.
   (d)   The environmental commission shall submit to the mayor an annual work
plan for the mayor's review.
(Ord. No. 11-1329, 6-6-11)
Sec. 2-417. - Powers and duties.
   The environmental commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   To advise and make recommendations to the mayor, city council, and
city administration on environmental policy, environmental issues and
environmental implications of all city programs and proposals on the air,
water, land and public health.
   (b)   To work collaboratively with other city commissions and committees
which have responsibilities for specific issues, including but not limited to:
planning commission, city beautiful commission, and recreation commission.
   (c)   To advise the mayor, city council, and city administration on
environmental aspects of transportation issues, including implementation of a
city transportation plan, alternative transportation issues, alternative fuel
vehicles, bicycling improvements, parking issues and related transportation
issues.
   (d)   To advise the mayor, city council, and city administration on all
solid waste policy and management issues including the reduction, reuse,
recycling and proper disposal of solid waste.
   (e)   To advise the mayor, city council, and city administration on
environmental risk and pollution issues, including community right-to-know,
emergency planning, pesticide and herbicide use and policies, pollution
prevention, air and water pollution, indoor air quality, worker health and
safety, environmental remediation and restoration, and environmental impact of
city procurement policies.
   (f)   To advise the mayor, city council, and city administration on drinking
water, sewer, water quality, flooding, and stormwater management issues,
including water treatment plant issues, wastewater treatment plant issues,
Rouge River water quality, protection, restoration and improvement of Rouge
River tributaries.
   (g)   To advise the mayor, city council, and city administration on all
matters related to sustainable development, clean production, and environmental
technologies.
   (h)   To hold public hearings on environmental issues and concerns.
   (i)   To assist the city in publishing an annual report on the city's "state
of the environment," using, whenever possible, measurable performance
indicators to monitor long term trends.
   (j)   To advise the mayor, city council and city administration concerning
effective advocacy for the city in regional, state and federal environmental
matters.
   (k)   To advise the mayor, city council and city administration on enhancing
the awareness, understanding, commitment, and active involvement of local
citizens in ensuring wise stewardship of the city's natural resources, now and
in the future, through education, volunteerism, public/private partnerships,
and incentive programs.
   (l)   To meet with and advise the city's sustainability coordinator and/or
any other city personnel involved in environmental or sustainability matters.
   (m)   To participate with commissions, in other jurisdictions, and other
environmental organizations to address regional and state environmental
matters.
   (n)   To create committees as necessary to help conduct the work of the
environmental commission, provided that a member of the environmental
commission chairs each committee, the environmental commission appoints
additional committee members for a time certain, and the names and
qualifications of committee members appointed by the environmental commission
are forwarded to the mayor.
   (o)   To have all other powers and duties granted by the city council by
resolution.
(Ord. No. 11-1329, 6-6-11)
Secs. 2-418—2-430. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - YOUTH AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Sec. 2-431. - Established.
   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a commission to
be known as the youth affairs commission, which shall consist of 15 members
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the city charter.
The chief of police, personnel director, housing director, city physician and
director of recreation shall serve as nonvoting advisors of the youth affairs
commission and shall attend meetings of the commission only upon the request of
the chairman. The members of the commission shall be appointed and shall
qualify for taking the oath of office to be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-113, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-432. - Organization.
   The youth affairs commission shall organize by annually electing a chairman,
vice-chairman and secretary from its membership and shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out its powers and duties as provided
in this division. Nine members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business and the concurring vote of at least eight members
shall be necessary to take action by such commission.
(Ord. No. 81-113, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-433. - Duties.
   The youth affairs commission shall be charged with the following duties:
      (1)   Study and investigate the availability of housing, work
opportunities, recreational facilities and the needs of young people and
recommend programs in these and related areas designed to attract and retain
youth within the community.
      (2)   Study and investigate school, county, state and federal agency
programs concerning youth and make recommendations to the mayor and city
council concerning cooperation and coordination of city programs with such
independent efforts to assist youth.
      (3)   Study, survey, investigate and make recommendations to the mayor
and city council concerning the development of plans and programs for the
enrichment of the quality of life of the youth of the city.
      (4)   Study and evaluate information on community programs and make
recommendations therein; sponsor, plan and promote such activities that will
provide for the enrichment of life and to otherwise promote public interest in
the general improvement of opportunities for young men and women.
      (5)   File an annual report with the mayor and city council indicating
the subject matter reviewed and action taken by the commission during the
preceding year. The report shall be filed with the city clerk and be available
for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 81-113, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-434. - Facilities.
   The council shall provide such meeting quarters, equipment and personnel for
the proper functioning of the youth affairs commission as it shall deem
necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-113, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-435. - Compensation.
   The members of the youth affairs commission shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. No. 81-113, § 5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 2-436—2-450. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - ARTS CENTER COMMISSION
Sec. 2-451. - Established; organization.
   There is hereby created an arts center commission, which shall consist of 15
members appointed by the mayor for three-year terms in accordance with the
provisions of the city charter. Five members shall be appointed for terms of
three years annually. The respective terms of office shall run from December 1
to November 30. The commission shall organize by annually electing a chairman,
vice-chairman and secretary from its membership and shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out its powers and duties as provided
in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-114, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-452. - Duties.
   The arts center commission shall study and investigate the feasibility of
constructing, operating and maintaining an arts center building (auditorium) in
the city. It shall study and investigate possible revenue sources for land
acquisition and construction costs, and alternative types of functions and
activities to which an arts center building may be put. The commission shall
file an annual report with the mayor and city council.
(Ord. No. 81-114, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-453. - Facilities.
   The council shall provide such meeting quarters, equipment and personnel for
the proper functioning of the arts center commission as it shall deem
necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-114, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 2-454. - Compensation.
   The members of the arts center commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 81-114, § 4, 11-4-81)
Secs. 2-455—2-470. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - HOUSING COMMISSION[12] 
Footnotes:
--- (12) ---
Cross reference— Housing, Ch. 11.
State Law reference— Housing projects, MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.
Sec. 2-471. - Created.
   There is hereby created in and for the city a commission to be known as the
Dearborn Housing Commission.
(Ord. No. 60-1335, § 1, 2-2-60)
Sec. 2-472. - Composition.
   The housing commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor.
City employees and/or officials other than elected officials are hereby
declared eligible for appointment to the commission. The terms of office of the
members of the commission shall be five years, and one member shall be
appointed each year. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation
and may be removed from office by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in
office shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(Ord. No. 60-1335, § 2, 2-2-60)
Sec. 2-473. - Powers, duties generally.
   The housing commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or
permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Act No. 18 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.),
as amended, and any laws enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being the
intention of this section to vest in the housing commission all powers and
duties permitted by law.
(Ord. No. 60-1335, § 3, 2-2-60)
Sec. 2-474. - Meetings; organization; etc.
   The housing commission shall meet at regular intervals, such meetings to be
public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of
the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. A president and vice-president shall be elected by the commission.
The commission may appoint a director who may also serve as secretary, and such
other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The commission shall
prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and may, with the
approval of the appointing authority, fix their compensation. The commission
may from time to time as necessary employ engineers, architects and
consultants.
(Ord. No. 60-1335, § 4, 2-2-60; Ord. No. 14-1442, 11-12-14; Ord. No. 17-1570,
3-7-17)
Sec. 2-475. - Funds.
   Funds for the operation of the housing commission may be provided by the
city council, but the commission shall as soon as possible reimburse the city
for all monies expended by it for the commission from federal subsidies and
from revenue received from the sale of bonds.
(Ord. No. 60-1335, § 5, 2-2-60)
DIVISION 7. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Sec. 2-476. - Short title.
   This division shall be known as the "Historic Preservation Commission
Ordinance" of the city.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-477. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is to:
      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts that
reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political or architectural
history, and to preserve historic landmarks.
      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values in such districts.
      (3)   Foster civic beauty.
      (4)   Strengthen the local economy.
      (5)   Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure
and welfare of the citizens of the city, and visitors to the city.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-478. - Exception.
   The provisions of this division shall not apply to the historic district
designations in effect on the date of enactment of this division. For
reference, the historic districts not covered by this division are:
      (1)   Springwells Park Historic District; and
      (2)   Ford Homes Historic District.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-479. - Definitions.
   As used in this division:
   Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.
   Bureau means the Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State.
   Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a
resource.
   Commission means the historic preservation commission, which is the name the
city of dearborn has chosen to identify the "historic district commission" it
has established pursuant to authorization of state law, MCL 399.201 et. seq.
For purposes of this division and all other purposes, the term "historic
preservation commission" shall be deemed to mean the "historic district
commission" of the city.
   Committee means a historic district study committee appointed by the mayor.
   Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of
a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
   Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a
resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource
or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
   Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
   Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that
are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. A
historic landmark as defined below shall be considered a historic district for
purposes of this division and state law.
   Historic landmark means any site, building, structure or object significant
in history, architecture, archaeology and culture. A historic landmark is a
historic district under the meaning described above that contains only one
resource.
   Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture.
   Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state, or a
community within this state, or of the United States.
   Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work
that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource pursuant to a
finding under subsection
2-481(6).
   Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal
or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between
other resources.
   Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in
its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external
appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and
expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work
for purposes of this division.
   Proposed historic district means an area or group of areas not necessarily
having contiguous boundaries that has delineated boundaries and that is under
review by a committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether
it should be established as a historic district or added to an established
historic district.
   Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound
condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a
resource constitutes work for purpose of this division.
   Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or non
historic building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space located
within a historic district.
   Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or
demolition.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-480. - Historic preservation commission.
   The historic preservation commission is hereby established. It shall consist
of seven members who reside in the city. The mayor shall appoint members for
three-year terms except the initial appointments of some of the members shall
be for less than three years so that the initial appointments are staggered and
that subsequent appointments do not recur at the same time. A majority of the
members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic
preservation. Members shall serve without compensation and shall be eligible
for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the commission, interim
appointments shall be made by the mayor within 60 calendar days to complete the
unexpired term of such position. One member shall be a graduate of an
accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience
or who is an architect duly registered in the state. Two members shall be
members of a recognized historical preservation organization. A person or
representative of a person shall be entitled to appear at any public meeting of
the commission and be heard on any matter before the commission before it
reaches a decision. The commission shall meet monthly or more frequently at the
call of the chairman.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-481. - Permits.
   (1)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior
appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district or, if
required under subsection (4), work affecting the interior arrangements of a
resource, is performed within a historic district. The person, individual,
partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of
government proposing to do the work shall file an application for a permit with
the building and safety department. Upon receiving an application, the building
and safety department shall immediately forward to the commission the
application and all supporting materials. A permit shall not be issued and
proposed work shall not proceed until the commission has acted on the
application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed.
   (2)   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission concerning a
permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation
Review Board of the Michigan Historical Commission within the department of
state. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished
to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of the appellant's
evidence and arguments in written form. The review board shall consider an
appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal, but
may not charge a fee for considering an appeal. The review board may affirm,
modify, or set aside a commission's decision and may order a commission to
issue a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. A permit
applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review
Board may appeal the decision to the Wayne County Circuit Court.
   (3)   In reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of
the Interior's Standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating
historic buildings, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67. Design review standards
and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic
districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent
in guidance to the secretary of interior's standards and guidelines and are
established or approved by the bureau. The commission shall also consider all
of the following:
      (a)   The historic or architectural value and significance of the
resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
      (b)   The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to
the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.
      (c)   The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and
materials proposed to be used.
      (d)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds
relevant.
   (4)   The commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource that are visible from the public right of way and shall not review and
act upon interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible change
to the exterior of the resource as seen from the public right of way. The
commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not
prescribed in subsection (3).
   (5)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior
of a resource the commission considers valuable to the city, state, or nation,
and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will
adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state, or nation, the
commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an
economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource.
      (6)   Work within a historic district or on a historic landmark shall be
permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the commission if any
of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be
demonstrated by a finding of the commission to be necessary to substantially
improve or correct any of the following conditions:
   (a)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to
the structure's occupants.
   (b)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will
be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work
has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and
environmental clearances.
   (c)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the
owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the
owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for
sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within
the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner.
   (d)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community.
      (7)   The business that the commission may perform shall be conducted at
a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings
Act, MCL 15.261 et. seq. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall
include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by
the commission.
      (8)   The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings,
and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained
by the commission in performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the Michigan Freedom of Information
Act, MCL 15.231 et. seq.
      (9)   The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedures and shall
adopt design review standards and guidelines for recourse treatment to carry
out its duties in accordance with this division.
      (10)   The commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to the building and safety
department. The commission shall provide the building and safety department
with specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness
under this subsection. On at least a quarterly basis, the commission shall
review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued by the building and
safety department to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities
should be continued.
      (11)   Upon a finding by the commission that a historic resource within a
historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and
approval or a historic landmark is threatened with demolition by neglect, the
commission may do either of the following:
   (a)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to the demolition by neglect.
   (b)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the
commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are
necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be
charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city council as a special
assessment against the property. The commission or its agents may enter the
property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the Wayne
County Circuit Court.
      (12)   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit and the
commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the commission may require an owner to restore the resource to
the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify
the work so that is qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the
owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirements within
a reasonable time, the commission may seek an order from the Wayne County
Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former
condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of
appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order
of the court, the commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct
work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the
work so that it qualifies for a certificate or appropriateness in accordance
with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner,
and may be levied by the city council as a special assessment against the
property. When acting pursuant to an order of the Wayne County Circuit Court,
the commission or its agents may enter a property for the purposes of this
section.
      (13)   The commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices
to proceed and denials of applications for permits with the building and safety
department. A permit shall not be issued until the commission has acted as
prescribed by this division. If a permit application is denied, the decision
shall be binding on the building and safety department. A denial shall be
accompanied with a written explanation by the commission of the reasons for
denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for
commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also
include notification of the applicant's right of appeal to the state historic
preservation review board and to the Wayne County Circuit Court. The failure of
the commission to act within 60 days after the date a complete application is
filed with the commission, unless the applicant and the commission agree upon
an extension in writing, shall be considered to constitute approval.
      (14)   Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district or to prevent
work on any resource under a permit issued by the building and safety
department before this division was enacted.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-482. - Acceptance of gift or grant.
   The city council may accept state or federal grants; may participate in
state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation; may accept
public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes; and may appoint the
commission to administer on its behalf grants and gifts for the purpose herein
provided. The director of finance shall be custodian of the funds of the
commission and the secretary or other officer designated by the commission
shall certify authorized expenditures to the director of finance. The
commission shall annually report to the city council any money it shall receive
or expend.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-483. - Right of appeal.
   Pursuant to MCL 399.211, any citizen or duly organized historic preservation
organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or
severally aggrieved by a decision of the commission may appeal the decision to
the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of
the commission may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right
to appeal to the state historic preservation review board pursuant to MCL
399.205(2).
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-484. - Historic district study committee.
   (1)   The city council may, by ordinance, establish one or more historic
districts and historic landmarks. The commission established by this division
shall administer the historic districts and landmarks. Before establishing,
modifying, or eliminating a historic district or historic landmark, a study
complying with this section, including reports and hearings, shall be conducted
by a historic district study committee appointed by the city council. A
historic district study committee shall contain a majority of persons who have
a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation and
shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic
preservation organizations. The committee shall do all of the following:
      (a)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
historic district following procedures established or approved by the bureau.
      (b)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the
historic resources located within that district.
      (c)   Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources
within a proposed historic district and the percentage of the historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources,
the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued
by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in
the national register of historic places, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 60,
and criteria established or approved by the bureau, if any.
      (d)   Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that
addresses at a minimum all of the following:
         i.   The charge of the committee.
         ii.   The composition of the committee membership.
         iii.   The historic district or districts studied.
         iv.   The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing
and on maps.
         v.   The history of each proposed historic district.
         vi.   The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a
sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of
resources found within the district relative to the evaluation criteria.
      (e)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the city planner, the bureau, the michigan historical
commission, and to the state historic preservation review board.
      (f)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public
pursuant to subsection (4).
   (2)   Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the
preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance
with the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et. seq. Public notice of the time,
date, and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by the
Open Meetings Act. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less
than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the
proposed historic district as listed on the tax rolls of the city assessor. An
audio record of the public hearing shall be maintained by the committee.
   (3)   After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city
council shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the
city council, to take the following actions:
      (a)   The committee shall prepare and submit a final report, including an
audio record of the public hearing, with recommendations and the
recommendations, if any, of the city planner to the city council. If the
recommendations is to establish a historic district or districts, the final
report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or ordinances.
      (b)   After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of
a historic district or districts, the city council, at its discretion, may
introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the city council
passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or more historic districts,
the city clerk shall file a copy of the ordinance or ordinances, including
legal description of the property or properties located within the historic
district or districts with the Wayne County Register of Deeds. The city council
shall not pass an ordinance establishing a historic district less than 60 days
after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district
as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment
of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. However, such a
petition shall not be a prerequisite to the establishing, modifying, or
eliminating of a historic district or historic landmark, as the city council in
its discretion deems advisable.
   (4)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
a committee in the performance of an official function shall be made available
to the public in compliance with the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, MCL
15.231 et. seq.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-485. - Historic districts.
   (1)   The city council may at any time establish by ordinance historic
districts and landmarks, including proposed districts and landmarks previously
considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district
or landmark, or may eliminate an existing historic district or landmark. Before
establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district or landmark, a
historic district study committee appointed by the city council shall, except
as provided in subsection (2), comply with the procedures set forth in section
2-484 and shall consider previously written committee reports pertinent to the
proposed action.
   (2)   If considering elimination of a historic district or landmark, a
committee shall follow the procedures set forth in section
2-484 for issuing a preliminary report holding a public hearing and issuing a
final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following:
      (a)   The historic district has those physical characteristics that
enabled establishment of the district.
      (b)   The historic district was not significant in the way previously
defined.
      (c)   The historic district was established pursuant to defective
procedures.
   (3)   Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the city council may, at its discretion, adopt a
resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
historic district be referred to the commission. The commission shall review
permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed
historic district was an established historic district. The review may continue
in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such
time as the city council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic
district by ordinance, whichever comes first.
   (4)   If the city council determines that pending work will cause
irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district
or a proposed historic district, the city council may, by resolution, declare
an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months.
The city council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period
not to exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to
resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a
resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-486. - Historic landmark roster.
   The commission shall maintain a roster of historic landmarks and historic
sites, which shall include a description of the characteristics of the historic
landmark or historic site which justifies its designation, and a description of
the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include the
location and boundaries of the historic landmark or historic site.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-487. - Advice and guidance to property owners.
   The commission, upon request of any property owner, shall render advice and
guidance with respect to any proposed work on a designated landmark site or any
designated historic district. In rendering such advice and guidance, the
commission will be guided by the purposes and standards set forth in the
division.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-488. - Other duties.
   The commission may:
   (1)   Assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed to identify
and evaluate structures, sites and areas worthy of preservation.
   (2)   Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic
groups, public agencies, and citizens interested in historic preservation.
   (3)   Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas which it has
reason to believe worthy of preservation.
   (4)   Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures,
sites and areas deemed worthy of preservation, and may encourage and advise
property owners of the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of
landmarks, historic sites, and other officially recognized property of historic
interest.
   (5)   Consider methods other than those provided for in this division for
encouraging and achieving historic preservation, and make appropriate
recommendations to the city council and other bodies and agencies, both public
and private.
   (6)   Establish such policies, rules and regulations as it deems necessary
to administer its duties as herein provided.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-489. - Violations of division.
   (1)   A person who violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (2)   In addition to the foregoing, a person who violates this division may
also be adjudged responsible for a violation of the state "Local Historic
District Act," MCL 399.201 et. seq., and may be subject to the civil penalties
and remedies provided for in section 15 thereof.
(Ord. No. 98-747, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 99-791, 9-21-99)
Sec. 2-490. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[13] 
Footnotes:
--- (13) ---
Charter reference— Finance and taxation,
Ch. 13.
State Law reference— Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et
seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21)
et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-491. - Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 in each year and close on
the following June 30.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 2, 5-20-81)
Secs. 2-492—2-505. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET
Sec. 2-506. - Fiscal officer.
   The finance director shall be the city's fiscal officer and shall perform
the duties of the fiscal officer enumerated in this division. The fiscal
officer shall be responsible to the mayor for the performance of his duties.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 3, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-507. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Budget, as defined in the state Uniform Budgeting Act, (Act No. 621 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq.),
shall mean a plan of financial operation for a fiscal year, unless another time
period is stated. It includes an estimate of expenditures from the funds of a
local unit, and the proposed means of financing the expenditures. "Budget" does
not include any of the following:
      (1)   A fund for which the city acts as a trustee or agent.
      (2)   An intragovernmental service fund.
      (3)   An enterprise fund.
      (4)   A public improvement or building and site fund.
      (5)   A special assessment fund.
   The city shall include intragovernmental or internal service funds and
enterprise funds in its budget review process. Because such funds' revenues
vary with demand for services, their budgets shall be adopted on a flexible
basis.
   General appropriations resolution shall mean the budget as adopted by the
city council.
(Ord. No. 81-24, §§ 4, 5, 5-20-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 2-508. - Budget policy statement.
   No later than December 1 of each year, the mayor may send to each office,
department, commission and board of the city a budget policy statement for the
use of those agencies in preparing their estimates of budgetary requirements
for the ensuing fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 6, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-509. - Budget estimates required.
   All offices, departments, commissions and boards of the city financed in
whole or in part by the city shall, on or before January 15 of each year,
transmit to the fiscal officer their estimates of the amounts of money required
for each activity in their agencies for the ensuing fiscal year. They shall
also submit any other related information requested by the fiscal officer and
authorized by the mayor, on such forms and at such times as he may direct,
including but not limited to, estimates of revenues from their operations.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 7, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-510. - Supplemental information.
   The fiscal officer shall prepare and submit with the budget an information
summary of projected revenues and expenditures of any special assessment funds,
capital improvement funds, internal service funds or enterprise funds,
including the estimated total cost and proposed method of financing the
operating costs of each capital construction project for the ensuing fiscal
year and the three years following.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 8, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-511. - Budget forms.
   (a)   Subject to approval by the mayor, the fiscal officer shall prescribe
forms to be used by the offices, departments, commissions and boards of the
city in submitting their budget estimates and shall prescribe procedures he
deems necessary for the guidance of officials in preparing such budget
estimates.
   (b)   The budget forms shall, at a minimum, require:
      (1)   The display of actual expenditures for all purposes for the last
completed fiscal year.
      (2)   Appropriations and estimated expenditures for those purposes for
the current fiscal year.
      (3)   Estimates of required expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year.
      (4)   A statement of actual revenues by source for the prior year.
      (5)   Estimates of revenue by source for the current fiscal year.
      (6)   Estimates of revenues by source for the ensuing fiscal year.
   (c)   The fiscal officer may require that the estimates for the ensuing
fiscal year be calculated on the basis of various assumptions regarding level
of service.
   (d)   Any agency request for the proposed acquisition of land, buildings, or
capital equipment shall be accompanied by a statement which:
      (1)   Describes the intended use of land, buildings, or equipment.
      (2)   States the order of priority of the acquisition.
      (3)   Provides a plan of financing for the acquisition.
      (4)   Provides an estimate of any operating costs associated with the
acquisition of new facilities for the ensuing fiscal year and for the following
three years.
   (e)   The fiscal officer may also require a statement of the purposes of any
proposed expenditure and a justification of the services financed by any
expenditure.
   (f)   The fiscal officer shall prepare estimates of revenue for each fund
for the ensuing fiscal year, classified in order to show in detail the amount
expected to be received from each source.
   (g)   Such estimates of expenditures and revenues shall also be classified
by character, object or source, function and activity consistent with the
accounting system classifications required by law.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 9, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-512. - Agency budget review.
   The fiscal officer may review the agency estimates with a representative
from each agency of the city that has submitted such estimates. The purpose of
the review shall be to clarify the estimates, ensure their accuracy and to
determine their consistency with the budget policy statement.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 10, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-513. - The budget document.
   The fiscal officer shall consolidate the estimates received from the various
agencies, together with the amounts of expected revenues, and shall make
recommendations relating to those estimates which shall assure consonance with
the budget policy statement and which shall assure that the total of estimated
expenditures including an accrued deficit in any fund does not exceed the total
of expected revenues including an unappropriated surplus. The budget shall
consist of the following parts:
   (1)   Part I. Statement of financial position. Part I shall contain a
summary statement of all assets, current and longterm liabilities and fund
equities at the close of the last completed fiscal year. For governmental
funds, the assets shall exclude fixed assets (land, buildings, equipment).
   (2)   Part II. Revenues. Part II shall contain detailed estimates of all
anticipated revenues to finance proposed expenditures; summary statements of
anticipated revenues classified by fund and source; comparisons between
revenues actually received during the last completed fiscal year, those
received and anticipated for the current fiscal year, and those anticipated for
the ensuing fiscal year; and the estimated surplus or unobligated balance of
the current fiscal year.
   (3)   Part III. Expenditures. Part III shall contain detailed estimates of
all operating and capital outlay expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It
shall include a statement of proposed expenditures from all funds classified by
organizational unit, character, object, function and activity. It shall show,
in the same classification of expenditure, the expenditures of the last
completed fiscal year, those anticipated for the current fiscal year, and shall
include as separate items any deficit from the preceding fiscal year that was
not included in the budget for the current year and any anticipated deficit
resulting from operations of the current year.
   (4)   Part IV. Capital projects. Part IV shall consist of any
recommendations for capital projects. These recommendations shall be
accompanied by a statement indicating recommended priorities for projects and
shall set forth for each project:
      a.   The total estimated cost at completion.
      b.   Appropriations and expenditures made to date.
      c.   Expenditures and encumbrances at the close of the last completed
fiscal year.
      d.   Estimated expenditures and encumbrances for the current fiscal year.
      e.   Estimates of the amounts of money necessary for the ensuing fiscal
year.
      f.   Estimated annual operating costs, if any, and the method of
financing those costs, for each of the three years following the budget year.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 11, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-514. - Consideration of budget by the mayor.
   The fiscal officer shall transmit the budget to the mayor who may revise or
alter it, but not so as to exceed the aggregate amount authorized by law to be
raised by taxation and other methods, provided that the mayor may not, unless
error in computation is discovered, revise or alter the amounts required to be
approved to provide a sinking fund for the payment of bonds at maturity, to pay
serial bonds at maturity, or the interest on bonds, or to pay other lawfully
incurred debt service. This includes amortization of any unfunded accrued
liability for retirement systems on an actuarially sound basis.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 12, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-515. - Transmittal of budget to the city council.
   No later than April 15 of each year, the mayor shall transmit the budget to
the city council. The budget shall be accompanied by:
   (1)   A message which in summary will put the mayor's proposed budget into
focus, including identification of unusual circumstances, or significant
changes in executive policy, activity levels and funding sources.
   (2)   A comparative analysis covering the immediate past and the current
budgets, together with the proposed budget as:
      a.   Requested by the several city agencies; and
      b.   Allowed by the mayor.
   (3)   A proposed general appropriations resolution, to be adopted by council
consistent with the budget document, which shall set forth the anticipated
revenue and requested expenditure authority for the ensuing fiscal year in such
form as developed by the fiscal officer and approved by the mayor. No
appropriations resolution shall be submitted to the city council in which
estimated total expenditures, including an accrued deficit, exceed estimated
total revenues, including an available surplus.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 13, 5-20-81; Ord. No. 83-270, 4-5-83; Ord. No. 84-288, 2-21-
84)
Sec. 2-516. - Consideration of budget by city council.
   (a)   The mayor shall furnish to the city council such additional relevant
information it may require in its consideration of the budget and proposed
general appropriations resolution. The city council may conduct budgetary
reviews with the mayor and appointed or elected officials for the purpose of
clarification or justification of proposed budgetary items. The city council
shall schedule such budget reviews upon consultation with the fiscal officer.
   (b)   The city council may revise the proposed budget and related general
appropriations resolution in any way, except that it may not change it in a way
that would cause total appropriations, including an accrued deficit, to exceed
total estimated revenues, including an unappropriated surplus. An accrued
deficit shall be the first item of expenditure in the general appropriations
resolution.
   (c)   The city council, by resolution, shall fix the time and place of a
public hearing to be held on the budget and proposed general appropriations
resolution. The city clerk shall then have published, in the official newspaper
of the city, notice of the hearing and an indication of the place at which the
budget and proposed general appropriations resolution may be inspected by the
public. This notice must be published at least seven days before the date of
the hearing.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 14, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-517. - Passage of general appropriations resolution.
   (a)   No later than June 13, the city council shall pass a general
appropriations resolution providing the authority to make expenditures and
incur obligations on behalf of the city for the ensuing fiscal year.
   (b)   The city council also shall determine the amount of money to be raised
by taxation necessary to defray the expenditures and meet the liabilities of
the local unit for the ensuing fiscal year; shall order that money to be raised
by taxation, within statutory and charter limitations; and shall cause the
money raised by taxation to be paid into the proper funds of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 15, 5-20-81; Ord. No. 83-270, 4-5-83; Ord. No. 84-288, 2-21-
84; Ord. No. 84-303, 6-5-84)
Sec. 2-518. - Veto power of mayor.
   Within 15 days of the adoption of the general appropriations resolution by
the council, the mayor shall have the power to veto the entire measure, or any
item therein, and shall return the document to the council for its
consideration of any part that shall have been vetoed. Within ten days
thereafter, the council shall consider any vetoes submitted. If five members of
the council shall vote to override a veto as to the whole or any part of the
general appropriations resolution, the council's decision shall be final. The
council shall consider each veto separately. Any veto not overridden by the
council shall result in the general appropriations resolution, or an individual
item therein as the case may be, to revert to that amount last recommended by
the mayor to the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 16, 5-20-81; Ord. No. 83-270, 4-5-83; Ord. No. 15-1463, 5-6-
15)
Sec. 2-519. - Amendment of the general appropriations resolution.
   Except as provided in section
2-526, a deviation from the original general appropriations resolution shall
not be made without first amending the general appropriations resolution at a
regular or special meeting of the city council. Such amendments shall be
subject to veto by the mayor, as generally outlined in section
2-518, except the mayor may waive his right of veto if council votes to give
such amendment immediate effect.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 17, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-520. - Appropriation not a mandate to spend.
   Appropriations will be deemed maximum authorization to incur expenditures.
The fiscal officer shall exercise supervision and control in order to ensure
that program or work objectives are realized within these limits and shall not
approve any expenditure beyond that necessary to accomplish those objectives.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 18, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-521. - Appropriation ledger accounts.
   The fiscal officer shall maintain appropriation ledger accounts in which are
to be recorded such expenditures, encumbrances and obligations for the proper
administration of the budget.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 19, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-522. - Allotment of appropriations.
   If directed by the mayor, each officer, department, board and commission of
the city shall, no later than June 15, submit to the fiscal officer, on forms
provided by him, a statement of proposed allotments of appropriations based
upon expected periodic requirements. The fiscal officer will review the
requested allotments in light of the plan of work of each unit and the expected
timing of those requirements, and he may revise or alter the proposed allotment
of any unit. The decision of the fiscal officer as to the amount of any
allotment for any fiscal period or the extent to which an allotment is
consistent with the purpose for which it is intended, as expressed in the
general appropriations resolution, shall be final and conclusive, provided that
the fiscal officer, upon the approval of the mayor, shall have the authority at
any time to modify any allotment previously made, upon application of, or upon
notice to, the officer, department, board or commission concerned.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 20, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-523. - Procedure for expenditures.
   (a)   No expenditure shall be made except in pursuance of an appropriation
of the city council.
   (b)   Each warrant, draft or contract of the city shall specify the fund and
appropriation designated by number assigned in the accounting system
classification established pursuant to law from which it is payable and shall
be paid from no other fund or appropriation.
   (c)   Expenditures shall not be charged directly to any contingent or
general account. Instead, the necessary amount of the appropriation from such
account shall be transferred pursuant to the provisions of this division to the
appropriate general appropriation account and the expenditure then charged
thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 21, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-524. - Limit on obligations and payments.
   (a)   No obligations shall be incurred against, and no payment shall be made
from, any appropriation account unless there is a sufficient unencumbered
balance in the appropriation and sufficient funds are or will be available to
meet the obligation. No contract or purchase order shall be issued to any
vendor until such contract or order is encumbered by the fiscal officer.
   (b)   Any obligation incurred or payment authorized in violation of this
division shall be void and any payment so made illegal.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 22, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-525. - Quarterly finance reports.
   The fiscal officer, within a reasonable time after the end of each quarter,
shall transmit to the city council a report of financial operations, including,
but not limited to:
   (1)   A summary statement of the actual financial position of the general
fund at the end of the previous month.
   (2)   A summary statement showing the revenues and expenditures and
encumbrances for the then current fiscal year to the end of previous month.
   (3)   A detailed listing of:
      a.   Expected revenues by major source as estimated in the budget; actual
revenues to date for the current fiscal year; the balance of estimated revenues
to be collected in the then current fiscal collection experience to date.
      b.   For each organizational unit and activity: the amount charged to
each appropriation for the current fiscal year; the unencumbered balance of
appropriations; and any revisions in the estimate of expenditures.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 23, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-526. - Transfers.
   (a)   Transfers of the unencumbered balance, or any portion thereof, in any
appropriation account may not be made without amendment of the appropriations
resolution, as provided in section
2-519, except that transfers within a department and fund may be made by the
fiscal officer, subject to the limitations of charter section
13.6. No full-time or part-time budgeted personnel positions may be added to a
department budget without prior Council approval. Transfers from the
contingency reserve shall be made in accordance with charter section
13.6 and are also excepted from amendment procedures provided by section
2-519.
   (b)   Transfers approved by the city council may be disallowed by the mayor
according to the veto provisions of section
2-519 unless such transfer is an emergency transfer under charter section
13.6.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 24, 5-20-81; Ord. No. 22-1761, 8-23-22)
Sec. 2-527. - Supplemental appropriations.
   (a)   The city council may make supplemental appropriations by amending the
original general appropriations resolution for existing or new appropriations,
as provided by section
2-519, provided that revenues in excess of those anticipated in the original
general appropriations resolution become available due to:
      (1)   An obligated surplus from prior years becoming available.
      (2)   Current year revenue exceeding original estimates in amounts great
enough to finance increased appropriations.
      (3)   Grants, gifts, donations, contributions or other unanticipated
revenues.
   (b)   In no case may such appropriations cause total estimated expenditures,
including an accrued deficit, to exceed total estimated revenues, including an
unappropriated surplus. Supplemental appropriations approved by the city
council shall be subject to veto by the mayor according to provisions of
section
2-519.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 25, 5-20-81)
Sec. 2-528. - Appropriation adjustment required.
   (a)   Whenever it appears to the mayor that actual and probable revenues in
any fund will be less than the estimated revenues upon which appropriations
from such fund were based, the mayor shall present to the city council
recommendations which, if adopted, would prevent expenditures from exceeding
available revenues for the current fiscal year. Such recommendations may
include proposals for reducing appropriations, increasing revenues, or both.
   (b)   Within 15 days of receiving the recommendations of the mayor for
bringing appropriations into balance with estimated revenues, the city council
shall amend the general appropriations resolution to reduce appropriations or
shall approve such measures necessary to provide revenues sufficient to equal
appropriations, or both. Such action of the council shall be subject to veto by
the mayor, as provided by section
2-519.
(Ord. No. 81-24, § 26, 5-20-81)
Secs. 2-529—2-545. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - TAX ASSESSMENTS
Sec. 2-546. - Tax day, determination of status.
   December 31 shall be deemed as tax day in the city, and the taxable status
of persons and real and personal property shall be determined as of that date.
The assessor shall not be restricted, except as otherwise provided in this
division, to any particular period in the preparation of the assessment roll
but may survey, examine or review properties at any time prior to or after tax
day.
(Ord. No. 81-13, § 1, 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-547. - Statement of taxable personal property.
   Any person owning taxable personal property may file the sworn statement as
required by law at any time prior to February 20 of each year. Such statement
shall list the personal property owned by such person on December 31
immediately preceding. The assessor shall not be restricted, except as
otherwise provided in this division, to any particular period in the
preparation of the assessment roll but may survey, examine or review properties
at any time prior to or after tax day.
(Ord. No. 81-13, § 2, 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-548. - Assessment; notice.
   On or before the first Monday in March in each year, the assessment roll
shall be completed by the assessor in the manner and form as required by Act
No. 206 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et
seq.), as amended, being the Michigan General Property Tax Act providing for
the Assessment, Levy and Collection of Taxes. The assessor shall give to each
owner or person or persons listed on the tax roll of the property a notice by
first class mail of an increase in the assessment for the year. The notice
shall specify each parcel of property, the assessed valuation for the year and
the previous year, the net change in assessment, and the time and place of the
meeting of the board of review. The notice shall be addressed to the owner
according to the records of the assessor and mailed not less than ten days
before a meeting of the board of review at which the owner may appear and
otherwise have a reasonable opportunity to examine, review and appeal the
individual assessment.
(Ord. No. 81-13, § 3, 2-17-81)
Sec. 2-549. - Approval of assessment; procedures.
   (a)   On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in March of each year,
the board of review shall meet in the council room, at which time the assessor
shall submit to the board the assessment roll for the current year, as prepared
by the assessor, and the board shall proceed to examine and review the
assessment roll according to the facts existing on tax day. During that day,
and the days following, if necessary, the board, of its own motion, or on
sufficient cause being shown by a person, shall add to the roll the names of
persons, the value of personal property, and the description and value of real
property liable to assessment in the city, omitted from the assessment roll.
The board shall correct errors in the names of persons, in the descriptions of
property upon the roll, and in the assessment and valuation of property. When
the board of review makes a change in the assessment of property or adds
property to the assessment roll, the person charged with the assessment shall
be promptly notified in such a manner as will assure the person opportunity to
attend a meeting of the board of review prior to the first Monday in April of
each year. The board shall do whatever else is necessary to make the roll
comply with state law.
   (b)   The business which the board may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as amended (Open Meeting Act). Public
notice of the time, date, and place of the meetings shall be given in the
manner required by that act and the City Charter, section
13.8. Notice of the date, time, and place of the meetings of the board of
review shall be given at least ten days before the first meeting by publication
in the official newspaper of the city. The notice shall appear in three
successive issues of the newspaper, if dates are available in a timely manner;
otherwise, by posting of the notice in five conspicuous places within the city.
Notice shall be posted in the assessor's office and the council room.
   (c)   The board of review shall be required to meet:
      (1)   On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in March of each
year, between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
      (2)   On the Wednesday next following the first Monday in March of each
year, between 3:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      (3)   On the Thursday next following the first Monday in March of each
year, between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
      (4)   On the Friday next following the first Monday in March of each
year, between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
      (5)   On the second Monday in March of each year between 9:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon and 1:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
      (6)   On the Tuesday next following the second Monday in March of each
year between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
      (7)   On such additional days as required to provide a reasonable
opportunity to property owners to appeal assessments on their property.
   (d)   At least one evening session shall be held, beginning at 3:00 p.m.,
and the board shall continue its sessions at least six hours each day. The
assessor or deputy shall attend all meetings of the board of review. The review
of all assessments shall be completed on or before the first Monday in April of
each year.
(Ord. No. 81-13, § 4, 2-17-81)
Secs. 2-550—2-565. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASING AND DISPOSITION OF GOODS AND SERVICES[14] 
Footnotes:
--- (14) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1062, adopted Dec. 5, 2005, amended Div. 4 in its
entirety. Former Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. No. 80-1, §§ 2—12, adopted July 1, 1980; Ord. No. 82-253, adopted Oct. 5,
1982; Ord. No. 89-439, adopted Jan. 17, 1989; Ord. No. 89-443, §§ 1—4, adopted
Mar. 7, 2989; Ord. No. 90-487, adopted June 19, 1990; Ord. No. 02-916, adopted
Nov. 6, 2002; and Ord. No. 03-938, adopted Jan. 21, 2003.
Sec. 2-566. - General provisions.
   (a)   Purposes and policies. The underlying purposes and policies of this
division are:
      (1)   To simplify, clarify, and modernize the city's procurement law.
      (2)   To permit the continued enhancement of procurement procedures and
practices.
      (3)   To increase public confidence in public procurement.
      (4)   To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal
with the procurement system of this city.
      (5)   To foster effective broad-based competition within the free
enterprise system.
      (6)   To maintain a procurement system of quality and integrity.
      (7)   To obtain the materials, services, and construction required by the
city in a cost-effective and responsible manner.
   (b)   Authorization for the use of electronic transmission. The use of
secure electronic media, including acceptance of signatures and electronic
receipt of sealed bids and proposals, is authorized.
   (c)   All solicitation documents, at a minimum, must contain boilerplate
language approved by corporation counsel.
   (d)   Application. This division applies to all procurement of supplies,
services, and construction, whatever the source of the funds. This shall not,
however, prevent any department or office from complying with lawful terms and
conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest made to the city.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 13-1378, 1-15-13; Ord. No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-567. - Procurement organization.
   (a)   Procurement Officer. The Procurement Officer shall serve as the
central procurement office of the city and shall have the right to delegate
authority as needed.
[NOTE: The terms "procurement officer" and "purchasing agent" may be used
interchangeably in other sections of the Code.]
   (b)   Duties. The procurement officer, except as otherwise specifically
provided in this code, shall:
      1.   Promulgate regulations, consistent with this code, governing the
procurement, management, control, and disposal of any and all supplies.
      2.   Procure or supervise all procurements of the city.
      3.   Ensure proper inventory management.
      4.   Supervise the sale, trade, or other form of disposal of surplus
items belonging to the city.
      5.   Ensure compliance with this code and implement regulations to review
and monitor procurements conducted by any designee or department.
   (c)   Centralized purchasing. All rights, powers, duties, and authority
relating to all procurements and the sale and disposal of supplies, hereby
reside with the Procurement Officer except as otherwise provided in this
section of the Code. All purchases and contracts for acquisition of equipment,
supplies and services shall be made by the Procurement Officer pursuant to a
requisition and specifications from the department whose appropriation will be
charged.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-568. - Methods of source selection.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   Competitive bids. A method of acquiring supplies, services, or
construction where the award is made to the lowest responsive and responsible
bidder whose bid meets the bid specifications established by the city for the
goods, services, or construction being sought that does not include discussions
or negotiations with bidders. Except for competitive bids electronically
submitted, competitive bids must be sealed.
      (2)   Contract. Any agreement entered into by the city with an individual
or entity for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual
services, or construction, including a purchase order, but not including a
collective bargaining agreement.
      (3)   Council threshold. Procurements that are anticipated to exceed the
current year threshold that is adjusted annually, with the beginning of the
fiscal year, by the Consumer Price Index as determined by the state of Michigan
for tax assessment, rounded up to the nearest hundred.
         a.   Purchases exceeding this threshold require city council approval
regardless of method of procurement.
         b.   Council approval not required for: Merchandise for resale,
parcel/postage services, utilities, railroad crossing maintenance, and revenue
contracts.
         c.   Procurements shall not be artificially divided so as to avoid the
council or quotation thresholds.
      (4)   Business.
      (5)   Invitation to bid (ITB). Formal request to prospective vendors
soliciting price quotations or bids; contains, or incorporates by reference,
the specifications or scope of work and all contractual terms and conditions.
      (6)   Lowest responsible and responsive bidder. In determining the lowest
responsible and responsive bidder, in addition to price, the following factors
shall be considered:
         a.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service or supplies required;
         b.   Whether or not the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service or supplies promptly or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
         c.   Whether the bid complies in all material respects with the bid
specifications;
         d.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
         e.   The quality of performance and time of completion by the bidder
of previous contracts or services;
         f.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to similar contracts or services;
         g.   The sufficiency of the financial resources, equipment, and
personnel resources and the ability of the bidder to satisfactorily perform the
contract or provide the services or supplies;
         h.   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
services to the particular use required;
         i.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
         j.   The number and scope of any additional, limiting, or qualifying
conditions attached to the bid by the bidder; and
         k.   Whether the supplies are recyclable, biodegradable, or otherwise
compatible with environmental concerns.
         The failure of a bidder to promptly supply information in connection
with an inquiry from the Procurement Officer or their designee with respect to
any of the provisions enumerated herein may be grounds for a determination of
nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder.
      (7)   Non-responsive bidder. Means a bid (ITB) or RFP response that does
not confirm to the mandatory or essential requirements of the ITB or RFP.
      (8)   Quotation threshold. Procurements that are anticipated to exceed
ten percent of the council threshold rounded to the nearest thousand.
      (9)   Request for quote (RFQ). Informal solicitation or request for
information, where oral or written quotes are obtained from vendors, without
formal advertising or receipt of "sealed" bids. Used only where ordinance does
not require formal "sealed" bids and where it is anticipated that the
procurement will not exceed the council threshold.
      (10)   Request for proposal (RFP). Bid solicitation method used for
services that exceed the council threshold based on evaluation criteria set
forth in the RFP. Used when it is expected that negotiations with one or more
bidders may be required with respect to any aspect of the requirements, or when
other factors will be considered in the selection of the contractor/consultant
in addition to price. Requires a sealed proposal.
      (11)   Request for qualification. A solicitation tool referred to as a
statement of qualifications (SOQ) used to prequalify a pool of potential
providers.
      (12)   Responsive bidder. Means a person or entity that has submitted a
bid, which conforms in all respects to the requirements set forth in the ITB.
      (13)   Sole source. Means the only known vendor possessing the unique and
singularly available capability based on technical qualifications, time
constraints, or personnel expertise, to meet the requirements of the solicited
bid or RFP.
      (14)   Standardized services. Standardized services are primarily price-
driven selections compared to professional services that involve more than
price for vendor selection.
      (15)   Vendor. Means any person or entity who offers goods for purchase
or services for hire, and includes, but is not limited to, contractors,
subcontractors, and businesses.
      (16)   Veteran. Means an individual who meets both of the following:
         a.   As defined in MCL 35.61, is an individual who served in the
United States Armed Forces, including the reserve components, and was
discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable. Includes an
individual who died while on active duty in the United States Armed Forces.
         b.   Was released from their service with an honorable or general
discharge.
   (b)   All city procurements shall be obtained and awarded through one of the
following methods:
      (1)   Sealed bidding. Required method for invitation to bid (ITB) for the
purchase of goods, equipment, standardized services, and construction for
public use, except as specified herein, that is equal to or exceeds the council
threshold. An award shall be made to the lowest responsible and responsive
bidder unless Council determines that it is in the best interest of the city to
award the contract to another bidder.
         a.   When the award is not given to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for awarding
the contract elsewhere shall be prepared by the Procurement Officer and filed
with the other documents relating to the bid.
      (2)   Sealed proposal. Required method for request for proposal (RFP) to
acquire services that exceed the council threshold based on evaluation criteria
set forth in the RFP. Generally accepted negotiation methodologies may be
conducted with responsive and responsible proposers who submit proposals in the
competitive range when defined in the RFP.
      (3)   Quotes. A solicitation for goods or services (referred to as a
request for quote or RFQ) that is not anticipated to exceed the council
threshold and which does not require a sealed submission. Shall be awarded to
the lowest responsible and responsive bidder as determined by the Procurement
Officer.
      (4)   Best value quotes. A solicitation for services based on the best
overall value as determined by the Procurement Officer using the factors for
lowest responsible and most responsive bidder.
      (5)   Reverse auction. An alternative method of obtaining goods in a real
time electronic, competitive format.
      (6)   Exceptions to competition. Competitive bids shall not be required
with respect to the following purchases unless otherwise required by law:
         a.   Small purchases. Procurements that are anticipated to be less
than or equal to the quotation threshold.
         b.   Sole source procurement. It is demonstrated that only one vendor
possesses the unique and singularly available capability to meet the
requirement of the solicitation, such as technical qualifications or
proprietary needs. A cost-benefit analysis must be done to determine if sole
source is the best course of action. Price and terms and conditions may be
negotiated. The following services may be considered sole source procurements
without a cost-benefit analysis unless the Procurement Officer deems otherwise:
Professional entertainers, marketing for professional performances, parcel/
postage services, utilities, and railroad crossing maintenance.
         c.   Single source procurement. Single source procurement occurs when
an invitation to bid results in only one bid received. Single source
procurement is to be treated as a sole source procurement.
         d.   Used items. In circumstances when used items are determined to be
in the best interest to the city, the Procurement Officer is authorized to
negotiate to obtain pricing and terms and conditions.
         e.   Continuity of professional services. An existing service is
ongoing beyond the expiration of the contract and for uniformity of results or
history of services it would be in the best interest of the city to extend the
contract. It shall be demonstrated that the need for the contract extension
could not have been anticipated at the time the original contract was awarded.
         f.   Merchandise for resale. Items obtained for the purpose of resale.
Prices and terms and conditions may be negotiated.
         g.   Emergency procurement. With the mutual concurrence of the
Procurement Officer and department director, a purchase may be made to
alleviate a situation in which there is a threat to health, welfare, or safety,
or to address an immediate regulatory mandate that does not allow time for
normal, competitive purchasing procedures. This method may not follow required
purchasing methods as previously described due to the immediate need.
Regardless of the cost of the procurement, notice from the purchasing division
will be provided to the mayor or council in advance of the procurement whenever
possible. Procurements exceeding council threshold will be presented at the
next regular council meeting.
         h.   Change orders. A written modification to a contract, approved by
the Procurement Officer, in the form of a change order, which increases or
decreases the contract cost, modifies the work to be performed, quantities
ordered, or duration of the contract. Council approval shall be required when
the new contract total value exceeds the council threshold and the change order
or combination of change orders exceeds council threshold or 50 percent of the
original contract amount, whichever is lower.
         i.   Emergency change orders. A verbal request for modification of a
contract made by the mayor, a director of a department, or their designee,
which increases the contract cost due to modification of the work to be
performed. An emergency change order must be requested before the work is
performed and shall be authorized by the Procurement Officer only upon a
showing that public life, health, property or peace may be affected. An
emergency change order shall be followed by the written procedure outlined for
change orders.
         j.   Professional services: Professional services means work rendered
by an independent contractor who has a professed and documented knowledge of
some department of learning or science used by its practical application to the
affairs of others or in the practice of an art founded on it, including, but
not limited to, accounting and auditing, court reporters, expert witnesses,
legal, medical, engineering, actuarial, architecture, and research. The
knowledge is founded upon prolonged and specialized intellectual training which
enables a particular service to be rendered. The word "professional" implies
professed attainments in special knowledge as distinguished from mere skills.
         Professional services may be procured without formal competition upon
a showing that professional offering the service has special or unique
knowledge advantageous to the city, or is offering a service that depends
primarily on the professional's invention, imagination or talent.
         k.   Contracts with professional entertainers.
         l.   Other. At the request of the Procurement Officer, and with the
approval of corporation counsel, the mayor and the council president, an
alternative procurement method may be applied.
         m.   Vehicles. All vehicles shall be procured in accordance with the
procedures established in this article. Upon purchase, all vehicles, except
those purchased for use by the police department, shall be affixed with a city
seal or other external identification identifying the vehicle as belonging to
the city. The method of identification shall be determined by the mayor. The
Procurement Officer shall execute all vehicle titles.
         n.   Micro-purchase. Procurements that are $3,000.00 or less. Micro-
purchases must be distributed among qualified suppliers but do not require
soliciting competitive quotations.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 13-1378, 1-15-13; Ord. No. 15-1476, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 22-1742, - -22)
Sec. 2-568A. - Preference for local bidders/Dearborn-based businesses.
   (a)   Purpose. The City of Dearborn believes that its purchasing practices
should encourage local vendors to provide goods and/or services to the City of
Dearborn, resulting in increased economic activity through more local jobs, tax
revenues, and expenditures, and to entice businesses to relocate to the city.
   (b)   Dearborn-based business. Means a physical and economic relationship to
Dearborn determined by a verifiable business address (not a P.O. Box) within
the corporate boundaries of the City of Dearborn, activities carried out in
Dearborn substantial enough to consider it a Dearborn-based business, and the
payment of city personal property taxes for not less than one year immediately
prior to the date of the bid submittal.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Purchases resulting from exigent emergency conditions where any
delay in completion or preference would jeopardize public health, safety or
welfare of the citizens of the city, or where in judgment of the mayor or his
designee, the operational effectiveness of a city department or division, or a
significant city function, would be seriously threatened if a purchase was not
made expeditiously.
      (2)   Purchases from any sole source supplier for supplies, materials or
other equipment.
      (3)   Purchases made through the State of Michigan's extended purchasing
program, or other cooperative purchasing contractual agreements utilized or
initiated by the purchasing division.
      (4)   The procurement of goods and services utilizing the request for
proposal (RFP) or best value quote processes where the award is based on
criteria other than lowest cost, unless the original solicitation contains the
criteria used to effect Dearborn-based preference.
      (5)   Bid solicitations that utilize federal funding that prohibits
awards based on local preference criteria.
      (6)   Bid solicitations that utilize “life cycle cost” as the basis of
award in place of submitted bid price.
   (d)   Dearborn business preference. When sealed bids are received under
section
2-568, Dearborn-based businesses may be awarded a contract as the lowest
responsible and responsive bidder, unless otherwise prohibited by law or
contract, as follows:
      (1)   For contract amounts up to $100,000.000. The person or business
submitting the lowest responsible and responsive bid, according to the
requirements of the bidding documents and this division, shall be deemed the
best bid. If the lowest responsible and responsive bidder is not a Dearborn-
based business, any Dearborn-based business with a bid within 10 percent of the
lowest responsible and responsive bid shall be deemed the best bid if it meets
all other qualifications found in the bid documents and this division for
lowest responsible and responsive bidder other than bid price alone. A lowered
bid by a Dearborn-based business which is premised upon, in whole or in part,
changes to or variances to the bid specifications, contract requirements, or
scope of work, shall be considered nonresponsible and will not be considered.
      (2)   No contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be sublet in any
manner that permits 50 percent or more of the dollar value of the contract to
be performed by a subcontractor or subcontractors who do not meet the
definition of "Dearborn-based."
   (e)   In no event shall a Dearborn-based business be awarded a contract if
the business is not current on real and personal property taxes owed to the
City of Dearborn.
   (f)   This section shall not waive or constrain, in any manner, the right
and prerogative of the City of Dearborn to reject any and all bids or
proposals, to reject a bid not accompanied by required bid security or other
documentation or data required by the bidding documents, or to reject a bid
which is in any way incomplete, irregular, not responsive or not responsible.
   (g)   Veteran preference. When sealed bids are received under section
2-568, veteran owned vendors may be awarded a contract as the lowest
responsible and responsive bidder, unless otherwise prohibited by law or
contract, as follows:
      (1)   The person or business submitting the lowest responsible and
responsive bid, according to the requirements of the bidding documents and this
division, shall be deemed the best bid. If the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder is not a veteran owned vendor, any veteran owned vendor with
a bid within 5 percent of the lowest responsible and responsive bid shall be
deemed the best bid if it meets all other qualifications found in the bid
documents and this division for lowest responsible and responsive bidder other
than bid price alone. A lowered bid by a veteran owned vendor which is premised
upon, in whole or in part, changes to or variances to the bid specifications,
contract requirements, or scope of work, shall be considered non-responsible
and will not be considered.
      (2)   No contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be sublet in any
manner that permits 50 percent or more of the dollar value of the contract to
be performed by a subcontractor or subcontractors who do not meet the
definition of "veteran owned vendor."
      (3)   Veteran owned vendor. Means a vendor that is at least 51% owned and
controlled by one or more persons that are veterans as defined in this
division. In case of a publicly-owned vendor, at least 51% of the stock is
controlled by one or more.
(Ord. No. 10-1266, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 11-1328, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 22-1742, - -22)
Sec. 2-568B.   Diversity procurement.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   Minority owned vendor. Means a vendor which is at least 51% owned
by one or more minorities or, in the case of a publicly owned vendor, at least
51% of the stock is controlled by one or more minorities; and whose management
and daily business operations are controlled by one or more individuals
(minorities). A minority is a person who is a citizen or lawful resident of the
United States who meets the classification of minority as determined by the
U.S. Census Bureau (as of March 1, 2022) as follows:
         i.   Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the
Black racial groups of Africa.
         ii.   American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any
of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America)
and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.
         iii.   Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples
of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for
example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.
         iv.   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having
origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific
Islands.
         v.   Middle East and North Africa. A person having origins in any of
the original peoples of the countries or territories that constitute the Middle
East and North Africa, including, for example, Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti,
Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen,
Iran, Israel, the West Bank and Gaza.
         vi.   Women owned vendor. Means a vendor which is at least 51% owned
and controlled by one or more women or, in case of a publicly-owned vendor, at
least 51% of the stock is controlled by one ore more women; and whose
management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more such
individuals.
         vii.   Person with disability owned vendor. Means a vendor that is at
least 51% owned and controlled by one or more persons with a disability. In
case of a publicly- owned vendor, at least 51% of the stock is controlled by
one or more persons with a disability; and whose management and daily business
operations are controlled by one or more such individuals. A person with a
disability is one determined to be a service-disabled veteran or other person
suffering from a chronic physical disability, defect or disease that restricts
the type of employment and business opportunity for which the person would
otherwise by qualified to perform.
         viii.   Controlled. Means exercising the power to make policy
decisions.
   (b)   Diversity certification. The city will accept the following
documentation as proof of minority, women or disabled person business
ownership:
      (1)   Evidence from a third-party organization that evaluates diverse
vendors including, but not limited to: the federal government, State of
Michigan, Michigan Minority Business Development Council, Native American
Business Owners, Asian-Pacific Chamber of Commerce, and Michigan Hispanic
Chamber of Commerce, Arab American Chamber of Commerce.
      (2)   Self-certification of minority ownership as evidenced by financial
documentation and a notarized affidavit affirming that the ownership of the
firm is at least 51% minority, women, or disabled person owned and that the
owner participates in the day-to-day operation of the vendor. Falsification of
information can result in the vendor's removal from the city's list of eligible
vendors.
   (c)   Diversity procurement objectives. In an effort to ensure fair and
equal competition for procurement opportunities and to increase the diversity
of vendors to more closely reflect the diversity of its population:
      (1)   All contracts for goods and services will have diversity
participation objectives as may be established from time to time by the
administration.
      (2)   All purchases will be evaluated according to the established
diversity participation objectives and a good faith effort shall be made to
reach each of the objectives so established.
      (3)   The city will, whenever practical, solicit for all quotes or bids a
minimum of three women-owned, minority-owned, and person with disability-owned
business responses.
(Ord. No. 22-1742, - -22)
Sec. 2-569. - Cooperative purchasing.
   (a)   The Procurement Officer may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or
administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any
supplies, services, or construction with one or more public procurement units
in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such
cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party
contracts between public procurement units and open-ended public procurement
unit contracts that are made available to other public procurement units (joint
purchasing and piggybacking).
   (b)   All cooperative purchasing conducted under this article shall be
consistent with the methods of section
2-568 (Methods of source selection).
   (c)   Procurement by participation in a cooperative purchasing agreement
shall be exempt from the requirements of section
2-568A.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1328, 6-6-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-570. - Specifications.
   Specifications shall be written to provide for and encourage full
competition.
   (a)   The Procurement Officer may require bid deposits, performance and
payment bonds as well as liability insurance as part of the procurement
process. When such security is required, a certified cashier's check or bid
bond will be held as a guaranty that respondent will enter into the contract in
accordance with the terms and conditions of such advertisement and bid.
Performance and payment bonds shall be delivered to the city and shall become
binding upon execution of the contract.
   (b)   Advertisement. Invitations to bid, requests for proposals, auctions,
and sale of real property must be advertised in one or any combination of the
official newspaper of the city, trade magazines or publications, the internet,
or other electronic means for a length of time to be determined by the
Procurement Officer based on the particular transaction. Solicitations that
result from the second step of a two-stage procurement process do not need to
be advertised; however, the initial solicitation state (e.g., SOQ) must be
advertised.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-571. - Selection teams.
   (a)   Invitation to bid. This team shall review and approve the scope of
work, specifications and special terms and conditions, and shall recommend the
low responsible and responsive bid for award at a meeting of the city council.
Teams shall consist of the Procurement Officer and the requesting department
director or their designees. Other qualified persons may be designated to serve
as additional members.
   (b)   Request for proposal (RFP). This team shall review and approve the
scope of work, specifications and special terms and conditions as well as study
the proposals submitted and, based on evaluation criteria, recommend to the
mayor or city council the proposal with the best value to the city. Teams shall
consist of the Procurement Officer and corporation counsel, or their designees,
in an advisory capacity, and no less than three members with voting rights
including the requesting department director or their designee and such other
members as appointed by the mayor. Members may include persons not currently
employed by the city but cannot be compensated if serving in a voting capacity.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-572. - Conflict of interest.
   All members of selection teams or in other decision-making processes must
disclose any conflict of interest as stated in
chapter 3, Standards of Conduct, of the City Charter. In addition, no person or
entity, or anyone who has financial ties, direct or indirect, to such a person
or entity, who participates significantly in the development of specifications
may compete.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-573. - Evaluation and award.
   (a)   Each solicitation must set forth the criteria to be considered in the
evaluation of bids or proposals for award and no factor shall be considered
that is not included in the solicitation.
    (b)   The Procurement Officer, corporation counsel, finance director and
the requesting department director or their designees shall approve all award
letters and change orders prior to requesting city council approval.
    (c)   No contracts shall become operative until approved as to legality and
form by corporation counsel.
   (d)   The mayor or his designee shall sign all contracts for purchases
exceeding the council threshold.
   (e)   The procurement officer or their designee is authorized to sign
contracts for purchases below the council threshold.
   (f)   Upon issuance of a purchase order, funds will be encumbered.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-574. - Supply management.
   The Procurement Officer is authorized to sell, trade in, lease, transfer or
dispose of surplus by public auction, competitive solicitation, donation to
nonprofit organizations or the scrapping of items when the cost of handling
exceeds the estimated proceeds, or other method approved by council.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 08-1159, 4-21-08; Ord.
No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 22-1742, - -22)
Sec. 2-575. - Contract management and contractual remedies; liquidation of
damages.
   (a)   The Procurement Officer is authorized to:
      (1)   Delegate the responsibility for contract administration, and
      (2)   Establish regulations governing contract administration.
   (b)   Authority to debar or suspend:
      (1)   Suspension and debarment procedures are authorized when a
contractor or vendor's activities, or those of any of its personnel or
subsidiaries, are so egregious that the contractor or vendor should be
precluded from obtaining government business for a period of time. Examples of
these activities may include but are not limited to:
         a.   Being in default to the city.
         b.   Breaching a contract that is/was held with the city.
         c.   Poorly performing under a contract that is/was held with the
city.
         d.   Engaging in criminal activity to obtain a contract.
         e.   Conviction of embezzlement, theft or bribery, or
         f.   Conviction of state or federal antitrust laws arising out of
submission of bids or proposals.
      (2)   Suspension. The Procurement Officer, after consultation with the
using department and corporation counsel, shall have authority to suspend a
person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause for
debarment. The suspension shall not be for a period exceeding six months.
      (3)   Debarment. After reasonable notice, the Procurement Officer, after
consultation with the using department and corporation counsel, shall have the
authority to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of
contracts. The debarment shall not be for a period of more than five years.
      (4)   Decision. The Procurement Officer or designee shall issue a written
decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the
action taken. Notice of this decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished
immediately to the debarred or suspended person and any other party
intervening.
      (5)   Appeal. The vendor may appeal this decision to the selection team.
This decision shall be final and conclusive. Vendors shall be notified of the
decision by letter.
   (c)   Liquidated damages. Contracts may include a liquidated damages clause
to allow for recovery from the vendor, by setoff against the unpaid portion of
the contract price, or otherwise pursuant to contract, a specified dollar
amount per day, as liquidated damages and not as a penalty, for each day that
the vendor shall fail to comply with the requirements of this division as
determined by the Procurement Officer, in consultation with corporation
counsel, said sum being fixed as negotiated and agreed upon by and between the
vendor and the city because of the impracticable ability and extreme difficulty
in fixing and ascertaining the actual damages which the city would sustain in
the even of such a breach of contract; and said amount is agreed to be the
amount of damages which the city would sustain.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 11-1311, 2-7-11; Ord.
No. 22-1742, - - 22)
Sec. 2-576. - Real property.
   (a)   Transactions involving the purchase, sale, gift or lease of real
property shall be authorized by council resolution. Offers to purchase and
proposals to sell city-owned property shall be reviewed by the corporation
counsel and a recommendation made concerning:
      (1)   The sufficiency of the consideration.
      (2)   The public purpose involved in the land transaction.
   (b)   The following factors shall be considered and identified by the
corporation counsel in making any recommendation to the city council for the
purchase, sale or lease of real property:
      (1)   Purchase: 
         a.   Identification of the public purpose involved in the proposed
land transaction.
         b.   Determination of the market value of the property as indicated by
the assessed and equalized values of the property from the city assessor's
records.
         c.   An opinion of value from the city assessor's office.
         d.   Determination of value as reflected by any recent comparable
sales in the immediate area.
         e.   Obtaining an outside appraisal or opinion of value if recommended
by the corporation counsel or requested by the city council.
         f.   Transaction upon a negotiated purchase price or through
condemnation, if authorized by separate council resolution.
      (2)   Sale: 
         a.   Identification of the public purpose involved in the proposed
land transaction.
         b.   Determination of the market value of the property as indicated by
the assessed and equalized values of the property from the city assessor's
records.
         c.   An opinion of value from the city assessor's office.
         d.   Advertising and/or posting the property if two or more persons
have indicated an interest in the property or the property has general utility
or the city council requests the property be advertised.
         e.   Examining the use to which the property can or will be put and
the cost of acquisition, demolition and improvement.
         f.   Sale to the highest bidder. Consideration to include dollar offer
and such other items as identified by the corporation counsel that represent a
legal obligation to the city and value assigned thereto. The city shall reserve
the right to reject all bids.
      (3)   Lease: 
         a.   Identification of the public purpose involved in the proposed
land transaction.
         b.   Determination of the market value of the property as indicated by
the assessed and equalized values of the property from the city assessor's
records.
         c.   An opinion of value from the city assessor's office.
         d.   As lessor, advertising and/or posting the property if two or more
persons have indicated an interest in the property or the property has general
utility or the city council requests that the property be advertised.
         e.   As lessee, the lease fee should be based upon the above
indicators of value through a negotiated lease fee procedure.
   (c)   These rules of procedure shall be construed liberally in recognition
of the unique character of land transactions and the requirement that all real
property transactions shall be authorized by council resolution. All land
transactions involving city officers or employees shall be governed by
applicable provisions of state law and city charter on conflicts of interest
and, in any event, shall require a full disclosure of the officer or employee's
interest and nonvoting of the officer involved.
(Ord. No. 05-1062, 12-5-05; Amend. of 7-14-06; Ord. No. 22-1742, - -22)
Secs. 2-577—2-595. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - APPEARANCE TICKETS
Sec. 2-596. - Generally.
   (a)   Definition. An appearance ticket is a written notice issued and
subscribed by a police officer or other public servant authorized by Act No.
366 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1984 (MCL 764.9f, MSA 28.868(6)), as
amended, or ordinances of the city to issue the same, directing a designated
future time in connection with his alleged commission of a designated offense.
   (b)   Issuance. Whenever a police officer would have reasonable grounds to
arrest a person without a warrant for any violation of an ordinance of the
city, in lieu of taking such person before the district court and filing a
complaint in connection therewith, he may issue to and serve upon such person
an appearance ticket.
   (c)   Authorized issuers. The following public servants of the city shall be
and they are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets:
      (1)   Director of public works and his written designees;
      (2)   Director of building and safety and his written designees;
      (3)   Ordinance enforcement officers:
   Ordinance enforcement officers shall include park rangers.
   (d)   Reasons to issue. The directors of public works and building and
safety and their written designees shall be authorized to issue appearance
tickets for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Planting of unauthorized trees on city property.
      (2)   Unauthorized trimming or removal of city owned trees.
      (3)   Using illegal refuse containers for refuse storage and pickup.
      (4)   Early set out of refuse for collection.
      (5)   Improperly stored refuse, commercial and residential.
      (6)   Outside storage of any items that contribute to the unsightliness
of the neighborhood and the health and safety of the community.
      (7)   High grass, over eight inches in length, shrubs and foliage that
obstruct the public way.
      (8)   Violation of other code provisions under the jurisdiction of the
individual ordinance officer.
   (e)   Filing of complaint. A police officer or other public servant of the
city who has issued and served an appearance ticket, at or before the time of
appearance ticket is returnable, shall file or cause to be filed in the
district court a complaint charging the person named in the appearance ticket
with the offense specified in this section.
(Ord. No. 86-357, 5-6-86; Ord. No. 05-1047, 7-5-05)
Secs. 2-597—2-610. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 2-611. - Short title.
   The short title of the article hereinafter set forth shall be the "Emergency
Management Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 1, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-612. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Act means the Michigan Emergency Management Act, Act No. 390 of the Public
Acts of 1976, as amended.
   Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made
cause, including but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm,
tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility
failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation
accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
drought, infestation, explosion or hostile military action or paramilitary
action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots or
civil disorders.
   District coordinator means the Michigan Department of State Police District
Emergency Management Coordinator. The district coordinator serves as liaison
between local emergency management programs and the Michigan State Police,
Emergency Management Division in all matters pertaining to the mitigation,
preparedness, response and recovery of emergency and disaster situations.
   Disaster relief force means all agencies of the City of Dearborn, private
and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees, and all other persons
or groups of persons identified in the City of Dearborn Emergency Operations
Plan as having duties to perform or those called into duty or working at the
direction of a party identified in the plan to perform a specific disaster or
emergency related task during a local state of emergency.
   Emergency management coordinator means the person appointed to coordinate
all matters pertaining to emergency management within the City of Dearborn.
   Emergency management program means a program established to coordinate
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities for all emergency or
disaster situations within a given geographic area made up of one or several
political subdivisions. Such a program has an appointed emergency management
coordinator and meets the program standards and requirements as established by
the department of state police, emergency management division. The City of
Dearborn has established an emergency management program.
   Emergency operations plan means the plan developed and maintained by the
City of Dearborn for the purpose of responding to all emergency or disaster
situations by identifying and organizing the disaster relief force.
   Governor's state of disaster means an executive order or proclamation by the
governor that implements the disaster response and recovery aspects of the
Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the county or
municipal programs affected.
   Governor's state of emergency means an executive order or proclamation by
the governor that implements the emergency response and recovery aspects of the
Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the county or
municipal programs affected.
   Local state of emergency means a declaration by the mayor pursuant to the
act and this article which implements the response and recover aspects of the
City of Dearborn Emergency Operations Plan and authorizes certain actions as
described in this article.
   Vital records means those records that contain information needed to
continue the effective functioning of the City of Dearborn and for the
protection of the rights and interests of persons under emergency conditions in
the event of an emergency or disaster situation.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 2, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-613. - Emergency management office; emergency management coordinator.
   (a)   By authority of this article, there is hereby created an office of
emergency management within the City of Dearborn for the purpose of
coordinating all mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities
within the city. The mayor shall have the authority to staff this office.
   (b)   The mayor shall have the authority to appoint a person to fill the
position of emergency management coordinator. The mayor shall also appoint a
minimum of two persons as successors to the position of the emergency
management coordinator. The line of succession shall be listed in the emergency
operations plan.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 4, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-614. - Emergency management coordinator; duties.
   The emergency management coordinator shall comply with the standards and
requirements as established by the department of state police, emergency
management division, under the authority of the act in accomplishing the
following:
      (1)   Direct and coordinate the development of the city emergency
operations plan, which shall be consistent in content with the Michigan
Emergency Management Plan.
      (2)   Specify departments or agencies which must provide an annex to the
plan or otherwise cooperate in its development.
      (3)   Identify departments and agencies to be included in the emergency
operations plan as the disaster relief force.
      (4)   Development and maintain a City of Dearborn Resource Manual.
      (5)   Coordinate the recruitment and utilization of volunteer personnel.
      (6)   Assure the emergency management program meets eligibility
requirements for state and federal aid.
      (7)   Coordinate and/or conduct training and exercise programs for the
disaster relief force within the city and to test the adequacy of the emergency
operations plan.
      (8)   Through public information programs, educate the population as to
actions necessary for the protection of life and property in an emergency or
disaster.
      (9)   Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements.
      (10)   Oversee the implementation of all functions necessary during an
emergency or disaster in accordance with the emergency operations plan.
      (11)   Coordinate city emergency management activities with those of the
county, state and adjacent jurisdictions.
      (12)   Coordinate all emergency preparedness activities, including
maintaining primary and alternate emergency operations centers.
      (13)   Identify mitigation opportunities within the city and encourage
departments/agencies to implement mitigation measures.
   The emergency management coordinator shall supervise the activities of the
emergency management office on a continuous basis. With the advice and consent
of the mayor, he/she shall formulate, review and approve policy and operational
guidelines for this office as needed.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 4, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-615. - Mayor; powers; duties.
   (a)   On an annual basis, the mayor shall review the eligibility and
performance of the emergency management coordinator.
   (b)   The mayor shall, once every two years, review the emergency operations
plan and, upon deeming it adequate, shall certify the plan to be current and
adequate for the ensuing two years.
      (1)   The mayor shall have the authority to enter into interstate,
intrastate, and regional mutual aid agreements on behalf of the city.
   (c)   When circumstances within the city indicate that the occurrence, or
threat of occurrence, of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or
property from natural or human-made cause exists, the mayor may declare a local
state of emergency. Such a declaration shall be promptly filed with the
department of state police, emergency management division. This declaration
shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except
with the consent of the city council.
   (d)   If the mayor invokes such power and authority, he/she shall, as soon
as reasonably expedient, convene the city council for one or more emergency
meetings, in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, to perform its normal
legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and will report
to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be
construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the city council unless
specifically provided herein.
   (e)   The mayor may do one or more of the following under a local state of
emergency:
      (1)   Direct the emergency management coordinator to implement the
emergency operations plan.
      (2)   Issue directives as to travel restrictions on local roads within
the city.
      (3)   Relieve city employees of normal duties and temporarily reassign
them to other duties.
      (4)   Activate mutual aid agreements.
      (5)   Direct the overall disaster relief effort, including the disaster
relief force, in accordance with the emergency operations plan.
      (6)   Notify the public and recommend in-place shelter or evacuation
protective measures.
      (7)   Request a state of disaster or emergency declaration from the
governor as described in section 6-216.
      (8)   When obtaining normal approvals would result in further injury or
damage, the mayor may, until the city council convenes, waive procedures and
formalities otherwise required pertaining to the following:
         a.   For a period of up to seven days, send the disaster relief force
and resources to the aid of other communities as provided by mutual aid
agreements.
         b.   For a period of up to seven days appropriate and expend funds
from the city's contingency fund, said appropriation and expenditure being
solely for the purpose of paying the disaster relief force, purchasing supplies
and services, repair costs or other needs required specifically for the
mitigation of the effects of, or in response to, the emergency disaster.
         c.   For a period of up to seven days make contracts, and obtain and
distribute equipment, materials and supplies for disaster purposes.
         d.   Employ temporary workers.
         e.   Purchase and distribute supplies, materials and equipment.
         f.   Make, amend or rescind ordinances or rules necessary for
emergency management purposes which supplement a rule, order or directive
issued by the governor or a state agency. Such an ordinance or rule shall be
temporary and, upon the governor's declaration that a state of disaster or
state of emergency is terminated, shall no longer be in effect.
      (9)   If a state of disaster or emergency is declared by the governor,
assign and make available for duty employees, property or equipment of the city
within or outside the physical limits of the city as ordered by the governor or
the director of the Michigan Department of State Police in accordance with the
act.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 5, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 11-1333, 9-19-11)
Sec. 2-616. - Governor declaration request.
   If a disaster or emergency occurs that has not yet been declared to be a
state of disaster or a state of emergency by the governor, and the mayor
determines that the situation is beyond the control of the city, he/she may
request the governor to declare that a state of disaster or state of emergency
exists in the city. The emergency management coordinator shall immediately
contact the district coordinator. The district coordinator, in conjunction with
the emergency management coordinator, shall assess the nature and scope of the
disaster or emergency, and they shall recommend the state personnel, services
and equipment that will be required for its prevention, mitigation or relief.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 6, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-617. - City departments; liaison; duties.
   (a)   Each department of the city identified by the emergency management
coordinator shall appoint an emergency management liaison who shall coordinate
the emergency management activities of the department and act as a liaison
between his/her department and the emergency management office on all matters
pertaining to emergency management.
   (b)   Each department identified shall appoint a minimum of two people to
serve as successors in the event the emergency management liaison is not
available or requires assistance. Successors shall be listed in the appropriate
annex to the emergency operations plan.
   (c)   Each department liaison shall be responsible for the following:
      (1)   Prepare and continuously update an annex to the city emergency
operations plan providing for the delivery of emergency management activities
by that department. The annex shall be in the form prescribed by the emergency
management coordinator.
      (2)   Recruit, appoint and organize private, volunteer and other
personnel to be part of the disaster relief force to perform specific duties as
assigned in the emergency operations plan.
      (3)   Coordinate the department's emergency management efforts with those
of other city departments.
      (4)   Attend training courses relevant to the function of the department,
and ensure staff is training so as to be able to implement assigned emergency
functions.
      (5)   Participate in periodic exercises to enhance the adequacy of the
respective department's response capability.
      (6)   Develop internal standard operating procedures (SOPs) to accomplish
emergency notification and assigned emergency tasks.
      (7)   Provide the emergency management coordinator with a list of
personnel and resources available within the department and provide a list of
those that may be needed by the department during times of emergency.
      (8)   Identify and provide for the protection of vital records.
      (9)   Implement the directives of the mayor or his/her designee under a
local state of emergency.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 7, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-618. - Volunteers; appointment.
   Each city department is authorized to appoint volunteers to augment its
personnel in the time of emergency to implement emergency functions assigned in
the emergency operations plan. Such individuals are part of the disaster relief
force and shall be subject to the rules and operational control set forth by
the respective department through which the appointment was made, and shall be
reimbursed for all actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 8, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-619. - Rights of disaster relief force.
   In accordance with the act, personnel of the disaster relief force while on
duty shall have the following rights:
      (1)   If they are employees of the city, or other governmental agency
regardless of where serving, have the powers, duties, rights, privileges,
immunities and receive the compensation incidental to their employment.
      (2)   If they are not employees of the city, or other governmental
agency, be entitled to the same rights and immunities as are provided for by
law.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 9, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-620. - Temporary seat of government.
   The mayor shall provide for the temporary movement and reestablishment of
essential government offices in the event that existing facilities cannot be
used.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 10, 4-6-93)
Sec. 2-621. - Liability.
   (a)   As provided for in the act and this article, the city, or the agents
or representatives of the city, shall not be liable for personal injury or
property damage sustained by the disaster relief force. In addition, any member
of the disaster relief force engaged in disaster relief activity shall not be
liable in a civil action for damages resulting from an act or omission arising
out of and in the course of the person's good faith rendering of that activity,
unless the persons's act or omission was the result of that person's gross
negligence or wilful misconduct. The right of a person to receive benefits or
compensation to which he or she may otherwise [be] entitled to under the
worker's compensation law, any pension law or act of Congress will not be
effected as a result of disaster relief activity.
   (b)   As provided for in the act, any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the
city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real
estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons or for any other
disaster related function during a declared local state of emergency or during
an authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the
death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises
under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage
to, the property of such person.
(Ord. No. 93-558, § 11, 4-6-93)
Secs. 2-622, 2-623. - Reserved.
Sec. 2-624. - Special assessments for legally rendered city services.
   (a)   Pursuant to Chapter 15.10 of the city charter, a special assessment
may be levied against any parcel of land in order to recover the cost of
providing any city service or making any necessary improvement permitted by
law.
   (b)   All bills for special assessments due under this section which become
and remain delinquent for a period of one month or more as of December 31 of
each year shall be certified forthwith to the city assessor by the finance
director. The certificate shall set forth a list of all charges for special
assessments due and unpaid and all interest and penalties as of December 31 of
the prior year.
   (c)   The city assessor shall enter the amount of each such delinquent
special assessment, together with a 25 percent transfer fee upon the general
city tax roll covering the premises upon which special assessment charges have
accrued, and such charges shall be collected and such lien shall be enforced in
the same manner as provided for the collection of the general city taxes
assessed on such rolls and the enforcement of the lien therefore.
(Ord. No. 02-921, 11-19-02)
Secs. 2-625—2-635. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEES[15] 
Footnotes:
--- (15) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-895, adopted May 21, 2002, enacted a new article
VII, §§
2-622 and 2-623. Said provisions have been redesignated at the discretion of
the editor as §§
2-636 and 2-637, to better fit the format of the Code.
Sec. 2-636. - Combining platted lots.
   Any person owning platted lots who wishes to combine two or more lots shall
pay a fee of $100.00 for each new parcel created.
(Ord. No. 02-895, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 15-1510, 12-8-15)
Sec. 2-637. - Industrial facilities tax exemption districts.
   (a)   The processing of an application for the establishment of an
industrial facilities tax exemption district shall require payment of a
$1,000.00 administrative fee.
   (b)   The processing of an application for tax exemption in an industrial
facilities tax exemption district shall require payment of a $1,000.00
administrative fee.
(Ord. No. 02-895, 5-21-02)
Sec. 2-638. - Vital records; individuals who may request birth records; fees.
   (a)   Vital records. Upon written request, to the extent available and
subject to applicable law, the city clerk shall provide individuals with copies
of records for births and deaths that have occurred within city limits.
   (b)   Individuals who may request birth records. Pursuant to MCL 333.2882,
the following people shall be permitted to request a birth certificate:
      (1)   The person named on the certificate with valid photo
identification;
      (2)   The mother or father named on the certificate with valid photo
identification;
      (3)   The legal guardian with valid photo identification and signed
guardianship paperwork;
      (4)   The heir, if the individual is deceased, with legal representative
documentation;
      (5)   A court of competent jurisdiction;
      (6)   Any other individual, agency, or representative with authority to
obtain these records under Michigan law.
   (c)   Fees. Except as otherwise stated, the fee for birth and death records
shall be nonwaivable and nonrefundable.
      (1)   The fee for a birth certificate is $25.00, with the exception of
seniors, aged 65 and older, who may obtain their own birth certificate for
$15.00.
      (2)   The fee for a death certificate is $25.00, with the exception of
veterans who are Dearborn residents, whose immediate family members may obtain
up to six certified copies of their death certificate at no cost.
         a.   Immediate family. For the purposes of this discounted fee, a
veteran’s “immediate family” shall mean the deceased veteran’s spouse, and
their children and step-children by blood or adoption.
         b.   Confirmation of veteran status. The deceased’s status as a
veteran can be confirmed as follows:
            (i)   The deceased’s status as a veteran is confirmed on the death
certificate; or
            (ii)   If the death certificate does not confirm the veteran’s
status, the individual claiming the discount must provide proof of the
deceased’s status as a veteran by providing a government issued document
confirming such status, including but not limited to a military service record
from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) or similar
government agency, the deceased veteran’s Certificate of Release or Discharge
from Active-Duty form (DD214 form), or similar record.
      (3)   The fee for each additional copy of the same record is $5.00.
(Ord. No. 25-1843, 5-20-25)
Secs. 2-639—2-699. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - RESIDENT IDENTIFICATION CARDS
Sec. 2-700. - Purpose.
   Some owner-occupied residences in the city are owned by individuals who also
maintain residences outside of the state. While they reside in two or more
locations, some of these individuals maintain their government-issued
identification (e.g., driver's license) in the non-Michigan location. As a
result, when these individuals are residing in the city, they are without
Michigan identification.
   These individuals are Dearborn residents by virtue of the fact that they own
property in the city, the property is not rental property, and they reside at
the property when in the city. Nevertheless, these individuals are unable to
take advantage of privileges afforded Dearborn residents (e.g., resident
discounts).
   The purpose of this section is to create a photo ID in the form of a
resident identification card for individuals who reside in the city on a part-
time basis and, when in Dearborn, reside in the residence that they own. The
property owned and resided in by these individuals is not offered for rent when
the individuals are living outside the city. An individual who is eligible for
and obtains a resident identification card will be able to take advantage of
privileges afforded Dearborn residents in the city.
(Ord. No. 08-1178, 9-24-08)
Sec. 2-701. - Application.
   (a)   To obtain a resident identification card, an individual shall make
application to the city clerk.
   (b)   At the time the application is filed, a nonrefundable application fee
of $25.00 shall be remitted to the city clerk.
   (c)   An applicant for a resident identification card shall submit the
following information and submittals to the city clerk.
      (1)   Proof of identity. In order to establish identity, each applicant
must present a photo ID card issued by a governmental agency.
      (2)   Proof of residence. In order to establish (part-time) residency,
each applicant must present:
         a.   Deed to the residential property located in the city;
         b.   Certificate of occupancy identifying the property as owner-
occupied;
         c.   Verification that all property taxes assessed on the property at
issue are current;
         d.   A notarized affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant
does not offer the property for rent when it is not occupied by the applicant;
         e.   Such additional information as required by the city.
(Ord. No. 08-1178, 9-24-08)
Sec. 2-702. - Issuance; renewal.
   (a)   Upon the city clerk's acceptance of the documents identified in
section
2-701, the applicant shall receive a resident identification card processed by
the Dearborn Police Department.
   (b)   A resident identification card shall be valid for two years and may be
renewed by following the process identified above.
(Ord. No. 08-1178, 9-24-08)
Sec. 2-703. - Change in status.
   (a)   It is the obligation of an individual possessing a residential
identification card to notify the city clerk of any change in status which
renders the individual ineligible for a residential identification card.
   (b)   Notification shall be in writing and shall occur within 30 days of the
change in status.
   (c)   An individual who becomes ineligible for a resident identification
card due to a change in status must immediately destroy his or her card.
(Ord. No. 08-1178, 9-24-08)
Sec. 2-704. - Unlawful conduct.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter in any way a resident
identification card.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or to possess a
fictitious or expired resident identification card.
(Ord. No. 08-1178, 9-24-08)
Secs. 2-705—2-709. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - SEAL OF THE CITY[16] 
Footnotes:
--- (16) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-1539, adopted October 18, 2016, amended article IX
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IX, §§
2-710—2-712, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 14-1420,
adopted February 11, 2014.
Sec. 2-710. - Seal of the city.
   As provided for in section
19.2 of the Charter of the City of Dearborn, until otherwise provided by the
council, the present seal of the city shall remain the seal of the city and be
maintained by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 16-1539, 10-18-2016)
Sec. 2-711. - Policy on use of the seal of the city.
   (a)   The seal of the city may be used by the city, its departments, and by
its elected officials in their official capacity.
      (1)   No individual may use the seal of the city in conjunction with his
or her fundraising activities.
(Ord. No. 16-1539, 10-18-2016)
Sec. 2-712. - Facsimiles or reproductions.
   No facsimile or reproduction of the seal of the city shall be used in a
manner unconnected with official functions of the city.
(Ord. No. 16-1539, 10-18-2016)
Sec. 2-713. - Penalty.
   Violation of this article is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 16-1539, 10-18-2016)
Secs. 2-714—2-719. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - CANCELLATION OF INVOICES
Sec. 2-720. - Invoices issued in error.
   An invoice that has been issued in error may be cancelled by the director of
the department issuing the invoice, or his or her designee.
   Issued in error as used in this article, includes, but is not limited to,
invoices issued to the incorrect address, issued to the incorrect property
owner, or issued because of contractor error.
(Ord. No. 16-1540, 9-20-2016)
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public highways and
streets, §
14-132; alcoholic beverages in parks, §
15-25.
State Law reference— Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. - False representation of age by minors.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city under the age of
21 years to falsely represent himself to be of the age of 21 years or over when
purchasing, offering to purchase or attempting to purchase or procure beer,
wine or other alcoholic beverages for the purpose of securing a sale thereof,
to himself.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false representation
in order to procure the sale or furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages to a person under the age of 21 years.
(Ord. No. 81-126, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 3-2. - Consumption, possession, etc., in public property; permit.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, use, sell or have in
his possession in any public park or playground or property of the city any
alcoholic beverage unless specifically authorized by permit issued in strict
accordance with the rules provided in this section.
   (b)   Any person desiring to consume, use, sell or possess alcoholic
beverages on any public park or playground or city property shall first make
application to the director of recreation. The application shall contain the
name and address of the applicant, identify the city facility desired to be
used and the date and time at which alcoholic beverages will be consumed, used,
sold or possessed on the public park or playground or other city property. The
director of recreation shall review the request and issue a permit if it is
determined that the activity can be carried on at the particular location on
the date and time requested in a peaceful and orderly fashion, and in such a
manner as to not disrupt or disturb the public peace. Any permit granted under
the terms of this section can and shall be revoked by the director of
recreation or the chief of police if the particular group and/or activity
causes a disturbance of the public peace.
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of every applicant for a permit under
the terms of this section to secure any license required under state law for
the sale of any alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. No. 81-129, §§ 1—3, 11-4-81)
Secs. 3-3—3-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1502, adopted November 24, 2015, amended article II
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§
3-21—3-31, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 90-506,
adopted November 20, 1990; Ord. No. 96-686, adopted October 10, 1996; Ord. No.
08-1163, adopted May 19, 2008 and Ord. No. 11-1330, adopted June 20, 2011.
Sec. 3-21. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish a policy and procedure for the
renewal, revocation and transfer of licenses for sales of intoxicating liquor
for consumption on the premises in the city.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-22. - Renewals—City investigation.
   In December of each year, the city administration shall cause the following
investigation to be made relative to each existing license for sales of
intoxicating liquor on the premises in the city:
      (1)   An inspection of the premises to determine whether the licensee is
in compliance with all applicable city and state codes. All inspection reports
for the prior 12-month period shall be obtained, including reports generated by
the county health department.
      (2)   An inspection of the premises to determine that the licensee is in
compliance with the license itself, its approved site plan and plan of
operation as well as any conditions imposed by the city or the liquor control
commission at the time of issuance or transfer of the license.
      (3)   An inspection to determine the general condition of the licensed
premises, both interior and exterior.
      (4)   An inspection of the city's records to determine whether all taxes
and other monies due the city are timely paid.
      (5)   An inspection of police files or other sources of information to
determine whether any activity in connection with the licensed premises is in
violation of the law, disturbs the public peace and tranquility or contributes
to the disruption of the normal activities of those in the neighborhood of the
licensed premises.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-23. - Same—City council.
   In January of each year, the city council will consider the renewal of all
existing licenses for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises in the
city. The council will review the information and other investigative materials
collected by the city administration as detailed in section
3-22. Following its review of this material, the city council may adopt a
resolution to establish a public hearing date to consider objecting to the
renewal of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises by
the liquor control council. If such action is taken by the city council, its
resolution shall:
      (1)   State the reasons why the city council is considering action which
would result in the city council objecting to the renewal of the license;
      (2)   State the date, time and place for the public hearing when the city
council will consider taking action to object to the renewal of the license;
      (3)   Direct the city administration to inform the licensee in writing
that he may submit any written material for consideration by the city council
prior to the date of the public hearing or at the hearing, that the licensee
may appear in person at the hearing or be represented by counsel, and that the
licensee may present witnesses or written evidence at the hearing.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-24. - Procedure for objecting to renewal or requesting revocation of
liquor license or permit.
   Prior to filing an objection with the liquor control commission to renew or
request the revocation of a liquor license, the city council shall do the
following:
      (1)   Serve the licensee by first class mail, at least ten days prior to
the hearing, with a written notice of the hearing, which notice shall contain
the following information:
         a.   Notice of proposed action;
         b.   Reasons for the proposed action;
         c.   Date, time and location of hearing; and
         d.   A statement that at the hearing the licensee may present
witnesses, evidence and arguments on his behalf and confront adverse witnesses
and that the licensee has the right to be represented by counsel.
      (2)   Hold a hearing as scheduled with the licensee present. The city
council may consider the investigation and other materials prepared by the city
administration pursuant to section
3-22, which materials shall be made available to the licensee. The city council
may also hear from members of the administration, other governmental agencies
or the public and the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to question
those who present information or other evidence to the city council. The
licensee shall be given an opportunity to be represented by counsel and to
present witnesses, evidence and arguments and shall be allowed to confront
adverse witnesses. The public shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to
comment upon the issues before the city council.
      (3)   Following the hearing, the city council shall make a written
resolution as to its findings and determination and shall by first class mail
forward a copy of the same to the licensee and the liquor control commission.
In cases where the city council's determination is to object to the renewal of
the license, a copy of the resolution shall be sent to the licensee and the
state liquor control commission and must be received by the state liquor
control commission no later than March 31.
      (4)   If the city council determines that a recommendation of nonrenewal
or request for revocation is to be filed with the state liquor control
commission, it shall forward the following documents to the state liquor
control commission:
         a.   A certified copy of the notice of hearing sent to the licensee;
         b.   A certified copy of the resolution adopted by the city council
objecting to the renewal of the license or requesting that the license be
revoked and, if there is a separate statement of findings, a certified copy of
the statement of findings shall be included;
         c.   A copy of this article, including the date of adoption of the
ordinance from which this article was derived and the date of publication of
such ordinance; and
         d.   A proof of service demonstrating that the notice of hearing was
sent to the licensee.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-25. - Same—Standards.
   The city council may object to renewal of a license for consumption of
intoxicating liquor on the premises for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Licensee's failure to comply with all applicable city and state
laws concerning health, safety, moral conduct or public welfare.
      (2)   Licensee's repeated violations of state liquor laws.
      (3)   Licensee's maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises, including but not limited to any of the following:
         a.   Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes;
         b.   A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed
premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order, and
tranquility of the neighborhood;
         c.   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being deposited upon
adjoining premises;
         d.   Entertainment on the licensed premises without a permit and/or
entertainment which disturbs the peace, order and tranquility in the
neighborhood of the licensed premises;
         e.   Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the
licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to
disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the
disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed
premises;
         f.   Numerous police contacts with the licensed premises or the
patrons of the premises;
         g.   Failure to adequately staff and control the premises; and
         h.   The conditions or practices of the business present immediate
health and safety issues.
      (4)   Licensee's failure to permit the inspection of the licensed
premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement
of the city Code.
      (5)   Licensee's failure to comply with the terms of its liquor license
or any conditions imposed by the city council or the liquor control commission
at the time of issuance or transfer of the license.
      (6)   Licensee's failure to comply with all standards and plans
established and approved by the city council at the time of original approval
or transfer of the license.
      (7)   Licensee's failure to timely pay its taxes or other monies due the
city.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-26. - Revocation.
   A license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises may be
revoked by the city council for licensee's violation of any of the standards
set forth in subsections 3-25(1) through (7) following a public hearing
conducted in conformance with the procedures established in section
3-24.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-27. - Transfers—Standards.
   Approval of the city council is required for all transfers of licenses for
consumption of intoxicating liquor on premises including, but not limited to:
ownership of the license; stock in a corporation that owns a license; interest
in a license through any entity; or location of the licensed premises.
Applications for a transfer shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk.
An application for transfer of a license for consumption of intoxicating liquor
on the premises will be considered by the city council based on the following
standards:
      (1)   An applicant will be given consideration only if he proposes to
provide and continues to provide for the service of meals to be consumed on the
premises.
      (2)   The location proposed and methods of operation must not
detrimentally and unreasonably impact nearby property owners, businesses and
residents.
      (3)   All applicable health and safety codes and ordinances, including
zoning, must be met.
      (4)   Applicants will be required to submit a detailed plan of proposed
operation as part of their application for transfer, which shall include a plot
plan of the site, a plan for any proposed change in exterior and interior
design, lay-out of any proposed change to ancillary facilities and a general
operational statement outlining the proposed manner in which the establishment
will be operated, including a schedule of the hours of operation, crowd control
plans, use of the facility, parking provisions and the estimated cost of any
proposed improvements.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-28. - Same—Procedure.
   (a)   Each applicant for transfer of a license for consumption of
intoxicating liquor on the premises must make an application to the city clerk
on forms provided by the city. This application is in addition to any
application required by the liquor control commission.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an application for transfer, the city clerk will refer
it to the department of law, department of law planning division, police chief,
economic and community development department, finance department treasury
division, department of public works water division, fire chief, the county
department of health, and such other city officers, employees or departments
who shall cause a thorough investigation of the applicant to be made, including
a complete history of past business experience and liquor law violations, if
any.
   (c)   The applicant will be required to reimburse the city for the cost of
its investigation prior to consideration of the transfer request by the city
council. The fee shall be established by resolution adopted by the city
council.
   (d)   The applicant will be required to appear before the city council, make
a written presentation concerning the plans for the operation of the licensed
premises and answer any questions pertaining to such plans.
   (e)   If the city council is satisfied that the transfer of the license for
consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises will constitute an asset to
the community and meets the standards of this article, it will adopt a
resolution approving transfer of the license, subject to any conditions stated
in the resolution. Once the city council approves the transfer of a license, a
copy of the resolution shall be sent to the liquor control commission. The
applicant must comply with all representations made to the city council as part
of his request for transfer. If, following transfer of a license for
consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises it is determined that the
project was not completed as required by plans and specifications presented to
the city council or in compliance with the representations made to the city
council, the city council may consider objecting to the renewal of the license
for the following year.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-29. - Same—Duty of continuing compliance.
   Successful applicants for transfer of a license for consumption of
intoxicating liquor on the premises or a permit endorsement to said license
shall continue to comply with all city and state codes and the standards set
forth in this division, including the written plan of operation submitted to
the city and any representations made to the city council in obtaining the
requested transfer. Licensee's failure to comply with all codes or variation
from the written plan of operation may result in the refusal of the city
council to renew a license or revocation of the license.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-30. - Permit endorsements.
   Any and all permit endorsements to a license for consumption of intoxicating
liquor on premises require the approval of the city council. Applications for
permit endorsements shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. An
application for a permit endorsement to a license for consumption of
intoxicating liquor on the premises will be considered by the city council
based on the following standards:
      (1)   An applicant will be given consideration only if he proposes to
provide and continues to provide for the service of meals to be consumed on the
premises.
      (2)   The location proposed and methods of operation must not
detrimentally and unreasonably impact nearby property owners, businesses and
residents.
      (3)   All applicable health and safety codes and ordinances, including
zoning, must be met.
      (4)   Applicants will be required to submit a detailed plan of proposed
operation as part of their application for permit endorsement, which shall
include a plot plan of the site, a plan for any proposed change in exterior and
interior design, lay-out of any proposed change to ancillary facilities and a
general operational statements outlining the proposed manner in which the
establishment will be operated, including a schedule of the hours of operation,
crowd control plans, use of the facility, parking provisions and the estimated
cost of any proposed improvements.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Sec. 3-31. - Same—Procedure.
   (a)   Each applicant for transfer of a permit endorsement to a license for
consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises must make an application to
the city clerk on forms provided by the city. This application is in addition
to any application required by the liquor control commission.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an application for transfer, the city clerk will refer
it to the department of law, department of law planning division, police chief,
economic and community development department, finance department treasury
division, department of public works water division, fire chief, the county
department of health, and such other city officers, employees or departments
who shall cause a thorough investigation of the applicant to be made, including
a complete history of past business experience and liquor law violations, if
any.
   (c)   The applicant will be required to reimburse the city for the cost of
its investigation prior to consideration of the transfer request by the city
council. The fee shall be established by resolution adopted by the city
council.
   (d)   The applicant will be required to appear before the city council, make
a written presentation concerning the plans for the operation of the licensed
premises and answer any questions pertaining to such plans.
   (e)   If the city council is satisfied that the permit endorsement to the
license for consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises will constitute
an asset to the community and meets the standards of this article, it will
adopt a resolution approving the permit endorsement to the license, subject to
any conditions stated in the resolution. Once the city council approves the
permit endorsement to a license, a copy of the resolution shall be sent to the
liquor control commission. The applicant must comply with all representations
made to the city council as part of his request for the permit endorsement. If,
following a permit endorsement to a license for consumption of intoxicating
liquor on the premises it is determined that the project was not completed as
required by plans and specifications presented to the city council or in
compliance with the representations made to the city council, the city council
may consider objecting to the renewal of the license for the following year.
(Ord. No. 15-1502, 11-24-15)
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290;
crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. - Keeping of animals—Permit required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be kept within the
city any exotic, wild and dangerous animals including but not limited to
hedgehogs, skunks, raccoons, chipmunks, alligators, tigers, lions, monkeys,
constrictor snakes.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be kept within the
city any farm animals, including but not limited to cows, horses, pigs,
potbellied pigs, goats, sheep, pigeons or fowl, or any other domestic animals
or insects, except birds, dogs, cats and other harmless domestic pets, without
first obtaining a permit from the director of residential services. On the
granting of this permit, the fowl or animals in question must not be allowed to
run at large or create any condition, affect the conduct or disturb in any way
any neighbor or human being, cause any nuisance as herein declared, or cause
any condition that might be unwholesome or in any way affect the health,
happiness and well-being of the surrounding neighborhood. The director of
residential services shall have the power to suspend the above mentioned permit
when a nuisance is being or has been thereby created, and to cause any such
nuisance to be abated.
(Ord. No. 81-69, § 2.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 13-1383, 2-12-13)
Sec. 4-2. - Same—Sanitary conditions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, continue or
maintain, or aid in causing, creating, continuing or maintaining any nuisance
within the city due to the ownership, harboring or keeping of animals. All
manure shall be removed, stored and disposed of expediently and in such manner
so as to prevent the breeding or harboring of insects, vermin or rodents.
      (1)   A person who violates this subsection shall be subject to the
penalties identified in the fine schedule as defined in section
4-6.
   (b)   No structure constructed for the purpose of harboring animal or fowl,
shall be erected within 25 feet of any dwelling, nor shall such a structure be
erected without prior approval of the zoning board of appeals, and compliance
with all relevant ordinances.
      (1)   A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 90-489, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 13-1407, 8-13-13)
Sec. 4-3. - Animal shelter.
   (a)   There is hereby established, under the jurisdiction and control of the
police department an animal shelter which shall be under the supervision of the
police department's ordinance division supervisor. Such shelter may be managed
and operated by civilians pursuant to a contractual service agreement. All
animals that may be found running at large, or which may be unlicensed in the
city, all vicious, dangerous or diseased animals, and all animals owned, kept,
possessed or harbored contrary to the terms and provision of this chapter shall
be impounded at this shelter.
   (b)   It is the duty of the police department's ordinance division
supervisor, other members of the police department, and the health officer to
enforce, or cause to be enforced, the terms and provisions of this chapter.
Every police officer is charged with the duty of reporting to the animal
shelter supervisor all stray, vicious or unlicensed animals. Persons in charge
or employed at the animal shelter shall be considered auxiliary civilian
members of the police department.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of all persons immediately to notify and turn
over all such stray animals or animals kept or harbored in violation of the
provisions of this chapter to the animal shelter supervisor, and all such
persons giving notice may temporarily confine such animals until the animal
shelter supervisor or animal warden arrives. Upon taking all such animals into
custody, the animal shelter supervisor shall register or cause to be registered
such animals, if appropriate, forthwith and notify their respective owners, if
any, at their registered or other known address.
   (d)   The refusal of any person to deliver or turn over to the animal
shelter supervisor or his subordinates any animal kept or harbored in violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation thereof and
subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 96-663, 4-2-96)
Sec. 4-4. - Redemption or destruction of impounded animals.
   (a)   The owner or person entitled to the custody or return of any impounded
animal may redeem the same at any time before it has been disposed of by paying
an impounding fee, established by the police department, which fee shall
provide for the care, custody and feeding of such animal while impounded;
provided, that no dog shall be released unless and until a license and tag fee
for the current year has been purchased from the city clerk; provided, the
owner or person entitled to demand the same shall exhibit to the person in
charge of the animal shelter satisfactory evidence that the animal has been
immunized against rabies in a manner approved by the health officer. No abused
animal may be redeemed be the person(s) responsible for the abuse.
   (b)   If the animal has not been immunized against rabies in a manner
approved by the health officer, the claimant shall be required to have it
vaccinated and immunized against rabies and present a certificate of
vaccination by a registered veterinary to the animal shelter supervisor within
ten days. Failure to present such certificate of vaccination within the time
specified shall constitute authorization to the animal shelter supervisor or
his employees to impound such animal forthwith wherever it may be found in the
city and to dispose of such animal in accordance with the provisions hereof.
   (c)   The animal shelter supervisor shall keep a careful record of all
animals impounded with their respective descriptions and the disposition made
of each animal, and shall monthly file with the clerk and health officer a
report showing the number of animals impounded, the owner's name and address,
if known, and the description of each animal and the disposition thereof.
   (d)   Every unlicensed animal not released or redeemed from the shelter in
the manner provided in this section within four days after such animal has been
impounded shall be destroyed, and the animal shelter supervisor is hereby
authorized and empowered to destroy all such animals or other animals so
required under the terms hereof, or if in the judgment of the animal shelter
supervisor, the animal has value, it may be sold and the animal shelter
supervisor is hereby authorized to sell such animal at the animal shelter to
the highest bidder.
   (e)   The animal shelter supervisor is hereby authorized to destroy any dog
or other small animal at the request of the owner of same, and the animal
shelter supervisor may require the owner to execute a release holding the city
harmless and shall charge a fee, established by the police department, for the
destruction of each animal; provided, however, that in cases of indigence or
hardship, the animal shelter supervisor is hereby authorized to reduce or waive
such fee.
   (f)   Fee schedules.
      (1)   The police department shall establish a schedule of fees for all
animal related services. Fees shall be based on the expenses incurred in
providing each service.
      (2)   The police department shall review and adjust its schedule of fees
for all animal related services at the beginning of each calendar year. The
schedule of fees shall be approved by the chief of police prior to adoption.
(Ord. No. 96-663, 4-2-96)
Sec. 4-5. - Disposition of bodies of animals.
   The animal shelter supervisor shall make provisions for the burial, carrying
away or other disposal of the bodies of all animals that have been destroyed.
(Ord. No. 96-663, 4-2-96)
Sec. 4-6. - Fine schedule defined.
"Fine schedule" as used in this chapter shall mean as follows:
   First offense civil infraction ..... $75.00
   Second offense civil infraction ..... 100.00
   Third offense civil infraction ..... 250.00
   Fourth and subsequent 93-day misdemeanor as defined in section
1-9.
(Ord. No. 13-1407, 8-13-13)
Secs. 4-7—4-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.
Sec. 4-21. - Prima facie evidence of ownership.
   In all prosecutions for violation of this article, the records in the
clerk's office showing the name of the owner and the license number to whom any
license was issued, and the license tag affixed to the collar or harness of the
dog showing a corresponding number shall be prima facie evidence of the
ownership of any dog.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 4-22. - Leash, immunization required; liability of owner; evidence of
negligence.
   (a)   Dogs are not permitted in city parks except the Dearborn Dog Park.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to verified service dogs.
   (b)   Dogs are not permitted on public highways or streets unless held
securely by a leash of suitable strength and length by the dog's owner or other
responsible person and unless the dog has been immunized against rabies.
   (c)   The owner of a dog shall be liable for any injury it inflicts on a
person or dog, regardless of the former viciousness of the dog or the owner's
knowledge of such viciousness, in accordance with state law, MCL § 287.321 et
seq., and MCL § 287.351.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 13-1407, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 16-1549, 10-
4-16)
Sec. 4-23. - License required; number of dogs allowed. 
   (a)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess,
keep or harbor a dog six (6) months old and over within the limits of the city
without first having obtained a license therefor from the city clerk, and
without first fully complying with all the provisions of this article and any
and all rules and regulations promulgated and established by the health officer
of the city relative to the keeping or harboring of dogs; provided, however,
that all persons moving into, with the intention of permanently establishing
their residence within, the corporate limits of the city and owning, keeping,
harboring or possessing any dog or dogs six (6) months old and over shall apply
forthwith to the city clerk for a dog license if the animal has not been
licensed for the current year elsewhere in the state. If such animal has been
thus licensed, such owner shall register such animal with the city clerk.
   (b)   Application. The application for a license under this article shall be
made with the city clerk unless otherwise indicated, and shall be accompanied
with proof that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies by a valid
certificate of vaccination for rabies signed by an accredited and licensed
veterinarian, and payment of a nonrefundable fee identified in section
12-6  of the Code of Ordinances based on the type of license and whether the
dog is sterilized and microchipped.
      (1)   License types. Beginning March 1, 2025, there shall be three (3)
types of dog licenses available:
         a.   Standard license (one (1)-year license). This license expires
annually on March 1 and requires proof of current rabies vaccination that lasts
a minimum of one (1) year, signed by an accredited and licensed veterinarian.
         b.   Three (3)-year license. This license expires three (3) years
after it is issued on March 1 of the third year, and requires proof of current
rabies vaccination that lasts a minimum of three (3) years signed by an
accredited and licensed veterinarian.
         c.   License with automatic renewal (no additional fee). This license
is only available for dogs that have been sterilized and microchipped. The
expiration date of the license shall correlate with subsections (1)a or (1)b
above and is subject to the following:
            i.   The dog’s owner must resubmit proof of current rabies
vaccination in accordance with the expiration of the vaccination after the
license is issued, and no later than March 1 of the expiration year. The rabies
vaccination must be signed by an accredited and licensed veterinarian.
            ii.   If proof of current rabies vaccination is not submitted be
March 1 of the expiring year, the lifetime license shall be considered expired
and void and the owner shall reapply for a new dog license as indicated in this
article.
      (2)   Application to animal shelter. The application for a license under
this article may also be made with the Friends for Animals of Metro Detroit
(aka, “animal shelter”) subject to the following:
         a.   Application shall be made on forms approved by the city clerk.
         b.   Application shall be accompanied with proof that the dog has been
vaccinated against rabies by a valid certificate of vaccination for rabies
signed by an accredited and licensed veterinarian, and payment of a
nonrefundable fee identified in section
12-6.
         c.   The city clerk or animal shelter shall provide a copy of the
official license and, if applicable, license tag to the applicant subject to
the terms and conditions of this article.
      (3)   Fee reduction with proof of sterilization and microchipping. If the
applicant provides proof that their dog has been sterilized or microchipped at
the time of application, the reduced nonrefundable fees identified in section
12-6  will be applied.
      (4)   Sterilization or sterilized. As used in this subsection, the terms
“sterilization” or “sterilized” shall mean a dog that is spayed or neutered.
   (c)   Number of dogs allowed. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
possess, shelter, keep, harbor, or maintain more than three (3) dogs that are
six (6) months of age or older at or within any one (1) residence, dwelling, or
legal property boundary, at any given time.
      Exceptions to subsection (c).
      (1)   This provision shall not apply to duly licensed pet shops, kennels
[Zoning Ord. sections
1.03 and
7.02(J)], veterinarians, veterinarian hospitals, doggie day cares, and/or
boarding facilities.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to short-term dog fostering at a
residence, dwelling, or legal property boundary under the following conditions:
         a.   For the purposes of this subsection, “dog fostering” shall mean a
situation where a person takes temporary ownership of a dog to provide care and
shelter for the dog.
         b.   No more than two (2) dogs may be fostered at any one time,
including in residence, dwelling, or legal property boundaries that already
have three (3) dogs licensed under this section.
         c.   The length any one dog is fostered may not exceed three (3)
months at any particular residence, dwelling, or legal property boundary.
         d.   Under this exception, all dogs at the residence, dwelling, or
legal property, including the dogs being fostered, must be licensed under this
section at all times.
         e.   Contact information of the agency that provided the fostered dog,
including a contact name and phone number, shall be kept at the residence,
dwelling, or legal property boundary and provided if requested by an
enforcement official.
      (3)   This provision shall not apply to short-term dog sitting under the
following conditions:
         a.   For the purposes of this subsection, “dog sitting” shall mean a
situation where a dog is temporarily left at a residence, dwelling, or legal
property boundary that is different from that of the dog’s owner or different
from the address listed on the dog’s license.
         b.   The period of dog sitting under this exception shall not exceed
seven (7) consecutive days.
         c.   Under this exception, no more than five (5) dogs shall be allowed
at any one residence, dwelling, or legal property boundary.
         d.   Under this exception, the dog being temporarily placed for dog
sitting purposes must be licensed under this section.
   (d)   Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be subject to the
following penalties:
      (1)   First violation shall be a civil infraction punishable by a fine of
$75.00.
      (2)   Second violation shall be a civil infraction punishable by a fine
of $100.00.
      (3)   Third and subsequent violations shall be a misdemeanor punishable
by up to 93 days in jail, a fine of up to $500.00, or a combination of both.
   (e)   Appeals. Appeals of any of the regulations of subsection (c) or of any
administrative interpretations and decisions from those regulations shall be
made to city council as follows:
      (1)   Application for appeal. An appeal from the regulations of
subsection (c) shall be made by filing with the council office a written notice
of appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal and the relief sought. If an
appeal is being made from an administrative interpretation or decision,
application shall be made within 20 calendar days after the decision, ruling,
interpretation, notice, or order complained of in the same manner. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim of one or more of the
following:
         a.   That the true intent of the regulations in subsection (c) have
been incorrectly interpreted;
         b.   That the provisions of subsection (c) do not fully apply;
         c.   That the requirements of subsection (c) are adequately satisfied
by other means; or
         d.   That the strict application of any requirements of subsection (c)
would cause undue hardship;
      (2)   Scope and procedure of appeal. The appeal procedure is intended to
provide limited relief from the requirements of subsection (c) in cases where
strict application of a particular requirement shall create an unnecessary
hardship. This procedure is intended to address extraordinary, exceptional, or
unique situations that were not caused by an act or omission of the applicant.
Relief is not to be granted merely on the basis of inconvenience or financial
burden.
      (3)   Other than subsection (c), no other provisions of this section are
appealable to Council.
   (f)   Subsections (c) and (e) shall take effect on April 1, 2024.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 13-1407, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-
8-22; Ord. No. 22- 1777, 10-25-22; Ord. No. 23-1795, 8-22-23; Ord. No. 24-1825,
passed 10-8-24; Ord. No. 25-1844, 6-10-25)
Sec. 4-24. - Term of license.
   The term of the license required by this article, manner of application,
type of license tag issued and the fee therefor shall be governed by the
provisions of the general licensing ordinance for the city.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 4-25. - Collar and license tag.
   Each person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall provide the same
with a substantial collar or harness of durable material to which shall be
securely attached the license tag required in section
4-23. Duplicate license tags in case of loss may be issued by the city clerk at
the expense of the applicant upon the filing of an affidavit of loss by the
applicant. No license tag shall be used on the collar of any dog other than the
one to which the tag was first issued. No person shall remove the collar or tag
from any dog without the consent of the owner or of the party to whom the
license was issued.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 4-26. - Running at large.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog or
dogs owned, possessed, harbored or kept by him to run at large, which shall
mean to wander unrestrained on any streets, alleys, parks or public places
within the city, or upon any private property other than that of the owner of
such dog.
   (b)   A person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties
identified in the fine schedule as defined in section
4-6.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 13-1407, 8-13-13)
Sec. 4-27. - Dangerous dogs; vicious dogs; definitions.
   (a)   Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   Complaint means notification to the city of a potentially dangerous or
vicious dog by filing a report with the police department.
   Dangerous dog means:
      (1)   Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person
would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
      (2)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not
cause serious physical injury.
   Owner means a person, firm, or corporation keeping, possessing, harboring or
having the care or custody of a dog.
   Vicious dog means a dog that, without justification, attacks a person or a
companion animal and causes serious physical injury or death or any individual
dog that has been found to be vicious under sec. 4-27A(b)(2)(i).
(Ord. No. 90-488, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 11-1308, 1-4-11)
State Law reference— Rules for control of rabies and the disposition of
nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.511;
regulation of dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq.
Sec. 4-27A. - Dangerous dog determination.
   (a)   The animal control officer or any police officer shall investigate all
complaints of a dangerous dog. The investigation shall include: within ten
business days of receipt of the complaint, notification to the owner of the
alleged infraction, the fact of the initiation of an investigation, and
affording the owner an opportunity to meet with the manager of the Dearborn
Animal Shelter, or his or her designee, prior to the making of a determination;
gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence; interviewing witnesses; and
completing a detailed report. Upon completion of the investigation, the animal
control officer or police officer may ask the manager of the Dearborn Animal
Shelter, or his or her designee, to deem the dog to be "dangerous." No dog
shall be deemed a "dangerous dog" unless shown to be a dangerous dog by a
preponderance of the evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate notification
of the determination by registered or certified mail. Appeal of such
determination shall be to the 19th District Court and must be taken within 14
days of the date of determination.
   (b)   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the manager of the Dearborn
Animal Shelter, or his or her designee, determines the conduct of the dog was
justified because:
      (1)   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing
a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was committing a
willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property occupied by the
owner of the animal;
      (2)   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring;
      (3)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking
or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
      (4)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
   (c)   If deemed dangerous, the owner shall:
      (1)   Have the dog spayed or neutered within 14 days at the owner's
expense and microchipped, if not already; and
      (2)   Have an evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a
board certified veterinary behaviorist, or other recognized expert in the field
and completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the
expert. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with
evaluations and training ordered under this subsection.
         i.   If evaluation by a behaviorist authorized by this section
determines that a dog has a temperament that could result in unacceptable
aggressive behavior, that dog shall be considered a vicious dog.
   (d)   A dangerous dog may be impounded if the owner fails to comply with the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 11-1308, 1-4-11)
Sec. 4-27B. - Vicious dog determination.
   (a)   The animal control officer or any police officer shall investigate all
complaints of a vicious dog. If the animal control officer or any police
officer has reasonable cause to believe that a dog is vicious, he or she shall
institute proceedings in the 19th District Court requesting the court to
conduct a hearing on whether or not the dog should be declared vicious under
this section. The issue of whether the dog is a vicious dog within the meaning
of this section shall be decided based upon the preponderance of the evidence.
If the court rules the dog to be vicious, it may order that the dog be confined
to the owner's premises or euthanized. The court may establish a time schedule
to ensure compliance with this section, but in no case shall such time exceed
30 days after the date of the court's determination. Court costs for such
action shall be taxed against the owner of the dog. The court may decide all
issues for or against the owner of the dog regardless of the fact that the
owner fails to appear at the hearing, and the determination of the court shall
be final and conclusive upon all parties thereto. If the animal control officer
or police officer has probable cause to believe that the dog in question is
vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic
animals, the animal control officer or police officer may seize and impound the
dog pending the hearing. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the city for
the costs and expenses of keeping such a dog.
   (b)   No dog may not be declared vicious if the court determines the conduct
of the dog was justified because:
      (1)   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the
time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog,
or was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or
property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
      (2)   The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing, assaulting,
or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the past abused,
assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring; or
      (3)   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
   (c)   Requirements for registration. Upon a finding by the court that a dog
is vicious, its owner shall comply with the following requirements for
licensing:
      (1)   License application. The owner shall apply to the city clerk for a
vicious dog license which shall be valid for one year from the date of its
approval provided all conditions of this section and applicable court orders
have been met. The license shall be renewable for successive one-year periods
provided that the dog is to be kept on the same premises under the same
conditions and its owner has not violated any conditions of this section or any
court order during the previous 12-month period. No such license shall be
transferable to a new owner of the dog or to a new location or address where
the dog will be kept.
      (2)   Insurance. Prior to the receipt of a license, the owner shall
present to the city clerk proof that the owner has procured liability insurance
in the amount of at least $100,000.00 covering any damage or injury which may
be caused by such vicious dog during the 12-month period for which licensing is
sought, which policy shall contain a provision naming the city as an additional
insured and shall provide that the city shall be notified by the insurance
company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability
insurance policy. In addition, the owner shall sign a statement attesting that
the owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance
during the 12-month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner
shall cease to keep or harbor the vicious dog prior to the expiration of such
licenses.
      (3)   Signs. Prior to receipt of a license, the owner shall display a
sign in a prominent place on his or her premises warning of a vicious dog on
the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from any
adjacent public right-of-way.
      (4)   Confinement of vicious dog. Prior to the receipt of a license, the
owner shall provide for the confinement of the vicious dog. If the vicious dog
is to be confined outdoors, the dog shall be confined to a pen or structure
with secure sides and top attached to the sides. The structure shall have a
secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the structure shall
be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. The structure shall be
constructed in accordance with standards set forth in chapter 5 and shall be
constructed of materials and be designed so as to prevent any escape of the
animal or entry of young children. In addition, the size and location of the
structure shall comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city
including lot coverage and setback requirements, applicable to accessory
structures. The owner shall keep the structure locked with a padlock or key
lock at all times that the vicious dog is kept inside the structure, and shall
keep the structure adequately lit and in a clean and sanitary condition. If the
vicious dog is to be confined indoors, the vicious dog shall not be kept on a
porch or patio or in any other part of a house or structure that would allow
the dog to exit of its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in
a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen
doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting.
      (5)   Proximity to schools. If the court rules a dog to be vicious, and
the owner of the dog lives within 500 feet of a school, the court may impose
additional regulations to safeguard the public, up to and including ordering
the dog permanently removed from the area.
   (d)   Control of vicious dogs. All vicious dogs shall be confined as
previously described in this section. It shall be unlawful for any owner to
maintain a vicious dog upon any premises which does not have a locked
enclosure, unless such vicious dog is at all times maintained in the owner's
dwelling. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious dog to be
outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is
necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog or to
sell or give away the vicious dog or to comply with commands or directions of
the court, the animal control officer or any police officer with respect to the
vicious dog, or to comply with licensing provisions of this section. In such
event, the vicious dog shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a choker
chain and leash having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not
exceeding three feet in length. The muzzle shall be made and fitted in a manner
that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal. The animal
shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner of a vicious dog
or his agent, either of whom shall be, in any event, a person of 18 years of
age and physically capable of restraining the animal.
   (e)   Reporting requirements. An owner shall notify the police department
immediately upon discovery that a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined,
has attacked another animal or human being, or has been stolen. An owner shall
notify the city clerk in writing within one day if the vicious dog has been
sold or given away or has died, and, if the vicious dog has been sold or given
away to a new owner residing within the city, the owner shall also provide the
city clerk with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the
vicious dog.
   (f)   Penalties for violation. 
      (1)   Failure to comply/show cause hearing. Upon an owner's failure to
comply with any condition in the court order finding a dog to be vicious, the
animal control officer or any police officer shall confiscate the dog and
impound same pending a hearing requiring the owner of the dog to show cause why
the dog should not be immediately destroyed. The owner of the dog shall be
liable to the city for the costs and expenses of keeping such dog. Failure to
comply shall, among other things, include:
         a.   The failure to obtain a vicious dog license in accordance with
this section;
         b.   The failure to secure liability insurance in accordance with this
section;
         c.   The failure to confine the vicious dog to the premises with
appropriate signage in accordance with this section;
         d.   The dog's presence outside of the owner's dwelling or the
enclosure except as provided in this section;
         e.   The failure to comply with the reporting requirements of this
section.
      (2)   Vicious conduct/show cause hearing. If any vicious dog shall, when
unprovoked, kill, wound or assist in killing any domestic animal belonging to
or in the possession of any person, or if any vicious dog shall, when
unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure a human being, the
animal control officer or any police officer shall confiscate and impound the
vicious dog pending a hearing within seven days requiring the owner of the dog
to show cause why the dog should not be destroyed. The owner of the dog shall
be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of keeping such dog.
(Ord. No. 11-1308, 1-4-11)
Sec. 4-28. - Biting dogs.
   (a)   No person shall own or harbor a dog that has been bitten by any animal
known to have been afflicted with rabies, or which shall have bitten any person
or animal.
   (b)   Any person who shall have in his possession a dog or other animal
which has contracted rabies, which has been subjected to the same, which is
suspected of having rabies or which shall have bitten any person or other
animal shall, upon demand of the animal shelter supervisor or of the health
officer produce and surrender such dog to the animal shelter supervisor or
health officer to be held for observation and treatment for a period of ten
days at the animal shelter; provided, however, that with the approval of the
health officer or animal shelter supervisor any such dog or other animal may be
surrendered to a registered veterinary or to any nonprofit corporation
organized for the purpose of sheltering dogs or other animals, for observation
and treatment for a period of at least ten days immediately following the
biting of such person or animal.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 4-29. - Prevention of nuisance.
   A person who owns, possesses or controls a dog shall not permit the dog to
commit a nuisance on a sidewalk of any public place, in a public park or on
private property not under control or ownership of such person.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 6a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 4-30. - Illegal possession.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or hold for reward or for any
person, other than the legal owner, to procure a license for any dog which has
strayed upon the premises of such person, has been picked up on a public
highway or other public place unaccompanied by its owner or other responsible
person or which has been stolen from the owner; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section against harboring and licensing a dog shall not
apply to any nonprofit corporation organized for the purpose of sheltering dogs
or to a legal purchaser of a dog from such organization, or at an authorized
auction sale.
(Ord. No. 81-64, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 4-31. - Dog bite reporting requirements.
   (a)   If a person 18 years of age or older is responsible for controlling
the actions of a dog or wolf-dog cross and the person knows or has reason to
know that the dog or wolf-dog cross has bitten another person, the person shall
immediately provide the person who was bitten with all of the following
information:
      (1)   His or her name and address and, if that person does not own the
dog or wolf-dog cross, the name and address of the dog's or wolf-dog cross's
owner.
      (2)   Information, if known by that person, as to whether the dog or
wolf-dog cross is current on all legally required vaccinations.
   (b)   If a person 18 years of age or older is responsible for controlling
the actions of a dog or wolf-dog cross, or has delegated that responsibility to
someone less than 18 years of age, and the person knows or has reason to know
that the dog or wolf-dog cross has bitten another person, the person shall
remain on the scene until the requirements of subsection (a) are fulfilled.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more that 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500.00 or both.
   (d)   This section does not apply if the person is bitten by a police dog.
As used in this subsection, "police dog" means that term as defined in MCL
750.50c.
   (e)   As used in this section, "dog" and "wolf-dog cross" mean those terms
as defined in Section 2 of the Wolf-Dog Cross Act, 2000 P.A. 246, MCL 287.1002.
(Ord. No. 09-1219, 4-6-09)
Sec. 4-32. - Tethering.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (a)   To attach chains or tethers, restraints or implements directly to a
dog without the proper use of a collar, harness, or other device designed for
that purpose and made from a material that prevents injury to the animal.
   (b)   No person shall:
      (1)   Continuously tether a dog for more than one continuous hour, except
that tethering of the same dog shall resume after a hiatus of three continuous
hours, for up to three hours' total time on tether per day; provided that for
the purpose of tethering a dog, a chain, leash, rope or tether shall be at
least ten feet in length; or
      (2)   Use a tether or any assembly or attachments thereto to tether a dog
that shall weigh more than one-eighth of the animal's body weight, or due to
weight, inhibit the free movement of the animal within the area tethered; or
      (3)   Tether a dog on a choke chain or in such a manner as to cause
injury, strangulation, or entanglement of the dog on fences, trees, or other
man made or natural obstacles; or
      (4)   Tether a dog without access to shade when sunlight is likely to
cause overheating, or appropriate shelter to provide insulation and protection
against cold and dampness when the atmospheric temperature falls below 40
degrees Fahrenheit, or to tether a dog without securing its water supply so
that it cannot be tipped over by the tether; or
      (5)   Tether a dog in an open area where it can be teased by persons or
an open area that does not provide the dog protection from attack by other
animals; or
      (6)   Tether an animal in an area where bare earth is present and no
steps have been taken to prevent the surface from becoming wet and muddy in the
event of precipitation.
   (c)   A person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties
indentified in the fine schedule as defined in section
4-6.
(Ord. No. 11-1309, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 13-1407, 8-13-13)
Sec. 4-33. - Reserved.
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; housing, Ch. 11;
streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; water and sewers, Ch. 19.
State Law reference— State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 5-1. - Legal status.
   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the classification
of all buildings as to use group and type of construction and the definition of
all terms relating thereto in the city.
   (b)   Saving clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the building code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court, any rights acquitted, liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 86-369, §§ 200.1, 200.2, 10-7-86)
Secs. 5-2—5-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE
Sec. 5-26. - Adoption.
   Certain documents, copies of which are on file in the office of the city
clerk, being marked and designated as the Michigan Building Code 2000 edition
along with Appendixes G and H, Michigan Residential Code 2000 edition along
with Appendixes A, B, C, D, E, F, F, G, J and K, 2003 Michigan Rehabilitation
Code for Existing Buildings as amended, 2000 Michigan Plumbing Code, 2000
Michigan Mechanical Code are hereby adopted in their entirety along with any
subsequent amendments as the building code of the city for the control of
buildings and structures; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the above are hereby referred to, adopted,
and make a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 86-369, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 94-618, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 97-702, 5-20-
97; Ord. No. 03-927, 4-1-03)
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3
(k).
Sec. 5-27. - Additions, insertions and changes.
   The following sections of the Michigan Building Code, 2000 Edition, adopted
in this article are hereby added or revised as follows:
    (1)   Section 107.1. Permits required. Permits shall be obtained before
starting work in the city, and such permits must be displayed in the front
window or other prominent place on the job site, clearly visible from the
street. Failure to obtain a proper permit before commencing work or failure to
properly display a permit on the job site will be deemed a violation of this
code. In such cases a "Stop Work" sign will immediately be posted, and no
further work will be permitted until such time as proper permits are obtained
and/or displayed and all required fees paid. Refer to Section 1.05 of the 2000
Michigan Building Code for Permits required.
      a.   Changing the established grade level of any lot or part of any lot.
Whenever, in the opinion of the building official or the city engineer, such
proposed changing of the grade level will tend to create a nuisance or hazard
to the adjoining property or to the public health, welfare and safety, no
permit shall be issued.
      b.   The temporary obstruction of any street or sidewalk required by any
building operation. Notice of all such permits shall be transmitted to the
police and fire departments.
      c.   The construction or installation of all above or below ground
storage tanks, vaults, or containers.
      In computing the time limit listed in this section, the contractor shall
not have charged against him any delays caused by good faith labor disputes,
strikes, or acts of God.
   (2)   Section 108.8. Display of permit. With each and every permit issued
for building or other structures, the department shall issue to the owner or
their agent a weatherproof card properly filled out, and it shall be their duty
to place such card in a conspicuous place on the premises before the
construction work is started and maintain it while the building operation is in
progress, the card to be unobstructed from the public view and to be accessible
to the inspector.
   (3)   Section 111.5. Building grade requirements. Subsequent to the issuance
of a building permit and prior to the commencement of construction, the permit
holder, or their authorized agent, shall set survey stakes on the property
which shall delineate the building grade in conformance with the approved plot
plan.
   (4)   Section 111.6. Grading requirements. No holder of any permit shall
receive a final inspection or final certificate of occupancy until the property
upon which the building or structure is located has been graded in strict
compliance with the approved individual plot plan and the requirements of this
code.
   (5)   Section 112.3.1. Fees. All fees for permits, licenses and inspections
are contained in chapter 9 of this Code.
   (6)   Section 113.2. Required inspections. It shall be the duty of the
holder of every permit for a building or other structure or installation to
notify the building and safety department, 24 hours prior to the time for which
an appointment for inspection is being made, by giving the street address,
permit number, and type of inspection requested.
   (7)   Section 116.4. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of not more than $500.00, plus costs, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (8)   Section 117.2. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than
$500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both, plus costs.
   (9)   Section 121.2. Membership of the board. The membership of the building
board of appeals shall consist of five members and two alternates appointed by
the mayor in accordance with the city charter and confirmed by the city
council. One member shall be a licensed contractor, one a professional
architect and one a professional engineer.
   (10)   Section 121.2.3. Chairman of board. The board shall select one of its
members to serve as chairman for a period of one year or until their successor
has been selected, and the building official shall designate a clerk from the
department to serve as secretary to the board, who shall keep a detailed record
of all proceedings.
   (11)   Section 121.4.1. Powers and duties of the board. The building board
of appeals shall hear, review, decide and determine the following matters from
building, mechanical, refrigeration, electrical, plumbing, fire, boiler and
property maintenance codes:
      a.   Appeals from a decision of the building official refusing to grant a
modification to the provisions of this code covering the matter of construction
materials to be used in the erection, alteration or repair of a building or
structure.
      b.   All other matters which the board is required to review or act upon
under this code or any other ordinance of the city.
   (12)   Section 121.4.2. Application for appeal. The owner of a building or
structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the building
official refusing to grant a modification to the provisions of this code
covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection,
alteration or repair of a building or structure to the building board of
appeals. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that: the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted pursuant to this code have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code does not fully apply,
or an equally good or better form of construction can be used. An appeal must
be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed from, by filing
with the building official and the board a notice of appeal specifying the
ground thereof, and paying a filing fee.
   (13)   Section 121.6. Decision of board. Three members of the board shall
constitute a quorum, and the board shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision
of the building official by a concurring vote of three members.
   (14)   Section 121.6.1. Resolution of board. Every action of the board shall
be by resolution, and copies shall be furnished to the appellant.
   (15)   Section 121.7. Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of
the board may apply to the appropriate court for a review of such decision.
Application for review shall be made to the appropriate court within 20 days
after the filing of the board's decision in the office of the building
official.
   (16)   Section 916.1. Fire hydrants. Change six inches to eight inches.
   (17)   Section 3407.2. Unlawful to move building without permit. It shall be
unlawful to move a building in the city form its foundation to some other
location either within or outside the city, unless from the building official;
provided however, that in case of used houses or structures which were
constructed outside the city, such houses or structures shall not be moved into
the city within the intention of being temporarily or permanently located
therein unless and until a permit to do so is first obtained from the council
of the city.
   (18)   Section 3407.3. Permits to move buildings. Except as otherwise
provided in this code, any building in a good physical condition may be moved
from one location to another after a permit has been obtained from the building
official and after the payment of the prescribed fee therefore had been made.
Such building may be moved upon the public streets when a permit has been
obtained from the building official approving moving such building through any
such public streets, alleys or other public property.
   (19)   Section 3407.4. Approval of application. Before a permit shall be
issued by the department of building and safety for the moving of any building
or structure through or upon any public street, alley or other public property
in the city, the application therefore must be approved by the chief of the
fire department, the chief of the police department, the health officer of the
city and the director of building and safety.
   (20)   Dangerous building prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner or agent
thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof that is a dangerous
building as defined in subsection (21).
   (21)   Dangerous buildings defined. As used in subsections (20) to (24),
"dangerous building" means a building or structure that has one or more of the
following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions:
      a.   A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not
conform to the approved fire code of the city.
      b.   A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind,
flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause so that
the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is
appreciably less than it was before the damage and does not meet the minimum
requirements of this act or a building code of the city for a new building or
structure, purpose, or location.
      c.   A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become
detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property.
      d.   A portion of the building or structure has settled to an extent that
walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially
less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by
this act or a building code of the city.
      e.   The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal
or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for
other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of
the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall
or give way.
      f.   The building, structure, or a part of the building or structure is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
      g.   The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood, is
dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who
might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor
for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to
the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral
act.
      h.   A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or for other reason, is unsanitary
or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the Building and Safety
Department or health officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease,
or is likely to injure the health, safety, or general welfare of people living
in the dwelling.
      i.   A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or
window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
      j.   A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale,
lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the
occupational code, 1980 PA 299, MCL 339.2401 to 339.2518. For purposes of this
subdivision, "building or structure" includes, but is not limited to, a
residential, commercial, or industrial buildings or structures. This
subdivision does not apply to either of the following:
         (i)   A building or structure if the owner or agent does both of the
following:
            (A)   Notifies a local law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction
the building or structure is located that the building or structure will remain
unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given to
the local law enforcement agency by the owner or agent not more that 30 days
after the building or structure becomes unoccupied.
            (B)   Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and
adjoining grounds in accordance with this act or a building code of the city.
         (ii)   A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied
for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies a local law
enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the dwelling is located that the
dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more
each year. An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this subparagraph
shall notify the law enforcement agency not more that 30 days after the
dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subparagraph,
"secondary dwelling" means a dwelling, including, but not limited to, a
vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or
a member of the owner's family during part of a year.
   (22)   Notice.
      a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building
or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the enforcing agency shall
issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building.
      b.   The notice shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee that is
registered with the city. If an owner, agent, or lessee is not registered, the
notice shall be serviced on each owner of or party in interest in the building
or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax
assessment records and all parties in interest on a title commitment.
      c.   The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether
the building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the
notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why
the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be
demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained.
      d.   Hearing officer; filing of notice with officer. The hearing officer
shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at their pleasure. The hearing officer
shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but not
limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or
member of a community housing organization. An employee of the enforcing agency
shall not be appointed as hearing officer. The enforcing agency shall file a
copy of the notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building with
the hearing officer.
      e.   The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person
to whom the notice is directed either personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address
shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail,
a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the
building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in
interest at least 10 days before the date of the hearing included in the
notice.
   (23)   Hearing; testimony; decision.
      a.   At a hearing prescribed by subsection (22), the hearing officer
shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any
interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or
ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly
maintained.
      b.   If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure
should be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained, the hearing
officer shall enter an order that specifies what action the owner, agent, or
lessee shall take and sets a date by which the owner, agent, or lessee shall
comply with the order. If the building is a dangerous building under subsection
(22), the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the exterior of the
building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building including,
but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees, and shrubs.
      c.   If the owner, agent, or lessee fails to appear or neglects or
refuses to comply with the order issued under subsection b. herein, the hearing
officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the
city council not more than five days after the date for compliance set in the
order and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. If the
city council has established a demolition board of appeals under subsection
(26), the hearing officer shall file the report of the findings and a copy of
the order with the board of appeals and request that necessary action be taken
to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer
shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in
subsection (22).
      d.   The city council or the demolition board of appeals of the city, as
applicable, shall set a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed
in subsection (21) for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing
officer. The city council or the board of appeals shall give notice to the
owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in subsection (22) of the time
and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent, or lessee shall be
given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The
city council or the demolition board of appeals of the city shall either
approve, disapprove, or modify the order. If the city council or the demolition
board of appeals approves or modifies the order, the city shall take all
necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified,
the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after
the date of the hearing under this subsection. For an order of demolition, if
the city council or the demolition board of appeals of the city determines that
the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind,
flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause, and the
cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state
equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent, or lessee shall
comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the
hearing under this subsection. If the estimated cost of repair exceeds the
state equalized value of the building or structure to be repaired, a rebuttable
presumption that the building or structure requires immediate demolition
exists.
      e.   The cost of demolition includes, but is not limited to, fees paid to
hearing officers, costs of title searches or commitments used to determine the
parties in interest, recording fees for notices and liens filed with the county
register of deeds, demolition and dumping charges, court reporter attendance
fees, and costs of the collection of the charges authorized under this act. The
cost of demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior
of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure
incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this act shall
be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the
property appears.
      f.   The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears
upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of
the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the
building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records.
If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after
mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall
have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the property into
conformance with this act. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the
lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this
subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and
encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same
manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act,
1893 PA 206, MCL 211.1 to 211.157.
      g.   In addition to other remedies under this act, the city may bring an
action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the
demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the
building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city
shall have a lien on the property for the amount of the judgment obtained under
this subsection. The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect
until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does
not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances.
   (24)   Enforcement of judgment against other assets; lien; effectiveness;
priority.
      a.   A judgment in an action brought pursuant to subsection (23)g. may be
enforced against assets of the owner other than the building or structure.
      b.   The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained
pursuant to subsection (23)g. against the owner's interest in all real property
located in this state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the
building or structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided
for in this section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or
recorded as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior
filed or recorded liens and encumbrances.
   (25)   Noncompliance with order as misdemeanor; penalties. A person who
fails or refuses to comply with an order approved or modified by the city
council or demolition board of appeals under subsection (23) within the time
prescribed by that section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 120 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000.00,
or both.
   (26)   Board of apeals.
      a.   The city council hereby establishes and creates a demolition board
of appeals to hear all the cases and carry out all of the duties of the city
council described in subsection (23).
      b.   The board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by
the city council and shall consist of the following members:
         (i)   A building contractor.
         (ii)   A registered architect or engineer.
         (iii)   A member of the general public.
         (iv)   A member of the City Council or its designee.
         (v)   An individual registered as a building official, plan reviewer,
or inspector under the building officials and inspectors registration act, Act
No. 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, being sections 338.2301 to 338.2313 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws. The individual may be an employee of the enforcing
agency.
      c.   Board of appeals members shall be appointed for three years, except
that of the members first appointed, two members shall serve for one year, two
members shall serve for two years, and one member shall serve for three years.
A vacancy created other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the
balance of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. A
member may be reappointed for additional terms.
      d.   The board of appeals annually shall elect a chairperson, vice-
chairperson, and other officers that the board considers necessary.
      e.   A majority of the board of appeals members appointed and serving
constitutes a quorum. Final action of the board of appeals shall be only by
affirmative vote of a majority of the board members appointed and serving.
      f.   The city council shall fix the amount of any per diem compensation
provided to the members of the board of appeals.
   (27)   Appeals. An owner aggrieved by a final decision or order of the city
council or the demolition board of appeals under subsection (23) may appeal the
decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of
superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision.
(Ord. No. 86-369, § 3, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 94-619, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 98-740, 10-6-
98; Ord. No. 02-878, 2-5-02; Ord. No. 03-928, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 04-999, 3-16-04;
Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Sec. 5-28. - Posted property; unlawful to remove posting.
   It shall be unlawful to remove, alter, deface and/or destroy any notice
posted on property under authority of the City Code of Ordinances, including
but not limited to "Unlawful to Occupy," "Illegal Occupancy," "Unfit for Human
Habitation," "Dangerous and Unsafe" and "Stop Work," unless directed by the
director of the department of building and safety or their designee.
A violation of this section shall be misdemeanor offense.
(Ord. No. 06-1071, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Sec. 5-29. - Nonresidential building inspection and occupancy requirements.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      (1)   "Building with independent units" shall mean a building with one or
more spaces occupied or designed to be occupied independently of the other
units, and which are independently serviced by utilities, regardless of whether
each unit is identified by a separate street address or by a suite number.
      (2)   "Multipurpose common building" shall mean a building with a common
address and suites that are serviced by common utilities.
   (b)   Certificate of occupancy required. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to occupy or reoccupy, or for any owner or agent
thereof, to permit the occupation or reoccupation of any building or part
thereof, for any nonresidential purpose until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the economic and community development department.
   (c)   Certificate of occupancy required for sale or transfer. It shall be
unlawful for anyone, including, but not limited to, the owner, attorney,
representative lending institution, title company, real estate firm, broker, or
salesman to assist in consummating a sale, transfer, lease, or other
transaction involving nonresidential real property in the city regardless of
where the closing of the sale or lease occurs, without first presenting the
purchaser or tenant with a copy of the inspection report or certificate of
occupancy issued by the economic and community development department within
six months prior to the date of such sale, lease, or transfer.
      (1)   Ownership change: application for name change in lieu of inspection
when no change in use or tenant. When the ownership information contained on a
nonresidential certificate of occupancy changes as a result of the sale of a
building, transfer between corporate entities, or any other event, and the
ownership change does not result in a change in the occupancy, use, or tenancy
of the building, the requirement of an inspection for sale may be waived
provided that the new owner files an application with the economic and
community development department for an owner name change, and submits the fee
for a name change according to the schedule provided in chapter 9 of this Code.
The owner of a building with independent units shall apply for a name change
for the certificates of occupancy of each unit within the building. The owner
of a multipurpose common building shall obtain a name change on the certificate
of occupancy for the building as a whole. A certificate of occupancy name
change will not alter the schedule for interval inspections provided for in
this Code.
         a.   Any building for which outstanding code violations exist, and/or
which do not have a final certificate of occupancy for the building or any part
thereof, and/or which have only a temporary certificate of occupancy for any
building or part thereof shall not be eligible for a name change in lieu of
inspection until all outstanding violations are corrected. If outstanding
violations remain upon the closing of the sale, transfer, or lease of the
building, the new owner or lessee shall correct those violations before a
certificate of occupancy is issued, and a full certificate of occupancy
inspection will also be required.
         b.   An owner who fails to apply for a name change and submit the
required fee, or who voluntarily requests a certificate of occupancy inspection
for sale shall be deemed to have waived the option to submit an application for
name change in lieu of inspection, and shall be required to correct all
violations identified in the inspection report as a condition of obtaining a
final certificate of occupancy for the building and its units.
      (2)   Period of validity. A final nonresidential certificate of occupancy
shall remain in effect for the life of the building or structure, or part
thereof, as long as the specific operation conducted within the building or
structure or use of the land continues, except that the certificate of
occupancy of a building or structure, or part thereof, that is found to have
code violations during an interval inspection shall be deemed a temporary
certificate of occupancy that shall expire 90 days after the date of the
inspection report unless the building official determines that all violations
identified on the inspection report have been corrected, or an extension of
time for compliance with the inspection report has been granted by the building
official.
   (d)   Interval inspections. The building official shall cause to be
inspected from time to time, and as nearly as possible once a year, as
determined by a schedule established by the economic and community development
director or his or her designee, all nonresidential buildings and facilities in
the city to ensure that they are being maintained to comply with minimum
health, safety, and public welfare requirements. Fees for interval inspections
shall be assessed as provided in chapter 9 of this Code. When an interval
inspection results in a finding that code violations exist, the building
official shall cause an inspection report to be issued that identifies each
violation, and the owner shall ensure that all violations are corrected within
90 days of the date of the inspection report.
   (e)   Construction. The provisions of this section shall be construed, if
possible, in such manner as to make such provisions consistent with all other
ordinances of the city, including all future ordinances of the city, and all
amendments thereto; provided, however, that where any inconsistency or conflict
cannot be avoided, then the most restrictive of such inconsistent or
conflicting provision shall control and prevail.
(Ord. No. 11-1340, 12-12-11)
Sec. 5-30. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1454, adopted January 27, 2015, repealed §
5-30, which pertained to building permits; expiration; extension and derived
from Ord. No. 14-1434, adopted September 9, 2014.
Secs. 5-31—5-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS
Sec. 5-71. - Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, or agent in charge of premises, not to
post or not to have posted in a conspicuous place on the front of any principal
building located on or along any street in the city, or to fail, neglect or
refuse to repair or to replace the number of the street address assigned
thereto by the city engineer. This article is needed in the interest of public
safety for the quick identification of any premises by the police and/or fire
departments, as well by other departments in the city and in serving the public
convenience.
(Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 1, 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-72. - Specifications.
   (a)   The size of numbers on residential buildings shall be at least three
inches in height and shall be posted on, at or near the front door, readily
visible to passersby.
   (b)   The size of numbers on commercial buildings shall be at least four
inches in height, shall be posted on, at, or near the front door, and shall be
displayed in such a manner as to be readily visible to occupants of vehicles
immediately in front of such buildings during all hours of normal daylight.
   (c)   The color of the numbers shall be in contrast with the immediate
background on which they are mounted.
   (d)   This section shall be so construed to mean that if the numbers are
hidden by an awning or other appurtenance, the owner of such building, or agent
in charge thereof, shall provide supplementary numbers in such a manner as to
comply with this article.
(Ord. No. 81-90, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-73. - Enforcement.
   The director of building and safety, the fire chief and the police chief are
hereby charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this
article, and if any such principal building along any street does not have a
street address number posted thereon in accordance with the requirements of
this article, the director of building and safety is hereby authorized and
directed to notify in writing by registered mail the owner of such premises, as
indicated by the current records in the city assessor's office, which notice
will give such owner ten days within which to post and install a suitable
number indicating the street address of the premises in question. On the
failure of such owner to comply with such notice within the time specified, the
director of building and safety is hereby authorized to obtain and procure a
number representing such street address made of suitable material and post such
number on the exterior of the premises near the front door thereof in a
conspicuous place, and any and all expense incurred by the city, including
labor and materials, in posting such number shall be charged to the owner of
the premises, and if not paid at the end of the calendar year after an invoice
therefor has been sent, the amount of such expense shall be added to the
consolidated miscellaneous assessment roll for that year and shall remain a
lien against such premises until full payment therefor has been made; provided,
however, that the minimum charge for obtaining and posting such number shall
not be less than $5.00 for each street address number posted.
(Ord. No. 81-90, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Secs. 5-74—5-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III.5. - STORAGE, USE, MANUFACTURE, SALE, HANDLING AND TRANSPORTATION
OF EXPLOSIVES
Sec. 5-91. - Definitions.
   The terms:
   Blaster shall mean any person who has been duly licensed by the department
of building and safety to use, handle or transport explosives in the city.
   Explosives or detonators wherever used in this article shall mean and
include any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units, or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that may be ignited by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or
detonation of any part of the compound or mixture which may cause an explosion
of such violence as is capable of producing harmful effects to life or
property.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-92. - Permit required.
   No person, firm or corporation shall bring within the limits of the city or
have in their possession any explosives, caps or other detonators (except in
the form of the official United States Pharmacopeia solution), until a permit
has been secured from the department of building and safety.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Sec. 5-93. - Exceptions.
   Nothing in this article shall be held to mean and include any small arms,
ammunition or device or compositions used to obtain visible or audible
pyrotechnic effects which are covered by special ordinance, nor shall this
article be applicable to persons, firms or corporations governed and regulated
by council resolutions passed pursuant to section 12 of Ordinance No. 32 or
section 1.8 of Ordinance No. 60-1354.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-94. - Transportation restrictions.
   No person shall carry or transport any explosives within the corporate
limits of the city upon his person or in or upon any conveyance which is
carrying passengers, except co-employees, without a permit as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-95. - Fees for permits; exception.
   No person, firm or corporation shall handle, use, store, transport or sell
any explosives within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in
section
5-105, until a permit has been obtained for such using, handling,
transportation or selling.
   Fees for the issuance of permits, evaluation of applicants for permits and
for inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be
collected by the building and safety department are established as follows:
   Explosives permit ..... $60.00
   Plan review fee for explosives permit ..... 60.00
   Provided, however, that where such explosives are to be used by any person,
firm or corporation under contract with the City of Dearborn, the City of
Detroit, the Board of Wayne County Road Commissioners or the Michigan State
Highway Commissioner, then such person, firm or corporation shall be exempt
from the payment of fees for permits required for specific blasting operations
for use of explosives, but shall be required to obtain such permits.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1112, 12-18-06)
Sec. 5-96. - Application for permits.
   Permits for the use, storage, transportation or sale of explosives shall be
obtained from the department of building and safety. Before such permit shall
be issued, an application shall be made in writing, giving the name and address
of the applicant, the location where explosives are to be used, the kind of
explosive to be handled, the time required to complete the blasting and the
name of person or persons licensed to handle high explosives. Upon the receipt
of such application, the fire department shall investigate the conditions as
set forth in this article and if found satisfactory, shall issue an approval,
upon receipt of which the building and safety department shall issue a permit
as petitioned for in the application. Permits shall not be issued for the use,
storage, handling, transportation or sale of explosives to any person in time
of riot without the approval of the director of the department of building and
safety, the fire chief and/or the police chief. Permits shall not be issued for
the use, storage, handling, transportation or sale of explosives in time of war
until the applicant has complied with all federal and local requirements.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1112, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-
25-22)
Sec. 5-97. - Storage.
   (a)   No permanent storage of explosives shall be allowed within the
corporate limits of the city. For temporary storage of explosives, a magazine
shall be provided in accordance with the current fire code. On the outside of
each magazine, there shall at all times be kept conspicuously posted a red sign
or signs with the words "Magazine-Explosives" legibly printed thereon in
letters not less than four inches high.
   (b)   Magazines shall be located at the maximum distance from inhabited or
occupied buildings, public highways and passenger-carrying railways on the
property where they are placed.
   (c)   Detonators, blasting caps, electric or otherwise, shall not be stored
in nor in dangerous proximity to a magazine with other explosives. They shall
be kept in closed containers and shall not be transported in the same vehicle
with other explosives.
   (d)   Ample covers such as mats, pads or equivalent protection shall be used
in blasting operations where persons or property may be endangered.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1112, 12-18-06)
Sec. 5-98. - Miscellaneous.
   (a)   A special permit may be granted by the building and safety department,
if approved by the fire department, where it is necessary to carry on a
particular blasting operation, but such permit shall not be granted for a
longer period than 30 days without renewal.
   (b)   Amounts stored in magazines shall be limited to one day's supply and
shall in no case exceed 150 pounds in each magazine.
   (c)   Mining or quarrying companies carrying on continuous blasting
operations underground may carry longer quantities when stored in a manner
satisfactory to the fire department.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-99. - Strict compliance.
   All explosives within the limits of the city shall be stored, used, handled
and transported in strict compliance with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-100. - Vehicle regulations.
   (a)   Every vehicle, while carrying explosives, shall have on the rear in
easily legible letters, at least six inches high, "EXPLOSIVES - DANGEROUS,"
printed or painted in white on a red background.
   (b)   It is prohibited for any person in charge of a vehicle containing such
explosives to smoke in or upon such vehicle, drive the vehicle while
intoxicated, to conduct himself in a careless or reckless manner, or to load or
unload such vehicle in a careless manner or while smoking.
   (c)   It is prohibited for any person to place or carry in the bed or body
or cause same to be placed in the bed or body of any vehicle containing
explosives, any metal tool or pieces of metal.
   (d)   It is prohibited for any person to place or carry or cause to be
placed or carried in the bed or body of any vehicle containing explosives, any
exploders, detonators, blasting caps or other similar explosive material or to
carry in or upon any such vehicle any matches.
   (e)   The vehicle transporting explosives shall traverse such streets as are
subject to traffic regulations and which are commonly termed "through" or
"stop" streets, whenever possible, and shall use the least traveled streets of
this type consistent with the expeditious movement of the explosives to
destination. All vehicles carrying explosives shall be provided with an
approved fire extinguisher.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-101. - Magazines.
   (a)   No artificial light shall be used in magazine except portable electric
safety battery lamps.
   (b)   All magazines must be kept locked except when being inspected or when
explosives are being placed therein or being removed therefrom.
   (c)   No matches or fire shall at any time be permitted near a magazine.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-102. - Blaster.
   All applicants for a blaster's permit to use, handle or transport explosives
in the city shall first comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Shall be at least 21 years of age and a citizen of the United
States.
      (2)   Shall have a reasonable understanding of the English language and
be able to answer satisfactorily such questions as may be asked him upon his
evaluation.
      (3)   Produce such evidence of his character, habits and past employment
as may be satisfactory to the fire department, for which purpose the fire
department may require him to appear for examination before the proper
officials of the police department.
      (4)   In addition to the foregoing requirements, an applicant, must
present satisfactory evidence of experience in handling high explosives, either
as a blaster or blaster's helper, for a period of not less than two years, and
that he is properly qualified to perform the duties as a blaster. A blaster
shall confine his activities to those designated on his permit.
      (5)   Each application for such permit shall be accompanied by three
unmounted photographs of the applicant, one and one-half inches by one and one-
half inches, taken in ordinary working clothes, one of which shall be attached
to the application and the other to the permit when issued. The permit shall be
carried by the blaster at all times during blasting operations.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 12, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1112, 12-18-06)
Sec. 5-103. - Contractor.
   Before an explosive permit may be issued, the applicant must first register
with the office of the city clerk. The contractor’s registration fee, listed in
Chapter 12, Section 6, must be paid prior to the issuance of a permit.
Contractors are required to meet insurance and other requirements, as noted on
the contractor registration application form.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 13, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1112, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 22-1724,
2-8-22)
Sec. 5-104. - Revoking of permits.
   The building and safety department, the fire department and/or the police
department shall have the authority and it shall be their duty to revoke any
permit to store, use, handle or transport explosives when they shall ascertain
by reasonable proofs that the holder of such permit has been careless or
negligent or incompetent in the use, storage, handling or transportation of
explosives, that he has been smoking or has been intoxicated while working with
or using explosives, that he willfully or through negligence permitted or
allowed explosives to be used or taken away by unauthorized persons, or that he
has used or permitted others to use, any of the explosives in their care for
improper or criminal purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 14, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1112, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 22-1733,
1-25-22)
Sec. 5-105. - Interstate commerce regulations.
   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to conflict with the interstate
commerce regulations for the transportation of explosives or detonators in or
through the city.
(Ord. No. 81-97, § 15, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-106—5-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FENCES[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1192, adopted Dec. 15, 2008, amended Art. IV in its
entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. IV
derived from Ord. No. 81-77, §§ 2—8, 10—22-a; Ord. No. 87-378, adopted Jan. 20,
1987; Ord. No. 99-770, adopted June 1, 1999; and Ord. No. 05-1049, adopted July
5, 2005.
State Law reference— Screening junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.;
fences and fence viewers, MCL 43.51 et seq.
Sec. 5-121. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Board-on-board fence shall mean any fence with alternating vertical boards
over horizontal structures that give the fence a finished look on both sides.
   Chain-link or cyclone fence shall mean any fence that is constructed of some
type of woven wire fence, with a minimum 11½ gauge in residential districts, a
minimum of 9 gauge in commercial districts, and a minimum 6 gauge in industrial
districts.
   Compliance certificate shall mean an approval issued by the City of Dearborn
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   Decorative fence shall mean any fence no more than 30 inches high not
intended for the purpose of preventing persons and/or domestic animals, from
crawling or passing through the fence, except at established gateways. A
decorative or ornamental fence shall not include a fence constructed of chain
link material or any other type of woven wire fence.
   Decorative top shall mean an open framework made of strips of material
matching the fence placed in a decorative pattern. Decorative tops may not
exceed one foot in height, must have a solid top rail, and shall not exceed 50
percent coverage of open viewing.
   Delinquent owner shall mean any party who owns a lot or parcel of land,
either as deed holder or contract purchaser, and who refuses or neglects to
build or assist in building or repairing a partition fence or to contribute his
portion of the expense for the building or repairing of a partition fence, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
   Department shall mean the department or division within the City of Dearborn
where the Building Official is assigned.
   Fence shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary
including but not limited to posts, boards, wire, concrete or gates.
   Line fence shall mean any fence erected on the boundary line of any lot or
parcel of land.
   Ornamental fence. See Decorative fence.
   Picket fence shall mean any fence with in-line boards no larger than one
inch × three inches with gaps equal to the width of the boards.
   Privacy fence shall mean a sight-obscuring fence used to block the area
enclosed by the fence from view from neighboring properties or public rights-
of-way.
   Privacy screen shall mean a sight-obscuring fence, erected adjacent to or
around a selected use or area (such as a patio, deck, courtyard or swimming
pool), designed to screen the area behind it from observation by persons
outside its perimeter. Privacy screens shall be of reasonable length as
determined by the building official or his/her designee and not the entire
property line. Privacy screens shall comply with the regulations specified in
section
5-128.
   Semi-privacy fence shall mean a fence designed and intended to be sight-
obscuring, such as a board-on-board fence, or a vinyl fence with vertical slats
with gaps between the slats.
   Shadow-box fence. See Board-on-board fence.
   Solid fence. Any fence which presents a solid surface without any gaps in
materials, such as a stockade fence.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 16-1533, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-
22)
Sec. 5-122. - Right to build fence at owner's expense.
   (a)   Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the owner of
any land in the city is hereby authorized and empowered to build and maintain a
line fence at his or her sole expense, if the location of such proposed fence
is established and a compliance certificate therefor is obtained in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The respective owners of lots adjacent to each other in the city may
construct and maintain fences between such adjacent lots at an equal expense
and cost to each owner, subject to the provisions of this article; provided,
however, by mutual consent of adjacent owners such fence may be omitted in
whole or in part. All owners of lots shall be responsible for the building,
repairing, care and upkeep of all fences contiguous to or bordering upon
alleys, all partition lines and property boundaries as herein specified.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-22)
Sec. 5-123. - Compliance certificate required; exceptions.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, replace, remove, repair or
relocate a line fence in the city without first having secured a compliance
certificate therefor from the department.
Exceptions:
    (a)   A compliance certificate is not required for minor repairs that do
not exceed ten percent of the length of the fence along any one property line
within any 12-month period, provided that the fence is permitted style and is
being repaired with like material.
   (b)   A compliance certificate is not required for a decorative fence, but
shall comply with the general requirements in section
5-127.
   (c)   A separate compliance certificate is not required if the proposed work
on an approved compliance certificate includes relocating the gate and/or
portion of a fence on the adjoining property.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 16-1533, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-
22; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-22)
Sec. 5-124. - Application for compliance certificate.
   (a)   An application for a compliance certificate shall be filed with the
building official made on a form prescribed by the department, along with other
documentation as specified on the application form. If a fence is proposed in
conjunction with a development that requires site plan review then the fence
shall be shown on the site plan, which shall be reviewed in accordance with
normal site plan review procedures.
   (b)   Such application shall indicate that it is being made with the joint
approval and consent of the adjacent owners, and it shall be signed by such
owners or their authorized representatives. The application shall further
indicate the names of the respective owners of the adjacent lots or properties
separated by such line fence.
   (c)   In connection with such application and before it is approved, there
shall be submitted for approval an accurate land survey or a site plan,
locating such fence line, as herein referred to, or an agreement in writing,
signed by the adjacent owners, stating that they have mutually agreed upon the
line and that appropriate stakes have been placed establishing such line, as
required by this article.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the department to issue a compliance
certificate upon the filing of such application properly filled out and the
approval thereof by the director or their designee, and after a compliance
certificate fee has been paid. Compliance certificate fees and other related
fees shall be in accordance with
chapter 9.
   (e)   Every fence compliance certificate issued shall expire 180 days after
date of issuance. Extensions may be granted by applying to the department and
after applicable fees are paid in accordance with Section
9-10.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-
22)
Sec. 5-125. - Application for compliance certificate—When adjacent property
owners do not agree.
   (a)   If the owners of the adjacent properties do not consent to the details
of the construction, replacement, removal, repairs or relocation of a line
fence, in addition to the requirements set forth in section
5-124, the applicant shall show proof that an attempt was made to obtain the
adjacent owner's consent by certified mail with return receipt requested of the
applicant's desire to have such line fence built, replaced, removed, repaired
or relocated in accordance with the provisions of this article. Notice shall be
mailed by the department to adjacent property owners by certified mail and
first-class mail advising them of the request for a compliance certificate and
that same will be issued within 15 days unless adjacent owners can show a valid
reason for withholding the compliance certificate.
   The conditions of an existing fence, the consistency of the fence styles in
a neighborhood and the timeframe in which a building board of appeals decision
was made on an existing fence will be reviewed. If a resolution cannot be
agreed upon, an applicant may apply to the building board of appeals. The
building board of appeals will also take the above factors into consideration
when making their decision.
   (b)   If there is a legitimate dispute between such adjacent owners
regarding the location of a fence, the owner who desires to have the fence
built shall obtain the services of a registered surveyor who shall make a
survey of the partition line in question and shall install such suitable
markers establishing the partition line. If the adjacent owners agree on the
location of the line fence, a registered survey shall not be required.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-
22)
Sec. 5-126. - Right of reimbursement for condemned fence.
   If the director of the department or their designee orders any owner to
build, replace, remove, repair or relocate the whole or any part of a line
fence, it is the responsibility of all property owners adjacent to the fence to
pay for all expenses incurred to comply with the order.
   If necessary, the director of the department or their designee shall
determine the reasonable cost of building, replacing or repairing such fence,
along with the cost of survey, application and permit fee. A prorated amount
shall be charged to the responsible property owners.
   If a property owner is delinquent in paying their share of expenses incurred
to the appropriate party(ies), then the city may pay the responsible party(ies)
for expenses incurred and charge appropriately for reimbursement.
   If the costs and charges due the city are not collected on or before
December 31 of the year in which the expenses were incurred by the city, the
same shall be reported by the finance director to the city council to be
collected by a special assessment, in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 15 of the Charter of the city.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-
22)
Sec. 5-127. - General requirements.
   (1)   Permitted fence styles. Permitted fence styles include, but are not
limited to, board-on-board, shadow-box, privacy, semi-privacy, solid fences,
chain link, cyclone, picket, and wrought iron, provided that all other
requirements of this article are met. Board-on-board, shadow-box, privacy
screens, privacy, and semi-privacy fence styles may include a one-foot-high
decorative top.
   (2)   Prohibited fencing.
      (a)   Prohibited fence styles include, but are not limited to, masonry
fences and vinyl slats inserted in chain-link or cyclone fences.
      (b)   Animal enclosures such as dog runs, kennels or pens are prohibited.
      (c)   Decorative fences are prohibited on side and rear property lines.
   (3)   Materials.
      (a)   All fences built or repaired shall have posts made of either iron
pipe one and five-eighths inches outside diameter, wood posts four inches in
diameter, reinforced concrete posts four inches across, or any other material
of equal stability sunk in the soil at least three feet encased in concrete. On
the posts shall be properly fastened materials commonly used in conventional
fence construction, such as wood, metal, vinyl or vinyl clad wood.
      (b)   Fences which carry electric current, razor wire are prohibited.
      (c)   Barbed wire may be used at the top of fences for security purposes
around storage areas located in the Industrial B (Medium Industrial District),
Industrial C (Intensive Industrial District), and Industrial D (General
Industrial District) zoning districts.
         1.   Barbed wire is prohibited in the Industrial A (Light Industrial
District).
         2.   Location requirements. Barbed wire shall not be permitted on
fences in the front yard or along frontages on streets defined as arterial or
collector roads.
         3.   Design regulations.
            a.   No strand of barbed wire shall be permitted less than eight
feet above ground.
            b.   The barbed wire strands shall be installed on supports that
slant inward toward the interior of the site.
      (d)   No owner or lessee, or their respective agents, of any building in
the city shall erect or cause to be erected or maintained on or about the
stairway to the entrance of such building, or on or about its exterior building
line, or upon fences or upon any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such
building, any railing, fence guard or other projection on which there shall be
affixed or placed, in any manner attached, any spike, nail or other sharp
pointed instrument of any kind or description. No wire or other fence materials
shall be affixed to the fence with the top edge having any sharp or pointed
projections of any kind; provided, however, if such fence is constructed of
pickets, such pickets shall have an angle at the top of not less than 90
degrees.
   (4)   Finished appearance.
      (a)   The finished appearance of a fence shall face the exterior of the
lot. If, because of the design or construction, one side of the fence has a
more finished appearance than the other, the side of the fence with the more
finished appearance shall face the exterior of the lot.
      (b)   All finished styles shall be approved by the building official or
his/her designee.
   (5)   Location of posts.
      (a)   Line fences shall be constructed on common property lines.
      (b)   On all streets running generally east and west, the posts shall be
placed contiguous to and on the westerly side of the dividing line, and the
boards, woven wire or other material on the easterly side of the posts; and on
all street running generally north and south, the posts shall be placed on the
northerly side of the dividing line and the boards, woven wire, or other
material on the southerly side of the posts; provided, however, if the owners
of adjacent lots mutually agree in writing, the posts can be placed on either
side of the partition line. The lot owner upon whose property the posts are
located shall be responsible for building, relocating, replacing, removing or
repairing the front half of the fence and the rear half of the opposite fence.
The junction of the posts and boards, or the posts and wire fence or other
materials, shall always be considered the lot line.
      (c)   In the case of line fences along the rear lot lines, the owner on
whose property the posts are located shall be responsible for building,
relocating, replacing, removing or repairing that half of the fence leading to
the higher house numbers, while the adjacent owner shall be responsible for
building, relocating, replacing, removing or repairing the other half of such
partition fence.
   (6)   Location of fences.
      (a)   Fences shall provide for unobstructed sight area standards which
include:
         1.   Not obstructing the area formed at the corner intersection of two
(2) public right-of-way lines, the two (2) sides of the triangular area being
twenty-five (25) feet in length measured along abutting public rights-of-way
lines, and third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides.
         2.   Not obstructing the area formed at the corner intersection of a
public right-of-way and a driveway, the two (2) sides of the triangular area
being ten (10) feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of
the driveway, and the third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides.
         3.   Not obstructing cross-visibility between a height of thirty (30)
inches and six (6) feet above the lowest point of the intersecting road(s).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7003.png]
 
      (b)   Unless otherwise determined unavoidable by the building official,
no fence shall be erected where it would prevent or unreasonably obstruct the
use of the applicant's property or adjacent property, nor shall a fence be
erected where it would obstruct or prevent the continued safe use of an
existing driveway or other means of access to the applicant's property or
adjacent property. In enforcing this provision, the building official may
require a fence to be set back in a minimum distance from a driveway or
property line.
      (c)   Fences that are a part of an approved site plan by the Planning
Commission may deviate from the location standards in this ordinance as long as
they meet unobstructed sight area standards and do not generate public safety
concerns.
   (7)   Fence maintenance.
      (a)   Fences shall be maintained in good condition. Rotten or broken
components shall be replaced, repaired, or removed. As required, surfaces shall
be painted, stained, or similarly treated. If a fence is found to be in need of
repair by the building official or his/her designee, he or she may issue orders
to complete such repairs. Failure to comply with a written notice from the
building official or his/her designee shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance. All owners of lots upon which a fence is erected shall hereafter be
responsible for the care and maintenance of the fence.
      (b)   Any person building, repairing, replacing or completing any fence
or a part of a fence for a delinquent owner may enter upon the premises of such
delinquent owner to the extent reasonably necessary to build, repair, replace
or complete such fence.
      (8)   This section shall not apply to property owned by the city.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 16-1533, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 16-1558, - -
16; Ord. No. 1752, 6-15-22)
Sec. 5-128. - Fence regulations in residential districts.
   (1)   Location and height.
      (a)   Line fences in residential districts shall not exceed six feet in
height.
      (b)   Permitted one-foot-high decorative tops on new fences are allowed
provided that the height of the fence does not exceed six feet.
      (c)   No fence shall be permitted to extend into one's own front yard. No
fence shall be located beyond the rear yard or project into the side yard
farther than three feet from the side grade door opening to enclose the door in
a side yard.
      Exemptions:
         1.   Decorative fences;
         2.   Houses located on corner lots may extend to the established front
building line provided that the adjacent yard is not a front yard.
      (d)   Fences shall be permitted on the side street lot line on corner
lots between the established building line and the front lot line. Such fences
shall taper from four feet in height at the building line to two feet at the
front lot line or such fences may have a uniform height of two feet.
      (e)   Fences located on a corner lot with no residential housing on the
relevant side street may be located on the property line or no closer than one
foot to the edge of the sidewalk.
      (f)   Only one fence may be constructed on any common or adjoining
property line.
      (g)   Where no house is built on a residence-zoned lot, a line fence or a
fence across the lot shall not be built closer to the street than the
established front building line along such street.
      (h)   Where a house has a side yard that is at least 16 ft. in width, but
does not have a side door opening, a line fence or a fence across the lot shall
not be built closer to the street than 10 ft. behind the building line along
such street in order to enclose the side yard.
   (2)   Privacy screens. Privacy screens may be placed on the interior of the
lot in the rear yard, subject to the following:
      (a)   A minimum clearance of six feet shall be provided between the
proposed privacy screen and along any other fence, structure, or property line.
      (b)   Privacy screens shall not exceed six feet in height.
      (c)   Privacy screens shall be constructed of the materials cited
previously in this article, subject to review and approval by the building
official.
      (d)   Privacy screens shall be freestanding and self-supporting.
      (e)   Only one privacy screen may be constructed along any common or
adjoining property line.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 16-1533, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 20-1693, 12-8-
20; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-22)
Sec. 5-129. - Fence regulations in nonresidential districts.
   (1)   Process. All nonresidential fences are subject to administrative site
plan review in accordance with the standards for site plan approval outlined in
Section
32.02 E of the City's Zoning Ordinance.
   (2)   Location.
      (a)   Fences shall be permitted in the rear or side yards of
nonresidential districts and may only extend up to the front building line.
      (b)   Fences located on a corner lot may be located on the property line
no closer than one (1) foot to the edge of the sidewalk.
   (3)   Height. Fences in commercial districts shall not exceed six feet in
height. Fences in industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-22)
Sec. 5-130. - Referral to building board of appeals.
   When special conditions exist, the director may refer such conditions to the
building board of appeals, or the parties themselves may appeal to the building
board of appeals to determine what is fair and reasonable and to adjust any and
all differences and disputes which may exist between the department and the
parties involved, or between adjacent owners, in order that justice may be done
and an equitable solution of the problem achieved.
(Ord. No. 08-1192, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 22-1752, 6-15-22)
Secs. 5-131—5-160. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - EARTH CHANGING ACTIVITIES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 5-161—5-185. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - SOIL EROSION CONTROL
Sec. 5-186. - Enabling authority; designation of a municipal enforcing agency
and official; and adoption of statute and rules by reference.
   (a)   This division is adopted under the authority of part 91, SESC, of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended
(hereinafter "part 91").
   (b)   The department of economic and community development is the municipal
enforcing agency responsible for administering and enforcing this division and
part 91 within the municipal limits of the city.
   (c)   The city building official or his duly authorized representative shall
be the municipal enforcing official responsible for administering and enforcing
this Division and Part 91 within the municipal limits of the city.
   (d)   Part 91 and the rules promulgated under part 91 ("rules") are
incorporated by reference into this division.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-187. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Accelerated soil erosion shall mean the increased loss of the land surface
that occurs as a result of man's activities.
   Building official means the director of the department of economic and
community development or his duly authorized representative who has
successfully completed the training requirements for administering part 91.
   Earth change shall mean a manmade change in the natural cover or topography
of land, including cut and fill activities which may result in or contribute to
soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state.
   Erosion shall mean the process by which the ground surface is worn away by
action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.
   Excavation or cut shall mean any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
   Floodplain shall mean that area which would be inundated by storm runoff or
flood water equivalent or that which would occur with a rainfall or flood for
an intermediate regional flood.
   Grading shall mean any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling or any
combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled
condition.
   Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measure shall mean those
control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and
sedimentation and which are maintained after project completion.
   SESC permit shall mean a permit issued to authorize work to be performed
under this division.
   Stripping shall mean any activity which removes or significantly disturbs
the vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
   Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall mean interim
and control measures which are installed or constructed for the control of soil
erosion and sedimentation until permanent soil control is effected.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-188. - Permits required; submission of plans.
   Prior to undertaking an earth change in the city involving one or more acres
of land, or within 500 feet of the water's edge of a lake or stream, an erosion
and sedimentation control permit shall be obtained from the building official.
Request for a permit shall be initiated by submitting an application and SESC
plan in accordance with rule 1703 promulgated under part 91.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-189. - Top soil removal.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether, owner, lessee, licensee or
trespasser, to scrape off, dig out or remove the top soil from any land, lot or
plot of ground in the city for the purpose of selling or appropriating to his
own purpose such top soil; provided, however, that any builder or contractor,
in connection with any building or construction work, may remove and scrape
back the top soil for the purpose of excavating in the place where the top soil
was formerly located, and if such top soil cannot be used in connection with
landscaping the grounds after such construction work is completed, such top
soil may be disposed of in an approved manner, in accordance with regulations
established by the building official.
(Ord. No. 81-88, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-190. - Compliance required for occupancy.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building will be issued unless the
applicant for such certificate shall have obtained approval from the building
official indicating compliance with all grading plans and specifications and
completion of all permanent soil erosion control measures.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-191. - Permits and fees.
   Upon payment of the necessary fees to the city treasurer, the submitted
plans shall be reviewed and approved and a permit shall be issued, provided the
plans meet the standards and specifications of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-192. - Bond requirement.
   (a)   An SESC permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first
post with the city clerk a bond executed by the owner and a corporate surety
with authority to do business in this state as a surety.
   (b)   The bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, payable to
the city, and in the amount of the estimated total cost of all temporary or
permanent soil erosion control measures. The total cost shall be estimated by
the building official. The bond shall include penalty provisions for failure to
complete the work on schedule as specified on the grading permit. In lieu of a
surety bond, the applicant may file with the city a cash bond or an instrument
of credit approved by the city attorney in an amount equal to that which would
be required for the surety bond.
   (c)   Every bond and instrument of credit shall include and every cash
deposit shall be made on the conditions that the permittee shall comply with
all of the provisions of this division and all of the terms and conditions of
the SESC permit, and shall complete all of the work contemplated under the SESC
permit within the time limit specified in the SESC permit, or if no time limit
is specified, within 180 days after the date of the issuance of the SESC
permit.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-193. - Extension of time.
   If a permitee is unable to complete the work within the specified time, he
may, at least ten days prior to the expiration of the permit, present in
writing to the building official a request for an extension of time, setting
forth the reasons for the requested extension. If such an extension is
warranted, the building official may grant additional time for the completion
of the work, but no such extension shall release the owner, the surety on the
bond or the person furnishing the instrument of credit or cash bond.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 8, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-194. - Failure to complete work.
   In the event of a failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all
the requirements, conditions and terms of the permit, the building official may
order such work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to persons or property
and to leave the site in a safe condition, and he may authorize completion of
all necessary temporary or permanent soil erosion control measures. The
permitee and the surety executing the bond or person issuing the instrument of
credit or making the cash deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a
continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that
may be insured or expended by the city in causing any and all such work to be
done. In the case of a cash deposit, any unused portion thereof shall be
refunded to the permitee.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 9, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-195. - Denial of permit.
   SESC permits shall not be issued where:
      (1)   The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and
welfare;
      (2)   The work as proposed by the applicant will damage any public or
private property, interfere with any existing drainage course in such a manner
as to cause damage to any adjacent property, result in the deposit of debris or
sediment on any public way or into any waterway, or create an unreasonable
hazard to persons or property;
      (3)   The land area for which grading is proposed is subject to
geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work
can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other
such hazard to persons or property; or
      (4)   The land area for which the grading is proposed may lie within the
floodplain of any stream or watercourse, not specifically designated and
delineated by the city as an area subject to flood hazard, unless a hydrologic
report, prepared by a professional engineer, is submitted to certify that the
proposed grading will have, in his opinion, no detrimental influence on the
public welfare or upon the total development of the watershed.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 10, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-196. - Modifications of approved plans.
   All modifications of the approved grading plans must be submitted and
approved by the building official. All necessary reports shall be submitted
with any proposal to modify the approved grading plan. No grading work in
connection with any proposed modification shall be permitted without the
approval of the building official.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 11, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-197. - Responsibility of permittee.
   During grading operations the permittee shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within
the limits of grading and along any routes of travel of the equipment.
      (2)   The prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall
grade on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public
street, sidewalk, alley or any public or private property without supporting
and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which
might result.
      (3)   Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved
plans and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit and this
division.
      (4)   The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris or other
materials applied, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways,
sidewalks or other public thoroughfares during transit to and from the
construction, where such spillage constitutes a public nuisance or hazard.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 12, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-198. - General requirements.
   (a)   Any earth changes shall be conducted in such a manner which will
effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation.
   (b)   Any persons engaged in earth changes shall design, implement and
maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation and control measures, in
conformance with this division.
   (c)   All earth changes shall be designed, constructed and completed in such
a manner which shall limit the exposed area of any disturbed land for the
shortest possible period of time.
   (d)   Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from
runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth change.
   (e)   Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the
conveyance of water around, through or from the earth change area shall be
designed to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity.
   (f)   A person shall install temporary soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures before or upon commencement of the earth change activity and
shall maintain the measures on a daily basis. A person shall remove temporary
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures after permanent soil erosion
measures are in place and the area is stabilized. A person shall stabilize the
area with permanent soil erosion control measures under approved standards and
specifications as prescribed by rule 1710.
   (g)   Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels,
ditches or any disturbed land area shall be completed with five calendar days
after final grading or the final earth change has been completed. When it is
not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth change
has been completed or where significant earth change activity ceases, temporary
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be implemented
immediately. All temporary soil erosion control measures shall be maintained
until permanent soil erosion control measures are in place and the area
stabilized (rule 1709(5)).
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 13, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-199. - Maintenance requirements.
   Persons carrying out soil erosion and sediment control measures under this
division, and all subsequent owners of property concerning which such measures
have been taken, shall maintain all permanent antierosion devices, retaining
walls, structures, plantings and other protective devices.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-200. - Minimum design standards for erosion and sediment control.
   All SESC plans and specifications including extensions of previously
approved plans which include provisions for erosion and sediment control in
accordance with, but not limited to, the standards contained in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 15, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-201. - Variances and exceptions.
   No earth-changing activity (SESC) permits shall be required for the
following:
      (1)   Grading or an excavation below finished grade for basements,
footings, retaining walls, or other structures on plots of less than one acre
and more than 500 feet from any lake, stream or drainage course.
      (2)   Although no permits are required under subsection (1), the
operations and constructions exempted from obtaining permits must comply with
the rules and regulations concerning grading and erosion specified in this
division.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 16, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-202. - Inspection.
   (a)   The requirements of this division shall be enforced by the building
official. The building official shall inspect the work and may require adequate
inspection of compaction by a soil engineer or by a soil testing agency,
approved by the building official.
   (b)   If the building official finds any existing conditions not as stated
in any application, SESC permit or approved plan, he may refuse to approve
further work until approval of a revised SESC plan which will conform to the
existing conditions.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 17, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-203. - Enforcement.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit or any other remedy, the city
may maintain an action in its own name in any court of competent jurisdiction
for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain or prevent
violations of this division.
   (b)   The building official may enter at all reasonable times in or upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigating
conditions and practices which may be a violation of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-111, § 18, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Sec. 5-204. - Violations.
   (a)   Performance. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to perform
any act required by this division or to perform any act prohibited by this
division.
   (b)   Knowledge. It shall be unlawful for any person having a possessory
interest in any land to knowingly permit, acquiesce, assist, aid or encourage
any other person to violate the provisions of this division.
   (c)   Continuance of work. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue
any earth change activity after having been served with a stop-work order until
such order has been rescinded.
(Ord. No. 09-1233, 8-17-09)
Secs. 5-205—5-220. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - DUMPING
Sec. 5-221. - Business license required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner or lessee, to engage
in the business of providing a place or places in the city for hire in which
rubbish, junk, organic material, parts or trimmings of trees, shrubs, bushes,
wire, glass, paper, old iron, metal cans or containers, wood or pieces of
concrete or similar waste material can be dumped or filled in without first
obtaining a license for each location in the city where such activity will be
carried on.
(Ord. No. 81-132, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-222. - Application for license.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of providing a place for the
dumping of materials for hire, as described in section
5-221, shall apply to the city clerk for a license to carry on such business.
The application shall state the name of the applicant, their residence and
business address, the location where such dumping operations shall be carried
on, the approximate size and cubical capacity of the area to be filled in by
such dumping operations, the legal owner of the land on which the dumping will
take place and the type of materials acceptable for the dumping operation.
After such application is filed and the fee therefor paid to the city
treasurer, the application shall be referred to the building and safety
department, the department of health, the fire department and the police
department for investigation. If the dumping will not violate any of the
ordinances of the city, including the zoning ordinance, and the rules and
regulations promulgated by any city departments, the application will be
approved and, upon the receipt of such approval from the several departments of
the city, the clerk will issue the license in question.
(Ord. No. 81-132, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Sec. 5-223. - Nuisance prohibited.
   In connection with dumping under this division, the applicant shall promise
and agree in the application to fill in the land to such elevation that will
allow at least 36 inches of good soil to be covered thereon, which good soil in
turn will be rough graded to the established elevation. The applicant must
further promise and agree not to fill in or dump any garbage or animal matter
that will tend to create an unfavorable health condition, create a stench,
attract rats or other rodents and to carry on the program so that the whole
dumping operation will not become a nuisance in the city.
(Ord. No. 81-132, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-224. - Bond requirement.
   (a)   A dumping permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first
post with the city clerk a bond executed by the owner and a corporate surety
with authority to do business in this state as a surety.
   (b)   The bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, payable to
the city, and in the amount of the estimated total cost of all temporary or
permanent soil erosion control measures. The total cost shall be estimated by
the city engineer or building inspector. The bond shall include penalty
provisions for failure to complete the work on schedule as specified on the
dumping permit. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file with the city
a cash bond or an instrument of credit approved by the city attorney in an
amount equal to that which would be required for the surety bond.
   (c)   Every bond and instrument of credit shall include and every cash
deposit shall be made on the conditions that the permittee shall comply with
all of the provisions of this division and all of the terms and conditions of
the dumping permit, and shall complete all of the work contemplated under the
dumping permit within the time limit specified in the dumping permit, or if no
time limit is specified, within 180 days after the date of the issuance of the
dumping permit.
Sec. 5-225. - License fee.
   In connection with every application for license to dump materials as
provided in this division, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer an
annual license fee of $300.00 for each location. Each annual license shall
expire at 12:00 midnight following December 31 of each year after such license
becomes effective, and may be renewed on similar terms.
(Ord. No. 81-132, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-226. - Suspension and revocation of license.
   (a)   Any license issued under the provisions of this division will be
subject to suspension and revocation for cause upon proof of charges filed with
the city council by the director of building and safety or any authorized
inspectors in the city, specifying with reasonable detail the facts on which
the suspension is based. Among the grounds for suspending or revoking any
license issued under this division are falsification of any material fact in
the application for a license, carelessness or negligence in the performance of
the licensee's duties in connection with their work, or showing that such
licensee has violated or permitted a violation of this division, or that this
division or any other ordinance or statute has been violated in connection with
work for which the licensee was responsible or of which the licensee was aware
or in the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have been aware that such
violation occurred.
   (b)   Upon the filing of such charges, the director of building and safety
department shall forthwith suspend the license involved and shall give to such
licensee notice of a hearing upon such charges, which hearing shall be held by
the city council not less than two weeks after the date of such notice unless
an earlier date is agreed upon in writing by the licensee affected. Such notice
shall be by personal service or certified mail and shall state the time and
place of such hearing and shall contain a copy of the charges. If such charges
are sustained by the city council, the director shall immediately revoke the
license involved or the council may modify or alter the suspension of the
license or reinstate it and shall notify the licensee in writing of such
finding.
(Ord. No. 81-132, § 5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Secs. 5-227—5-240. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS AND SUBCONTRACTORS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-241. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Registered design professional shall mean any registered design professional
licensed under article 20, 1980 PA 299, MCL 339.2001 et seq., R 408.30513.
   Residential, commercial and industrial building contractor shall mean any
person engaged in the construction, alteration or demolition of residential,
commercial or industrial structures, or a combination of residential,
commercial and industrial structures, who for a fixed sum, price, fee,
percentage, valuable consideration or compensation, other than wages,
undertakes or offers to undertake with another for the erection, construction,
replacement, repair, alteration or any addition to, subtracting from,
improvement, movement of, wrecking of or demolition of, a residential,
commercial or industrial structure or combination of residential, commercial
and industrial structure, and who is skilled in the planning and superintending
of residential, commercial and industrial construction or a combination of
residential, commercial and industrial construction, and has a practical
knowledge of the same, and who is familiar with the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the city governing residential, commercial and industrial
construction.
   Subcontractor shall mean any tradesman who takes a contract from a general
contractor or another subcontractor including, but not limited to, the
following trades: Masonry, carpentry, lathing, plastering, cement work, tile
work, roofing materials, painting and waterproofing, except that mechanics
hired by a licensed general contractor on an hourly basis will be exempt from
this provision of securing a license; provided further, that any subcontractor
already licensed under another city licensing ordinance or by a community with
which this city reciprocates shall be exempt from the requirement of securing a
license under this article.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 1.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 02-877, 2-5-02)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Secs. 5-242—5-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1038, adopted June 6, 2005, amended Art. III, Div.
2, §§
5-262—5-268, in their entirety. Former Art. III, Div. 2, §§
5-262—5-268, pertained to building contractors and subcontractors, licenses,
and derived from Ord. No. 81-135, §§ 1.4—1.9, 1.11, adopted Nov. 4, 1981.
Sec. 5-261. - Required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
residential, commercial or industrial building contractor or subcontractor
without first obtaining a residential, commercial and industrial building
contractor's license or subcontractor's license, as provided in this division;
provided, however, that contractors and registered design professionals
licensed by the State of Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulations will
not be required to take out a license with the city but will be required to
register their state license and comply with all other requirements of this
article; provided further, that all registered architects and professional
engineers may take out building permits in their name without securing a
builder's license if they exercise complete supervision on construction of the
building.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed a restriction of the right of
a property owner to build a residential structure on his own property for his
own use or occupancy, provided that such right shall be limited to the
construction of one residential structure in any 12-month period.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 1.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 02-877, 2-5-02)
Secs. 5-262—5-268. - Reserved.
Sec. 5-269. - Application and issuance of licenses; insurance required.
   All applications for licenses shall be made to the city clerk. The city
clerk shall issue a license to eligible applicants; provided, however, that
before a license is issued under this division, the applicant shall pay the
license fee listed in
Chapter 12 Section 6, and shall file with the city clerk a certificate of
insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State
of Michigan, insuring against claims for personal injury and property damage by
members of the public resulting from negligent acts or omissions by the
applicant or his agents or employees, all of which insurance shall cover public
liability damage for amounts of $100,000.00 for each person, $100,000.00 for
each accident and $100,000.00 property damage per accident. Every certificate
must contain the following clause: "Before a cancellation of this policy, the
insurer will give notice, in writing, to the Dearborn City Clerk, City Hall,
Dearborn, Michigan, of the insurer's intention to cancel this policy, not less
than ten days after receipt of said notice." NOTE: 1. The City of Dearborn
shall be listed on the certificate as an additional insured. 2. The
cancellation clause shall not be contravened.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 1.12, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1038, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 22-1724,
2-8-22)
Sec. 5-270. - Registration.
   Upon issuance of any license under this division, the name, business address
and classification of the licensee shall be kept as a public record in the
office of the city clerk, and shall be available for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 1.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-271. - Term of license.
   All licenses issued under this division shall expire on December 31.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 1.14, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1038, 6-6-05)
Sec. 5-272. - Suspension or revocation of license.
   The suspension and revocation of licenses issued under the provisions of
this division shall follow the procedures outlined in chapter 12 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 1.15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-273. - License fees.
   Every applicant for a license or license renewal of any classification
referred to in this section shall at the time of applying for such license pay
the annual fee specified in
Chapter 12, Section 6 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 2.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1038, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 22-1724,
2-8-22)
Sec. 5-274. - Unlawful employment.
   It shall be unlawful for any contractor to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter, for any person to aid or abet any contractor in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or to conspire at its violation, or to employ an
unlicensed person or mechanic or to permit such employment for the purpose of
doing or performing any of the acts required under the terms of this chapter to
be done or performed by a licensee under this division.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 2.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-275. - Unlawful use of licenses.
   No person having procured a building contractor's license or a
subcontractor's license shall permit or allow the use of his name by any other
person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any
construction, installation, alteration or repairs to any building or structure
within the city.
(Ord. No. 81-135, § 2.2, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-276—5-290. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - FIRE REPAIR CONTRACTORS
Sec. 5-291. - Fire repair contractors license.
   (a)   Builders and contractors doing repair work after fires, making
appraisals of fire losses or giving estimates on fire repairs to owners or
occupants of fire damaged buildings will be required to obtain an annual
license from the city clerk, in conformity with
Chapter 12, Section 6 of this Code.
   (b)   The fees charged under this division shall be in lieu of all other
permit and inspection fees in connection with:
      (1)   Temporary repairs after a fire, such as protecting the building
from the elements with a temporary cover.
      (2)   Making provisions for ceiling, door and window openings.
      (3)   Installing temporary heating, plumbing, lighting or other
utilities.
      (4)   Installing temporary street barriers where needed.
      (5)   Removing debris from premises.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1038, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-
8-22)
Sec. 5-292. - Submission of plans required.
   Permits must be taken out on all repair work contemplated after a fire. The
method of construction must be shown on a plan submitted to and approved by the
department of building and safety prior to the issuance of a permit.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-293. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1038, adopted June 6, 2005, deleted §
5-293 in its entirety. Former §
5-293 pertained to application for permit; bond required, and derived from Ord.
No. 81-96, § 2.3, adopted Nov. 4, 1982.
Sec. 5-294. - Fees.
   The fee to be paid for the annual fire repair contractors license shall be
$100.00.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-295. - Revocation of permit.
   All permits issued under this division shall be conditioned upon all work
being done promptly in a workmanlike manner and meeting all applicable code
standards. The director of building and safety is hereby empowered to revoke
the license or permit of any person failing to meet the standards of
workmanship required by the applicable codes and ordinances of the city and the
state. In the event of a revocation of a permit there shall be no refund of
fees.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 2.5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Secs. 5-296—5-310. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - HIGH PRESSURE BOILER CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-311. - Scope.
   This article, except those items specified in section
5-312, shall apply to and govern:
      (1)   All steam boilers.
      (2)   All hot water boilers.
      (3)   All steam or fuel actuated prime movers (engines and turbines).
      (4)   All ammonia refrigeration systems used in commercial or industrial
buildings or facilities, or in multiple dwellings containing six housing units
or more. (Refrigeration systems for buildings of six housing units or less
shall be governed by the city mechanical code.)
      (5)   All refrigeration systems having a unit capacity of over 50 tons.
All refrigeration systems using all new classifications, or their equivalent
refrigerants as defined by the American Standards Association for Mechanical
Refrigeration Code, or ANSI/ASHRAE, to include all amendments and revisions
thereto.
      (6)   All refrigeration systems with a capacity over 50 tons when used in
buildings or facilities of public assembly such as: educational, fraternal,
governmental, religious, sports, amusements, hospital, penal or institutional
level.
      (7)   The regulation and licensing of all stationary engineers, boiler
operators, refrigeration operators and turbine and reciprocating engine
operators.
      (8)   The regulation, licensing, and operating procedures of power plants
over 15 megawatts (MW), and high pressure heating plants over 50,000 pounds/
hour.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 1.2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-
20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-312. - Exclusions.
   This article shall not apply to the following:
   Absorption refrigeration systems that are installed in accordance with the
American Standard Code for mechanical refrigeration, as published by the
American Society of Refrigeration Engineers. However, absorption systems that
are mechanically driven, solid fuel-fired, or nuclear powered must have a
licensed steam operator on duty.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 1.3, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-313. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   Aggregate shall mean the total of the horsepower/tonnage or heating surface
in a group of equipment.
   Alteration shall mean a change in the piping structure or construction of
boilers, fired pressure vessels, unfired pressure vessels or any equipment
coming within the scope of this article.
   Annual operating permit shall mean the written permission granted by the
building and safety department to an owner to operate a power plant for a
specified period.
   Appurtenance shall mean an adjunct or accessory required in connection with
boilers, fired pressure vessels, unfired pressure vessels, prime movers or
their auxiliaries. For example, the water column, blow-off valves and steam
pressure gauge are appurtenances of a boiler.
   Attending licensed operator shall mean the licensed operator who is
designated by the person having control or management of the property, or other
person, to operate the equipment.
   Automatic monitoring shall mean any Underwriters Laboratory approved energy
system which operates a mechanical and/or electronic device or system.
   Auxiliary shall mean any of the various pieces of equipment such as but not
limited to: fans, stokers and pumps required in the operation of a boiler,
fired pressure vessel or prime mover.
   Auxiliary room shall mean space enclosed or set apart, in which the
auxiliaries incident to a boiler or fire pressure vessel are housed.
   Banked operation , the banked operation of a boiler or fired pressure vessel
shall mean that the fuel supply has been positively cut off so that no fuel
shall be introduced into the firing chamber, either automatically or manually;
that air supplied in the firing chamber shall be below that used under normal
operating conditions and blocked securely so that it cannot be increased toward
the normal operating level; that the pressure in the vessel is below the
authorized maximum at the time the fired pressure vessel is banked; and that
the pressure in the vessel will continue to recede from the authorized
pressure.
   Board shall mean the Board of Safety Engineers in the city as established by
this article.
   Boiler shall mean a pressure vessel containing a liquid and in which vapor
is generated or pressure is developed by the application of heat resulting from
the conversion of any form of energy. For the purpose of this article, the
above shall be the definition of a boiler together with the following:
Superheaters, whether integral or separately fired, economizers, all boiler
appurtenances, all steam or vapor piping and fittings connecting the boiler
drum to superheaters, all piping from the boiler inlet and outlet connections
up to and including the stop valve or valves required by the A.S.M.E. Boiler
Code, all feed piping and fittings starting with the inlet valve to the
economizer or to the boiler drum and all boiler blow-off piping and fittings
from the boiler proper, water walls, or economizers, to and including the valve
or valves as required by the A.S.M.E. Boiler Code.
   Boiler classification shall mean boilers classified as follows:
      (1)   High pressure boiler shall mean a fired pressure vessel carrying
over 15 psig or, where vapor is not generated, a boiler in which the liquid
temperature exceeds 250 degrees Fahrenheit and the liquid pressure exceeds 160
psig.
      (2)   Low pressure boiler shall mean any fired pressure vessel in which
the maximum allowable working pressure for steam or other vapor is limited to
15 psig or, where vapor is not generated, a boiler in which the liquid
temperature does not exceed 250 degrees Fahrenheit and the liquid pressure does
not exceed 160 psig.
   Boiler horsepower shall mean ten square feet of boiler or fired pressure
vessel heating surface. The horsepower of vapor generating pressure vessels of
a type not having heating surface exposed to products of combustion may be
based on accepted energy units, conversion factors and conduction formulae.
   Boiler room shall mean a space enclosed or set apart, in which one or more
boilers or fired pressure vessels are installed.
   City shall mean City of Dearborn.
   Compliance officer shall mean the city employee designated by the director
of the building and safety department to enforce this division.
   Department shall mean the Building and Safety Department.
   Director shall mean the Director of the Building and Safety Department in
the City of Dearborn.
   Examiner shall mean the examiner of the Building and Safety Department in
the City of Dearborn.
   Engine horsepower shall mean 33,000 foot pounds per minute or the expanding
of 42.42 BTUs per minute.
   He shall be used as a nonsexist term referring to men and women alike.
   Heating surface shall mean any part of a boiler or fired pressure vessel
having liquid or vapor on one side and heat resulting from combustion on the
other side which can be determined by the state boiler board of boiler rules
and the A.S.M.E. Code.
   License shall mean a formal permission granted by the department of building
and safety permitting an individual person to operate for a specified period
specific classes of boilers and other equipment coming within the scope of this
article.
   Licensed operator or engineer shall mean a person holding any one of the
licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this article, authorizing
him to operate, or supervise the operation of, specified classes of boilers,
and other equipment coming within the scope of this article.
   Low load shall mean a reduced capacity or idle/banked rated capacity with no
more than 50 percent utilization of the maximum rated capacity of either
heating or cooling systems.
   Occupied shall mean periods of time the building is open for business or
operational activities.
   Operation outside of normal business hours shall mean the presence of a
licensed operator shall not be required when the premises served by steam
boilers or hot water boilers (as for example, nights, weekends and holidays)
are closed to normal operations or public usage, provided all of the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   The aggregate heating surface of the boiler system does not exceed
1,500 square feet.
      (2)   Steam boilers are equipped with approved safety relief valves set
and stamped to relieve at not more than 15 psig, and hot water boilers are
equipped with approved safety relief valves set and stamped to relieve at not
more than 160 psig.
      (3)   An approved automatic means of feeding water into the boilers is
provided.
      (4)   Boilers are equipped with an approved pressure control with a
maximum setting not to exceed 90 percent of the setting of the safety relief
valves or safety valves, and, in addition, hot water boilers are equipped with
an approved temperature control with a maximum setting of 250 degrees
Fahrenheit.
      (5)   An approved control requiring manual resetting is installed which
will shut off the fuel and air supply in the event of low water.
      (6)   During this period the boiler shall be used only for space heating,
indirect hot water supply heating, or the maintaining of temperatures of idle
processes.
      (7)   Such methods of operation shall not be put into effect until
written permission has been granted by the department.
      (8)   The equipment must have two approved low water cutoffs as required
by the city boiler code.
   Operate shall mean to have control and responsibility for the safe operation
of heating and/or cooling systems or equipment.
   Permit shall mean written permission granted by the department of building
and safety a person to install, replace, alter or construct a specified piece
of equipment at a specific location.
   Portable boiler operating permit shall mean a permit to operate boiler used
for temporary heating, to process steam, or for heating water for industry-type
operations. A portable boiler operating permit may be issued with the approval
of the building and safety department for a maximum of six months.
   Post of duty shall mean the station place or position to be occupied by a
person licensed under this article while carrying out his assigned tasks and
responsibilities.
   Power plant shall mean a building or factory including all of the equipment
for generating power or for purposes of a heating boiler plant.
   Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure
thereon.
   Pressure shall mean pounds per square inch (psig).
   Prime mover shall mean an initial source of motive power, such as an engine
or turbine, which receives heat or energy in some other natural form and
converts it into mechanical power which is then applied to drive other
machinery.
   Weld shall mean to unite metallic parts by heating, to a plastic or fluid
state, and then allowing the metal to flow together with or without the
addition of other molten metal.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 1.4, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-
20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-314. - Violations.
   The violation of any provision of this article shall be and constitute a
separate offense under this article for each and every day such violation shall
continue.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 6.5, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-315. - Penalty.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 6.6, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-316. - Repeal.
   Ordinance No. 81-66 of the city and all amendments thereto, and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly
repealed.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 6.7, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-317. - Requirement of licensed operator.
   Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, each boiler and/or
refrigeration system shall be licensed and attended by a licensed operator or
engineer.
(Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Secs. 5-318—5-330. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF SAFETY ENGINEERS
Sec. 5-331. - Created; membership.
   (a)   There is hereby created a board of safety engineers.
   (b)   The board of safety engineers shall consist of five members appointed
by the mayor and who shall serve at the discretion of the mayor in accordance
with the city charter. The director of building and safety, or his designee,
and the compliance officer, shall be ex-officio members of the board and shall
be permitted to vote on matters coming before the board. The mayor shall
further appoint one qualified alternate for a term of three years. The
alternate shall be subject to call.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.1, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-332. - Qualifications of members.
   (a)   All members of the board of safety engineers shall be residents of the
city and first class stationary engineers in the city. All members of the board
shall have a minimum of ten years experience as a stationary engineer. One
member of the board shall be either a professional or chief engineer, licensed
mechanical engineer, or a city and state licensed boiler installer. One member
of the board shall be a registered energy manager, a certified plan engineer,
or a licensed mechanical operator.
   (b)   A chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected by the members and shall
have the right to vote. The chairman may act as chief examiner of applicants
for licenses under this article or appoint an examiner with the approval of the
director of the building and safety department.
   (c)   The residency requirement may be waived as to two members of the board
in the sole direction of the director.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.1.1, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742,
10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-333. - Rules, regulations and procedures.
   The board of safety engineers shall prescribe its own rules and regulations
for carrying out its functions and duties as prescribed in this division. The
director shall appoint a secretary to the board who shall be a qualified
employee from the building and safety department who shall have the following
duties:
      (1)   To keep all records and minutes and proceedings of the board and to
assist the compliance officer in making and keeping such records as required of
him by the provision hereof.
      (2)   To be in attendance at all open meetings of the board insofar as it
is possible.
      (3)   To send out any and all necessary notices authorized by the board,
director, or compliance officer this Code.
      (4)   To perform such other duties as the board, director, or compliance
officer may delegate to him.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.1.2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-334. - Powers and duties.
   The board of safety engineers is hereby authorized and empowered:
      (1)   To hear and conduct appeals from rulings or decisions of the
director or compliance officer as to the requirements of this article, when it
is impossible for a building contractor or an owner to obtain the materials
specified for use in this article; or when it is undesirable to use the
materials specified because of improvements or new discoveries made, or when it
is impractical or undesirable to follow the method or procedure prescribed by
this article. The board, in its discretion, may approve any material proposed
as a substitute for those specified in this article, or may in its discretion
approve any method or procedure as a substitute for that herein prescribed. In
interpreting this article, the board shall give due consideration to the
practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the article, but
shall in all cases so interpret this article as to observe the spirit thereof,
secure the public safety and do substantial justice.
      (2)   To conduct hearings on the suspension or revocation of all
licenses, as provided in this article, and to make recommendations to the
department.
      (3)   To conduct investigations and make recommendations pertaining to
the effective operation and application of this article to the department.
      (4)   To review examinations of applicants for licenses issued under this
article.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-335. - Quorum.
   Three members of the board of safety engineers shall constitute a quorum,
and the concurring vote of at least three members shall be necessary to take
action by the board.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.3, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-336. - Inspector—Appointment.
   The compliance officer shall be appointed by the director of building and
safety by and in accordance with the civil service provisions of the City
Charter. The compliance officer shall hold any licenses or certifications that
may be deemed necessary to perform his duties.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.4, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-337. - Same—Duties.
   The compliance officer shall have the following duties:
      (1)   He shall carry out and enforce the terms and provisions of this
article and any and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto.
      (2)   He shall prepare, subject to the approval of the board and the
joint commission of reciprocating municipalities, the examination questions of
applicants for licenses under this article, and shall hear and conduct all such
examinations, which examinations shall consist or oral and written questions
and practical demonstrations which shall be sufficient to prove the competency
of the applicant for the license applied for. All such examination questions
and the answers thereto shall be kept in the possession of the department and
shall be kept under lock and key at all times; provided, however, that all such
answers to the examinations shall be regarded as confidential and shall be open
to inspection only by members of the board, its secretary, or by the applicant
himself, for a period of not more than 60 days after the examination has been
taken by the applicant. The compliance officer shall be chief examiner of
examinations and may appoint an examiner with the approval of the director of
the building and safety department with concurrence of the board of safety
engineers.
      (3)   He shall be authorized to suspend the license of any person holding
such license under this article for any of the following reasons:
         a.   Intoxication while on duty.
         b.   Incompetency.
         c.   Neglect of duty.
         d.   Failure to keep apparatus under his charge in good operating
condition and order.
         e.   Leaving the apparatus under his custody without a competent
substitute thereof.
         f.   For any reason, even though not listed above, which in the
judgment of the compliance officer, shows conduct on the part of the licensee
that would endanger the safety of persons or property.
   Immediately upon such suspension, the department shall notify the owner of
the apparatus or equipment which the licensee was operating, or his agent, of
such suspension with a written statement of the reasons thereof, and shall file
a copy of such notice and reasons with the secretary of the board who shall
thereupon forthwith notify such licensee to show cause within ten days from the
date of such suspension why his license should not be revoked, and such show
cause shall be served upon the inspector or director and forwarded to the
department as soon as possible. At the time of giving such licensee notice to
show cause, he shall be served with a copy of the reasons for his suspension.
It shall be unlawful for any person whose license is suspended to operate any
boiler or pressure vessel or equipment covered by this article, and the
inspector is hereby authorized to take into his possession the license of any
and all certificates issued to the licensee by the city and hold them until a
hearing on the suspension has been held and a determination made by the board
as to whether the license will be revoked. The board of safety engineers shall
conduct a hearing within a reasonable time after such show cause is delivered
to the division or department so as to afford substantial justice.
      (4)   The compliance officer may approve additional operating capacity of
up to 20 percent of the existing aggregate total if warranted by special
conditions and with the approval of the board and the building and safety
department. Operations of this type shall obtain a new annual operating permit.
Required applications and approval must be granted by the board and the
director of the building and safety department, and all required fees paid.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.5, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-338. - Procedure on appeal.
   If any person desires to appeal to the board of safety engineers any
decision or ruling of the inspector or director of building and safety or
examiner on any matter or variance under this article, such appeal shall be
made in writing and filed with the secretary of the board 28 days before the
board meeting, and, at the same time, such person shall pay to the finance
department any and all required fees. These fees shall not be refundable. If
giving notice of hearing before the board is not otherwise provided for herein,
the secretary of the board shall give such notice to all the known interested
parties who are not members of the board at least 28 days before the date of
such hearing either by personal service or certified mail, and the hearing
shall be held at such time and place in the city as shall be therein stated.
Proof of service or giving of such notice shall be made and filed with the
board prior to the hearing.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.7, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-339. - Compensation.
   Members of the board of safety engineers, excepting officers and employees
of the city, shall be paid such compensation as the city council shall
determine.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 2.6, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Secs. 5-340—5-355. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION
Sec. 5-356. - Standards.
   (a)   The rules for construction of power and low pressure heating boilers,
as formulated by the boiler code committee and published by the A.S.M.E.
(American Society of Mechanical Engineers), 1984 edition, and the rules and
construction of unfired pressure vessels, 1981 edition, being a report of the
subcommittee of boiler code committee of unfired pressure vessels and published
by the A.S.M.E. and the American Standards Association ANSI/ASHRAE 15-78 (B9.1)
Code for Mechanical Refrigeration set forth the standards for and shall govern
boiler, pressure vessels and refrigeration construction installation,
inspection, operation, and safety for all apparatus and equipment covered by
this article in the city, together with all amendments thereto and shall be
regarded as good practice in such work the requirements of the State of
Michigan Board of Boiler Rules (Michigan State Boiler Act of 1965, as amended)
and the National Board Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.
   (b)   The compliance officer or director shall have the authority to issue
notices of violation or appearance tickets that may be necessary to enforce
this code of ordinances or protect the health and safety of the community and
building occupants.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 3.1, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-356A. - Authority.
   (a)   [Operating rules.] All power plants shall meet the following
guidelines in reference to operating rules. All new power plants must submit
drawings and plans to the board of safety engineers and an outline of their
mode of operation. The compliance officer shall review all license requirements
and make recommendations to the board chairman and department of economic and
community development for the minimum number of engineers needed on duty and
the grade of license required.
   (b)   [Approval authority.] The board of safety engineers or director shall
have the authority to approve drawings, plans, specifications and approve the
minimum number of licensed engineers per power plant.
   (c)   Board authority .
      (1)   The board of director shall have the authority to order the
compliance officer to investigate a violation regarding the safe operation of a
power plant or facility. The board shall make recommendations and develop
guidelines based on the following national standards:
         a.   ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.
         b.   Hartford Steam Boilers standards and lots.
         c.   State Mechanical Code or BOCA National Mechanical Code of 1999
and amendments.
   (d)   [Annual permit required.] The operators of power plants and heating/
cooling systems must obtain an annual operating permit to be issued by the
department of economic and community development subject to compliance with
this article.
(Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 09-1262, 12-14-09)
Sec. 5-357. - Unlawful construction or installation.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or install in the city an apparatus or
equipment covered by the provisions of this article which does not conform to
this article governing new installations; provided, however, that all boilers
or unfired pressure vessels installed and ready for use or in use at the time
this article takes effect shall be made to conform as nearly as possible to
this article as to such existing installations, and the procedure prescribed in
this article shall be used in determining the maximum allowable working
pressure for such apparatus or equipment; provided, however, that boilers,
pressure vessels and refrigerating systems constructed or installed in
compliance with the standards in effect at the time of such construction or
installation shall be required to conform to standards subsequently adopted
only to the extent that the department shall deem necessary for the safety of
persons and property.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 3.2, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-358. - Insurance company inspector reports.
   The department may accept a copy of the state certificate internal
inspection report in lieu of city internal inspection if the inspector has a
national board license and the insurance company writes boiler and machinery
insurance in the state, and if the owner makes a written request for such
acceptance to the department of building and safety. All insurance inspectors
must report violations governed by this article to the department within 72
hours and comply with all rules and regulations of the city boiler code and
safety code. A permit shall be required.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 3.3, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-359. - Suspension.
   The director or compliance officer may at any time suspend a license or
permit when in his opinion the apparatus, equipment, or system is a safety
hazard or does not conform to this article.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 3.4, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-360. - Permit and license fees.
   The fees for annual inspections are listed in chapter 9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 3.5, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-361. - Records.
   The inspector is hereby directed, empowered and charged with the duty of
making and filing with the department a complete record of the type or kind,
serial number, name of manufacturer, size, age, condition, allowable pressure,
location and date of last inspection, and date of issuance of inspection
certificates covering all apparatuses or equipment governed by this article and
of all insurance company inspection reports and applications for permits
approved by him as required in this article. All inaccurate or missing records
shall be corrected within 18 months from the adoption of this article.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 3.6, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-362. - Automatic and/or monitoring devices; operation during low load
conditions.
   If a high or low pressure boiler system or refrigeration system is equipped
with an automatic and/or monitoring device or system, the presence of a
licensed boiler operator shall not be required during low load conditions such
as holidays, weekends, and other low load times, provided all of the following
requirements have been met:
      (1)   The owner or operator of the building where such device or system
is located must have an annual operating permit for the automatic monitoring
device. Such permit shall be approved by the director of economic and community
development or his designee. The fee for permit shall be as set forth in
section
9-68 of this Code.
      (2)   The aggregate heating surface of the boiler system does not exceed
1,000 square feet.
      (3)   All steam boilers and refrigeration systems equipped with such
devices or systems must be equipped with approved energy management systems.
      (4)   All steam boilers equipped with such devices or systems must be
equipped with approved safety relief valves set and stamped to relieve pressure
at not more than 15 psig. All hot water boilers equipped with such devices or
systems must be equipped with approved safety relief valves set and stamped to
relieve at not more than 160 psig.
      (5)   An approved automatic means of feeding water into the boiler must
be provided.
      (6)   Boilers are equipped with a master control which includes an
approved pressure control device with a maximum setting not to exceed 85
percent of the setting of the safety relief valves or safety valves. Hot water
boilers must be equipped with an approved temperature control device which
includes a maximum setting of 240 degrees Fahrenheit.
      (7)   An approved control device or system must be installed which
requires manual resetting and will shut-off fuel and air supplies in the event
of a low water situation.
      (8)   The boiler room must have two means of ingress and egress and
comply with all applicable provisions of the building code.
      (9)   All boiler and chiller systems must have required safety controls.
Boilers must have two approved low water cut-off devices of systems with manual
reset. Chillers must be equipped with manual rest.
      (10)   All refrigeration systems must have required safety controls
approved by the current ASHRAE Mechanical Refrigeration Code or Underwriters
Laboratory energy management systems.
      (11)   Such methods of operation shall require the approval of the board
and the director of the economic and community development department. The
board may grant temporary approval if conditions necessitate approval for one
season.
      (12)   The compliance officer or the director may revoke approval if any
condition of approval has not been met upon providing written notice to the
property owner. Such approval may be revoked if the required renewal fees are
not paid or property owner is in violation of any applicable codes or
ordinances to the equipment.
   Furthermore, the compliance officer may enter the premises at any time
during normal business hours for the purpose of testing any monitoring or
automatic control device in order to ensure code compliance and to ensure the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99;
Ord. No. 09-1262, 12-14-09)
Secs. 5-363—5-380. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - LICENSES
Sec. 5-381. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Attending licensed operator shall mean the licensed operator who is
designated by the person having control or management of the property, or other
person, to operate the equipment.
   Licensed operator in responsible charge shall mean a person holding any one
of the licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this article
authorizing him to operate or supervise the operation of specified classes of
boilers, fired pressure vessels, prime movers, refrigeration and equipment.
   Person to be in charge of shall mean the immediate licensed supervisor of an
employee at the time of the operation of the apparatus or equipment governed by
this article when relating to such person being in charge of or having
supervision over persons in this section.
(Ord. No. 85-323, §§ 4.1, 4.1a, 4.1b, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord.
No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-382. - Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in charge of or to operate,
supervise or to be in charge of persons operating any apparatus or equipment
governed by this article in the city without a license to do so; provided,
however, that no license shall be issued to any person who has not attained the
age of 18 years.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.1, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-383. - Classification of licenses—Established.
   There shall be issued in the city the following classifications of licenses
involving apparatus and equipment.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-384. - Same—Low pressure boiler operator.
   There shall be a classification of license known as low pressure boiler
operator which shall be issued to persons properly qualified for the operation
of boilers where steam pressure does not exceed 15 pounds per square inch, the
liquid pressure does not exceed 160 psig or the liquid temperature does not
exceed 250 degrees Fahrenheit. Such licenses shall be limited to operation of
equipment having an aggregate of 5,000 square feet of heating surface and shall
be issued to any person who has had a minimum of one year's experience in the
operation of maintenance of low and high pressure boilers, prime movers or
their auxiliaries and has passed a satisfactory examination. The time spent as
a boiler trainee, or general helper, will be credited toward actual experience
for qualification prerequisites.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(a), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-385. - Same—High pressure boiler operator.
   There shall be a classification of license known as high pressure boiler
operator which shall be issued to persons properly qualified for the operation
of boilers in which the steam pressure exceeds 15 pounds per square inch, the
water pressure exceeds 160 psig, or where the liquid temperature exceeds 250
degrees Fahrenheit. Such license shall be limited to the operation of equipment
having an aggregate 5,000 square feet of heating surface and shall be issued to
any person who has had two years' experience in the operation or maintenance of
high pressure boilers, prime movers, or other auxiliaries, and has passed a
satisfactory examination showing that he is familiar with and can operate such
boilers with safety to life and property. The applicant shall possess a low
pressure boiler operator's license and have been actively employed as such an
operator for a minimum of one year or shall have spent two years as a boiler
trainee, boiler room fireman or apprentice.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(b), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-386. - Same—Fourth class stationary engineer.
   There shall be a classification of license known as fourth class stationary
engineer which shall be issued only to persons who operate hoisting portable
boilers and privately owned track locomotive equipment, excluding locomotive
boilers used on railroad trunk lines. Each person to whom this classification
of license is issued must have at least two years' experience in the operation
of such mechanical equipment, working under the direction of a licensed
engineer and must pass a satisfactory examination that he has reasonable skill
and familiarity in the operation of such an apparatus. The license issued for
this classification shall be in a card form and must be carried on the person
of the operator when engaged in the operation of such hoisting or portable
apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate hoisting or portable
apparatus without such a license, except that a person who holds a first class
stationary engineer's license may operate this equipment.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(c), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-387. - Same—Third class stationary engineer.
   There shall be a classification of license known as third class stationary
engineer which shall be issued to personnel who have had three years experience
in the operation of power boilers in a high pressure boiler plant, plus
sufficient experience in the actual operation of steam prime movers. The
applicant shall be given credit for boiler maintenance experience or as an
apprentice in an approved training program. Such person shall pass a
satisfactory examination showing he is competent and understands the operation
of high pressure boilers and prime movers. The department, with the concurrence
of the board of safety engineers, may waive the length of experience for this
classification if the applicant submits documentary evidence of equivalent
education. Such licenses shall be limited to the operation of equipment having
an aggregate heating surface of 10,000 square feet, or less, or steam prime
movers not exceeding 150 horsepower.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(d), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-388. - Same—Second class stationary engineer.
   (a)   An applicant for a second class stationary engineer shall meet one of
the following experience requirements:
      (1)   He shall possess a third class stationary engineer license and
shall have had at least one year of experience as a third-class stationary
engineer.
      (2)   He shall be an engineering graduate of an engineering college of
recognized standing and have been actually employed in the engineering or
research division of a steam-electric power generating unit for at least one
year.
      (3)   He shall have at least four years of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 10,000 square feet, the foregoing experience to be
established by documented evidence from present and previous employers.
      (4)   He shall have at least one year of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 10,000 square feet, plus sufficient experience in
the actual operation of steam prime movers in excess of 100 horsepower to make
a total of at least four years, the foregoing experience to be established by
documented evidence from present and previous employers.
      (5)   He shall have at least one year of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 10,000 square feet, plus sufficient experience in
the actual operation of boilers in a high-pressure boiler plant having an
aggregate heating surface of more than 5,000 square feet to make a total of at
least four years, the foregoing experience to be established by documented
evidence from present and previous employers.
   (b)   He shall pass a satisfactory examination showing he is competent to
operate and understands the operation of a high pressure boiler and prime
mover. The department, with the concurrence of the board of safety engineers,
may waive the experience requirement for this classification if the applicant
submits documentary evidence of equivalent education. Such a license shall be
limited to the operation of equipment having an aggregate heating surface of
25,000 square feet or to prime movers of 250 horsepower.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(e), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-389. - Same—First class stationary engineer.
   (a)   There shall be a classification of license known as first class
stationary engineer which shall be unlimited as to horsepower of boilers,
engines and refrigeration. Such license shall be granted to any person who
passes satisfactory examinations showing he is competent and understands the
operation of any and all boiler, engine, and refrigeration equipment covered by
this article and meets one of the following experience requirements:
      (1)   He shall have a second class stationary engineer's license and
shall have had at least two years of experience under such license.
      (2)   He shall have at least six years of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 20,000 square feet, which experience is
established by documented evidence from present or previous employers.
      (3)   He shall have at least two years of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 20,000 square feet, plus sufficient experience in
the actual operation of steam prime movers in excess of 250 horsepower to make
a total of at least six years, which experience is established by documented
evidence from present and previous employers.
      (4)   He shall have at least two years of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 20,000 square feet, plus sufficient experience in
the actual operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an
aggregate heating surface of more than 10,000 square feet to make a total of at
least five years, which experience is established by documented evidence from
present and previous employers.
      (5)   He shall be a graduate mechanical engineer from a recognized
college or university, shall have had two years' experience in any steam plant,
and shall have had a second class stationary engineer's license for at least
one year, with the further provision that one year of the steam plant
experience may be waived by the board if the applicant has been employed in the
engineering or research divisions of a steam-electric power generating plant to
make a total of at least six years experience, which experience is established
by documented evidence from present or previous employers.
   (b)   The department, with concurrence of the board of safety engineers, may
waive the experience requirement for this classification if the applicant
submits documentary evidence of equivalent education.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(f), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-389A. - Facility engineer.
   There shall be a classification of license known as facility engineer, which
shall be unlimited as to horsepower of boiler and refrigeration systems. Such
license shall be granted to any person who passes an examination showing he is
competent and understands the operations of any and all equipment in buildings
with over 350,000 square feet of building space. These facilities shall have a
licensed facility engineer on site. In addition to the above, all applicants
shall have at least six years of experience in boilers and refrigeration
equipment, three years experience as a supervisor, and have knowledge of
building, and energy safety codes. In lieu of the above, and with the approval
of the board, an individual may:
      (1)   Possess a first class stationary engineer license for two years;
      (2)   Be a graduate mechanical engineer or have a degree in facilities
from a recognized college or university, with two years experience in
powerhouse boilers and refrigeration systems; or
      (3)   The board will waive the experience requirement with the
recommendation of the code compliance officer if all other requirements are met
and written evidence of such is presented to the board and the department of
building and safety.
(Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-389B. - Chief powerhouse stationary engineer.
   There shall be a classification of license known as chief powerhouse
stationary engineer which shall be unlimited as to horsepower of boilers,
engines, turbines, and refrigeration systems. Such license shall be granted to
any person who passes a satisfactory examination showing he or she is
competent, who meets all the requirements and understands the operation of any
and all equipment, and who has the supervisory experience necessary to assume
responsible charge of various engineering duties covered by the code. In
addition, the applicant shall meet one of the following experience and
educational requirements for all facilities over 500,000 square feet, said
facilities being required to have a licensed chief powerhouse engineer on site:
      (1)   The individual shall have a first class stationary engineer's
license with at least two years of experience under such license; or
      (2)   The individual shall have at least eight years of experience in the
actual operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 25,000 square feet plus sufficient experience in
the actual operation of prime movers in excess of 500 horsepower; or
      (3)   The individual shall have had at least eight years of experience in
the actual operation of a power-house in a high pressure plant having an
aggregate heating surface of more than 25,000 square feet which experience is
established by documented evidence from present or previous employers; or
      (4)   The individual shall have been a licensed supervisor in the field
of a large powerhouse high pressure boiler and prime movers with sufficient
experience in the operation and maintenance of equipment in a steam-electric
power generating plant for at least eight years; or
      (5)   The individual shall be a graduate mechanical engineer from a
recognized university or college; shall have had four years experience in any
steam plant and shall have had a first class stationary engineer license, or
equal grade of professional license if the board approves the application.
(Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-390. - Same—Refrigeration operators.
   (a)   First class refrigeration operator. Refrigeration systems of unlimited
tonnage using any kind of refrigerant may and shall be under the supervision of
a licensed operator in responsible charge possessing at least a first class
refrigeration operator's license. An applicant for a first class refrigeration
operator's license shall have had at least two years experience in the
operation of nondomestic refrigeration systems, or, he shall be an engineering
graduate of a college of recognized standing, or, shall have satisfactorily
completed an acceptable course in refrigeration engineering, as established by
completion letters or certificates indicating in detail his schedule of time
and studies, and shall have at least one year of experience in the operation of
construction of nondomestic refrigeration systems. In addition to the above,
all applicants for first class refrigeration operators license shall take an
appropriate examination.
   (b)   Second class refrigerator operator. Refrigeration systems, the largest
of which contains not more than 1,000 pounds of refrigerant or is driven by
motors not in excess of 300 tons, shall be under the supervision of a licensed
operator in responsible charge possessing at least a second class refrigeration
operator's license. An applicant for second class refrigeration operator's
license shall have had at least one year of experience in the operation of
nondomestic refrigeration systems; or he shall be an engineering graduate of a
college of recognized standing or shall have satisfactorily completed a written
examination or acceptable course in refrigeration engineering, as established
by completion letters or certificates indicating in detail his schedule of time
and studies, and shall have at least six months experience in the operation or
construction of nondomestic refrigeration systems.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(g), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-391. - Same—Turbine and reciprocating engine operator.
   There shall be a classification of license known as turbine and
reciprocating engine operator. Each person to whom this classification of
license is issued shall have at least four years of experience in the operation
of such equipment and must pass a satisfactory examination showing that he
understands the operation of such apparatus.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(h), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-391A. - Trainee operators.
   There shall be a classification of license known as trainee who shall work
under the direct supervision of a licensed engineer. This individual:
      (1)   Shall have at least six months of experience or equal hours of
formal education approved by the board or the compliance officer;
      (2)   Shall have at least eight credit hours of schooling or college
courses in boilers and refrigeration and three months of work experience; or
      (3)   The board may waive the experience requirement upon recommendation
of the code compliance officer.
(Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-391B. - Limited license.
   A license may be issued by the director upon approval of the board of safety
engineers for one approved building only. This license is applicable only to
buildings with 3,000 square feet low pressure boilers and/or 400 ton
refrigeration systems. Applicants must have one year of documented experience,
and are subject to approval of the board of safety engineers. This license must
be upgraded after two years to an appropriate license in this article.
(Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-392. - Post of duty—Low pressure boiler operators and engineers.
   In low pressure boiler plants, the post of duty of the licensed operator in
responsible charge shall be in the boiler rooms which contain the auxiliaries
pertinent to the operation of such boiler or boilers, providing such rooms are
accessible for passage, visibility or audibility. "Post of duty" need not apply
when banked operations are met.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(i), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-393. - Same—High pressure boilers operators and engineers.
   In high pressure boiler plants or stationary prime mover plants where
licensed personnel are required by this article to be in attendance, the post
of duty of such operator or engineer shall be in the room where such boilers,
engines, turbines, or auxiliaries are located pertinent to the plant operation,
if such rooms are readily accessible for passage, visibility or audibility.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(j), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787,
8-3-99)
Sec. 5-394. - Same—Refrigeration operators.
   In all facilities that have refrigeration systems that function primarily as
support for actual testing and production and not for human comfort cooling,
the post of duty of the licensed refrigeration operator at all times when the
systems are in operation shall be on the premises within easy reach and hearing
distance of where the equipment which he is licensed to operate is located,
provided that the operator may be absent for a period of not more that 60
consecutive minutes during any two hours for the purpose of inspecting or
adjusting parts, auxiliaries or appurtenances of the system which he is
licensed to operate; provided further that the compliance officer or director
of the economic and community development department shall be permitted to
modify, by written notice to the owner, any of the above limitations where
special conditions warrant such action, and on systems where in the opinion of
the department, the refrigeration plant design is such that the operation does
not endanger the life or health of individuals. The post of duty of the
operator when the systems are in operation shall be on the premises in which
the refrigeration systems are located.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(k), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742,
10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 09-1262, 12-14-09)
Sec. 5-395. - Same—Exceptions.
   Fulltime licensed personnel in attendance will not be required for the
following equipment:
      (1)   Boilers or pressure vessels operating under banked operation or
under the requirements of section
5-313.
      (2)   Low pressure steam boilers with 1,000 square feet aggregate or less
of heating surface.
      (3)   Low pressure hot water heating and hot water supply boilers having
1,000 square feet aggregate or less of heating surface.
      (4)   Direct low fired pressure hot water heaters used for purposes other
than space heating whose self-contained capacity does not exceed 120 gallons;
whose heating surface does not exceed an aggregate total of 750 square feet
regardless of pressure or temperature conditions. Such apparatuses shall,
however, be designed and constructed for the pressure carried, shall be
equipped with A.S.M.E. approved safety valve and appliances, and must comply
with all requirements of the state board of boiler rules and the city boiler
code.
      (5)   All rooftop refrigeration systems under 150 tons aggregate provided
they are properly monitored and maintained by an approved ASHRAE and Mechanical
Refrigeration Code or Underwriters Laboratory energy management system. The
compliance officer and the director of the economic and community development
department may modify these limitations, if the plant designs are such that the
operation does not endanger the life, safety or health of individuals.
Operators of refrigeration systems under these exceptions shall be required to
file an annual reliability report to the board of safety engineers.
      (6)   All refrigeration systems classified as a low probability system as
described in the 2006 Michigan Mechanical Code during established non-core
business hours and/or operations, provided the system is equipped with a
central control board as defined in subsections 5-396(b) through (j).
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.2(l), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-742,
10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 09-1262, 12-14-09)
Sec. 5-396. - Same—Centralized control.
   (a)   Post of duty requirements for all refrigeration systems and plants
with low pressure boilers with an aggregate of not more than 5,000 square feet
of heating surface are as follows: the attending licensed operator may be
absent from the area monitored by a central control station in which the
equipment is located for not more than four hours, provided that the safety of
the plant is not jeopardized by his absence.
   (b)   A central control board must monitor all levels of operation of
equipment being controlled, including all safety alarms, valve states,
temperatures and pressures as necessary to ensure complete safe operation. All
equipment shall have manual reset controls on equipment with alarms.
   (c)   A central control station must be continuously manned by personnel
licensed to operate all classes of equipment under centralized control.
Personnel may be absent for up to ten minutes provided that an alert pager
system is in use and approved by the department of economic and community
development.
   (d)   A central control board failure or "no signal" condition shall cause
immediate shutdown of the equipment involved. All such equipment, when shut
down, shall require manual restart at the equipment location. All shut down
alarms causing damage to equipment shall be reported to the department in
writing within 72 hours of detailing the type of alarm and damage caused.
   (e)   The central control station operator shall maintain one year a
continuous separate readout of all system messages. In addition, a working log
may be kept. The operator must obtain a system readout of all equipment at
least twice per shift.
   (f)   The central control system, together with all operator requirements,
and any significant changes that alter the intent of any previously granted
appeal, shall be approved by formal appeal to the board of safety engineers or
the department for the interim period. The written approval shall remain in
force only so long as the system is maintained and operated in a manner such as
to eliminate any undue safety hazard to life, limb, or property.
   (g)   The central control system must have the approval of Underwriters'
Laboratories or other nationally approved independent testing laboratories,
national fire codes, National Electric Code, 1990 BOCA Mechanical Code, and all
amendments thereto.
   (h)   The fee for a special permit required to be issued annually is to be
based on the size of the equipment and chapter 9 of this Code.
   (i)   Licensed personnel may continue to operate equipment under their
control as of June 4, 1985, if approved by the department. Any new employee
must obtain the proper license for the equipment to be operated as required by
this article. The department may require a higher grade license if unusual or
hazardous conditions warrant same. The license requirements shall be subject to
review if there is any change or alteration in equipment at an existing
location.
   (j)   Any holder of a first class engineer license issued under the
requirements of Ordinance No. 81-66, as amended, which license was in good
standing on June 4, 1985, shall, upon payment of fees therefore, be entitled to
a first class stationary engineer license and a first class refrigeration
operator license without further requirements.
(Ord. No. 85-323, §§ 4.2(m)—(o), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 98-
742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 09-1262, 12-14-09)
Sec. 5-396A. - Licensed engineer required.
   Each power plant facility owner must employ a licensed stationary engineer
as described below, who shall be in responsible charge of the power plant
facilities and be registered with the building and safety department.
   (a)   A chief engineer is required for all facilities over 500,000 square
feet, or over 450-megawatt capacity, or 450,000 pound/hour boiler capacity.
   (b)   A facility engineer is required for all facilities over 350,000 square
feet, or over 200-megawatt capacity, or 300,000 pounds/hour boiler capacity.
   (c)   The board of safety engineers may waive the above requirements upon a
showing by the facility owner of sufficient and adequate safeguards and
automatic monitoring systems.
(Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Sec. 5-397. - Application and examination.
   Applicant forms, approved by the board, shall be supplied to any applicant
by the department for all classifications of licenses provided for in this
division. All information and data pertaining to the applicant set forth on
such application form must be answered in full, sworn to before a notary public
and, upon payment of the filing fee, filed with the secretary of the board.
Falsification of any material fact upon the application shall be grounds for
revocation of any license granted. Regular examinations as prescribed by the
board shall be held at a time and place specified by the board in its rules and
regulations. Applicants will be notified of the time and place where such
examinations will be held. Special examinations may be held at the discretion
of the department and at such time and place as designated by the board. When
any applicant for a given classification has passed the required examination
prescribed by the board, the department shall certify such fact to the city
clerk and, upon the payment of the registration fee listed in
Chapter 12, Section 6, the city clerk shall issue the particular license
specified by the department to which such applicant is entitled.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.4, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 5-398. - Posting license.
   Every license granted or issued to any person under this division shall be
hung under glass in the boiler or engine room where such person operates the
mechanical apparatus, except that of fourth class stationary engineer.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.5, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-399. - Issuance of lower classification of license; reexamination.
   Any person applying for a particular classification of a license and failing
to pass the examination required for that classification may, in the discretion
of the department or board, be issued a license of lower classification than
that applied for to which his qualification and his examination may entitle
him, but such person shall not make a reapplication for the license, the
examination for which he failed to pass, or for a higher classification until
after a period of at least 90 days has expired.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.6, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-400. - Expiration and renewal.
   Engineers, and operators, licenses issued under this article shall expire at
12:00 midnight one year from the date of original issuance or one year from the
last expiration date, and shall be renewable at the office of the city clerk
upon approval by the department and upon payment of the fee set forth in
Chapter 12, Section 6. If any licensee fails to apply for a renewal of his
license within 60 days after the expiration thereof, such license will be
deemed to have lapsed. Any person allowing his license to lapse will be subject
to reexamination before obtaining a renewal thereof.
   Before any license shall be issued after an examination or reexamination of
the licensee, as provided in this section, such licensee shall pay the fee as
prescribed in
Chapter 12, Section 6 for the original issuance of the license.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.7, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 5-401. - Periodic refresher training required.
   All engineers licensed in the city must provide proof of satisfactory
completion of a state-approved refresher course in the field of stationary
engineering, every five years commencing January 1, 2001.
   All chief powerhouse engineers and refrigeration engineers must provide
proof of satisfactory completion of a state-approved refresher course in the
field of stationary engineering every five years commencing January 1, 2002.
(Ord. No. 99-787, 8-3-99)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-787, adopted Aug. 3, 1999, replaced §
5-401, which formerly pertained to the exception of miniature boilers and
unfired pressure vessels, and derived from Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.8, adopted June
4, 1985, with a new §
5-401 to read as herein set out.
Sec. 5-402. - Reciprocal clause.
   (a)   The city may participate with other municipalities or states in a
reciprocal program for the licensing of stationary engineers, boiler operators
and refrigeration operators.
   (b)   A person desiring to be licensed as a stationary engineer, boiler
operator or refrigeration operator shall obtain such license in the
reciprocating municipality or state where he is, or will be, employed to
operate boiler plants, steam prime movers or refrigeration systems. Prior to
being issued a license, such person shall submit to the reciprocating
municipality or state a formal notarized document setting forth his
qualifications for same.
   (c)   Municipalities or states desiring to participate with the city in a
reciprocal program for licensing shall have had approved, by an affirmative
action of their legislative bodies, licensing provisions meeting the
requirements set forth in this article. In addition, any state or municipality
which has a department with authority to issue stationary engineers licenses
and examinations equal to that of the city, and which has comparable types of
grades of licenses and requirements, will be acceptable. City reciprocal
licenses may be registered with all communities that are in good standing and
members of the reciprocal committee after payment of a registration fee. The
reciprocal licenses shall be obtained in the municipality wherein the applicant
maintains his principal place of employment.
   (d)   The right of any municipality or state to participate in the
reciprocating provisions of this division shall be determined by the department
and the board of safety engineers. A joint committee of an equal number of
members of the reciprocal agreement may be established to recommend fees and
changes to portions of this article.
   (e)   The fee for the reciprocal registration of any and all of the license
classifications described in section
5-396, which have been issued by a reciprocating municipality and are in good
standing with that body, shall be according to chapter 9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 4.9, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-403. - Chief powerhouse stationary engineer.
   There shall be a classification of license known as chief powerhouse
stationary engineer which shall be unlimited as to horsepower of boilers,
engines, turbines, and refrigeration steam generations. Such license shall be
granted to any person who passes a satisfactory examination showing he is
competent and meets all the requirements and understands the operation of any
and all equipment and has supervisor experience as is necessary to assume
responsible charge of various engineering duties covered by the within code and
meets one of the following experience and educational requirements:
      (1)   He shall have a first class stationary engineer's license and shall
have had at least two years of experience under such license; or
      (2)   He shall have had at least eight hears of experience in the actual
operation of boilers in a high pressure boiler plant having an aggregate
heating surface of more than 25,000 square feet plus sufficient experience in
the actual operation of prime movers in excess of 500 horsepower; or
      (3)   He shall have had at least eight years of experience in the actual
operation of a powerhouse in a high pressure plant having an aggregate heating
surface of more than 25,000 square feet which experience is established by
documented evidence from present or previous employers; or
      (4)   He shall have been a licensed supervisor in the field of a large
powerhouse high pressure boiler and prime movers with sufficient experience in
the operation and maintenance of equipment in a steam-electric power generating
plant for at least eight years; or
      (5)   He shall be a graduate mechanical engineer from a recognized
university or college, shall have had four years experience in any steam plant
and shall have had a first class stationary engineer license, or equal grade of
professional licenses if the board approves his application.
(Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95)
Secs. 5-404—5-420. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS
Sec. 5-421. - Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
install, alter, replace or repair any apparatus or equipment governed by the
provisions of this article, or to begin such work in or for any building or
structure in the city without first having a permit issued therefor. An
application for a permit must be made in writing and permit issued pursuant
thereto by the department prior to beginning any work governed by the
provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to fail or neglect to comply
with the conditions of the permit issued, as hereby required. Any person when
applying for any such permit shall furnish the department with all necessary
plans and/or specifications for such proposed construction, installation,
alteration, replacement or repair and with all proper and sufficient
information relating thereto, and the approval in writing of the department
regarding such plans and/or specifications shall be first obtained before such
permit shall be issued; provided, however, that the department may waive the
above requirement of a permit in the case of alterations, replacements or
repairs, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, to any existing
apparatus or equipment governed by this article where the estimated cost of
such alteration, replacement or repair, both as to labor and materials, will
not exceed $100.00, if such alteration, replacement or repairs will not add to
the capacity of such apparatus or equipment and will not, in the opinion of the
department, be of such a nature as to render an inspection of same necessary.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 5.1, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-422. - Test data, measurements, ratings, capacity.
   Before a permit shall be issued by the department for the installation,
alteration, replacement or repair of any apparatus or equipment covered by this
article, the person seeking such permit shall furnish the department with such
test data, measurements, ratings, capacities or other information as may be
required for the purpose of establishing ratings or capacities of such
apparatus or equipment in accordance with the engineering provisions of this
article.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 5.2, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-423. - Certificate required.
   All test data, measurements, ratings or capacities submitted to the
department, as required in this article, shall be accomplished by an engineer's
certificate certifying to the correctness of such information; such certificate
shall be made by an engineer employed by the manufacturer of the apparatus or
equipment for which the test data, measurements, ratings or capacities is
submitted.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 5.3, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-424. - Secondhand apparatus or equipment.
   The department may require such data, certification, or testing as may be
deemed necessary to determine the rating or capacity of any secondhand
apparatus or equipment governed by the provisions of this article which is no
longer manufactured, or for which the manufacturer's test data, measurements,
ratings or capacity, as required by this article, are not available.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 5.4, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-425. - Repairs ordered; condemnations.
   Whenever the department shall order in writing repairs to be made to any
apparatus or equipment covered by this article, such repairs shall be made
within two weeks from the date of such order if practical; provided, however,
in cases where life or property would be endangered by the use of such
apparatus or equipment without such repairs, the department may in its
discretion shut down such apparatus or equipment forthwith to prevent its
continued use, and may suspend the inspection certificate until the necessary
repairs are made.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 5.5, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-426. - Fees.
   Permit fees for all work governed by this article shall be as specified in
chapter 9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 5.6, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-427. - Unlawful acts.
   In addition to the unlawful acts heretofore designated as violations of this
article, it shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or any person using any
apparatus or equipment governed by the provisions of this article to:
      (1)   After the limits, adjustment, or connection of any safety device in
a maneuver that would change its operation or create a hazard.
      (2)   Alter the adjustment of the safety valve to increase the pressure
in a boiler.
      (3)   Allow hazardous accumulation of scale in the water column pipes to
the boiler.
      (4)   Use apparatus or equipment after suspension of the license of the
operator or the inspection certificate.
      (5)   Operate any apparatus or equipment without a valid and subsisting
license to do so.
      (6)   Willfully neglect to abuse any apparatus or equipment.
      (7)   Operate or cause to be operated any apparatus or equipment in the
city without having complied with the provisions of this article or allowing
any licensee under this article to absent himself from his post of duty without
a licensed person to take his place.
      (8)   Prevent or attempt to prevent any licensee under this article from
performing any act required to be performed by this Code or require or attempt
to prevent a licensee from restoring boiler control devices or the automatic
monitoring of the boiler to proper operating conditions.
      (9)   To operate or to start boiler control devices or automatic
monitoring boilers from a remote location without written permission from the
compliance officer and the department of building and safety.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 6.1, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Sec. 5-428. - Portable boilers.
   Every owner or user of portable or semiportable boilers in the city, on or
before March 1 of each year, shall furnish to the department a written list
setting forth the number of such boilers used, the description of each boiler
and the location thereof in order that an inspection thereof may be made. It
shall be unlawful for any person to use in the city any such boiler until it
has been inspected and an inspection certificate has been given in accordance
with this article.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 6.2, 6-4-85)
Sec. 5-429. - Safety alarms and cut-off controls.
   Each and every boiler governed by this article shall have two low water
safety alarms and cut-off controls of a type easily tested by the compliance
officer without interfering with the operation of the boiler. The alarms shall
be connected with the boiler so that the low water alarm will be sounded when
there is less than two inches of water over the highest point of tubes or crown
sheets and with manual reset controls.
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 6.3, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 98-742, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 99-787, 8-
3-99)
Secs. 5-430—5-445. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.5. - REFRIGERATION CODE
Sec. 5-446. - Scope.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all new and used refrigerating
systems hereafter installed, to all existing refrigerating systems and to all
repairing, servicing, alterations or additions to new and existing
refrigeration systems; provided, that this article shall not apply to
refrigerating systems in private passenger motor vehicles using refrigerants
designated as Group 1 Refrigerants in the American Standards Association Safety
Code for Mechanical Refrigeration, A.S.A. B9.1-1958, or the latest revision
thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 1.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 95-631, 4-18-95)
Sec. 5-447. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable regulations and
safeguards for persons and property and to correct certain practices which are
inconsistent with public safety.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 1.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-448. - A.S.A. standard.
   All refrigerating systems shall be constructed, installed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the American Standards Association Safety
Code for Mechanical Refrigeration, A.S.A. B9.1-1958, or the latest revision
thereof, together with the rules adopted thereunder.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 1.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-449. - Regulations of other agencies not affected.
   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to nullify or affect the federal or
state statutes or rules and regulations governing the storage and use of
flammable and explosive gases and chemicals, or the requirements of the
Interstate Commerce Commission or other statutes governing the transportation
and use of hazardous gases, explosive and other flammable substances.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 1.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-450. - Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:
   Additional definitions means the definitions as set forth in section 2 of
the American Standards Association Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration,
A.S.A. B9.1-1958, or the latest revision thereof, shall be applicable to and
made a part of this article by reference.
   Alter means the addition to or removal of any equipment or refrigerant in a
refrigerating system by which the refrigerant, refrigerant capacity,
refrigerating capacity, pressure allowed or location of any part of the system
is changed.
   Board means the mechanical refrigeration board created and established by
this article.
   City means the City of Dearborn, Wayne County, Michigan.
   Council means the City Council of the City of Dearborn.
   Department means the Department of Public Works and Facilities in the City
of Dearborn.
   Division means the Division of Building and Safety in the Department of
Public Works and Facilities in the City of Dearborn.
   Existing installation means and refers to a refrigerating system or a part
of a refrigerating system installed prior to the effective date of this
article.
   Major replacement means the replacement of a compressor, receiver,
condenser, heat exchanger, evaporation condenser and cooling tower which are
part of a refrigerating system or any such items, and any change of refrigerant
piping from original specification or installation in excess of one and one-
half inch nominal diameter and piping up to and including one and one-half inch
nominal diameter when more than a 20-foot run of such piping is replaced.
   Refrigerant is a substance used to produce refrigeration by its expansion or
vaporization.
   Refrigeration contractor means any person, firm, co-partnership, association
or corporation duly licensed by the city under the provisions of this article
to install, alter or service, or to contract to install, alter or service
refrigerating systems in the city.
   Refrigeration maintenance means and includes alteration, repair or
replacement of piping and fittings, compressors, condensers, evaporators,
receivers, generators, absorbers and controls of refrigerating systems.
   Refrigerating system means a combination of interconnected refrigerant-
containing parts constituting one closed refrigerant circuit in which a
refrigerant is circulated for the purpose of extracting heat.
   Superintendent means the Superintendent of the Division of Building and
Safety in the Department of Public Works and Facilities in the City of
Dearborn.
   Supervising employee means such person as is qualified by written and oral
examinations to act as an employee responsible for and in charge of all
installations, alterations, repairing or servicing of refrigerating systems in
the city by a firm, co-partnership, association or corporation licensed as a
refrigeration contractor by the city.
(Ord. No. 81-91, §§ 2.1-2.16, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-451. - Adopting code by reference.
   Inasmuch as MCL 117.3, MSA 5.2073(k) provides that each city shall have
power, whether so provided in its charter or not, to adopt by reference an
ordinance or any refrigeration code which has been promulgated by an
organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose of
developing such code; if such code is clearly identified in the adopting
ordinance and its purpose published with such ordinance; if printed copies
thereof are kept in the office of the city clerk available for inspection by
and distribution to the public at all times; if a complete copy of such code is
available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk; and if
the publication shall also contain a notice to that effect; therefore, notice
is hereby given that a complete copy of the 1996 International Mechanical Code
and 1997 Supplement thereto, is hereby adopted by reference in this article for
the purpose of furnishing material standards for construction, installation,
inspection and operation of refrigerating systems and equipment, and other
mechanical systems, and that such ordinance is available for public use and
inspection at the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 11.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 97-703, 5-20-97)
Secs. 5-452—5-470. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES
Sec. 5-471. - Required.
   No person acting in the capacity of a refrigeration contractor, as governed
by the provisions of this article, shall install, construct, alter or service,
or contract to install, construct, alter or service any refrigerating system in
the city without first securing a refrigeration contractor's license therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-472. - Issuance.
   All licenses shall be issued by the city clerk to every applicant qualified
as authorized in this article, and upon the payment of the registration fee
listed in
Chapter 12, Section 6. A refrigeration contractor's license shall be issued
upon the approval of the board of safety engineers.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 5-473. - Examination papers to be filed.
   All written examination papers when submitted to the board shall become the
property of the city, and shall be kept on file in the department for a period
of not less than 60 days after the examination has been taken by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-474. - Time for holding examination.
   Examinations for a license under this article shall be held each month on
such day prescribed by the rules and regulations of the board, except when such
day is a holiday, in which case it shall be held on the following day on which
the city hall is open. Special sessions of the board may be called by the
director for the purpose of holding examinations when, in his discretion,
necessity may require it.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-475. - Application forms.
   Applications for a refrigeration contractor's license shall be made on blank
forms furnished for such purpose by the department. The application, which
shall be sworn to, shall, as a minimum, provide the following information:
      (1)   Name, age and residence address of applicant.
      (2)   If application is that of supervising employee, show name and
address of employer.
      (3)   Refrigeration experience of applicant; describe in detail.
      (4)   If applicant is a corporation:
         a.   Full and accurate corporation name.
         b.   When and where incorporated.
         c.   Full names and addresses of officers of corporation.
         d.   Name and refrigeration experience of officer or supervising
employee designated to take the examination for the corporation; describe
experience in detail.
      (5)   If applicant is a partnership:
         a.   Names and addresses of copartners and the name and refrigeration
experience of the partner or supervising employee designated to take the
examination for the partnership; describe such experience in detail.
      (6)   If the applicant conducts business under a trade or assumed name,
the following additional information shall be given:
         a.   Full trade name.
         b.   Name together with residence address of the person or persons
doing business under such trade or assumed name.
      (7)   Two references from former employers or persons having knowledge of
refrigerating experience.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-476. - Conduct of examination.
   The board shall determine, by written and oral examination and/or practical
demonstrations, the qualifications of an applicant. There shall be at least
three members of the board present at any examination of any applicant unless
otherwise changed by the board.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-477. - Examination required.
   No license shall be issued to an applicant until he has shown to the board
that he has been actively engaged in the installation or servicing, or both, of
refrigerating systems for a period of at least three years for Class A
applicants, four years for Class B applicants and five years for Class C
applicants; or has had in his regular employ and actively in charge a
supervising employee who has been previously engaged in the installation or
servicing of refrigerating systems for a period of at least three years for
Class A applicants, four years for Class B applicants and five years for Class
C applicants; provided that credit varying up to a maximum of three years of
such actual experience in the installation or servicing of refrigerating
systems shall be extended to any applicant who is a registered professional
engineer or who possesses at least a bachelor of science degree in mechanical
or chemical engineering, or who is a graduate of a refrigeration trade school.
In any event a minimum of two years of practical experience on actual
installations shall be required for all applicants. Also, the applicant shall
show the refrigerants and sizes of refrigerating systems with which he has
familiarized himself during his experience and education in the installation or
servicing, or both, of refrigerating systems. An applicant holding a master
warm air heating and air conditioning contractor's license, or a heating
engineer's license with the city or holding a Class "A" or "B" gas and/or oil
burner contractor's license of reciprocating municipalities, that are
recognized by the reciprocal heating council of this area, shall be examined by
the board for a Class "B" refrigeration license, or for a restricted
refrigeration contractor's license, the choice of examination and license to
rest with the applicant.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-478. - Age.
   All applicants for license shall have attained a minimum of 21 years of age.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-479. - Classification and limitation.
   (a)   A refrigeration contractor's license shall be classified and limited
as to definite refrigerants and size of refrigerating systems with which the
applicant is familiar in installing or servicing, and the applicant shall be
licensed for that particular refrigerant or refrigerants and size of systems;
provided, however, that any person if properly qualified, may make application
for and receive a license to engage in the installation and servicing of all
sizes of refrigerating systems involving any, or all, approved refrigerants.
   (b)   A contractor's license shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   Class "A" license shall be limited to the installation and
servicing of completely self-contained refrigerating units in domestic boxes
for private use in residential occupancies.
      (2)   Restricted license shall be limited to the installation of self-
contained refrigerating systems used for air conditioning for human comfort and
employing group one refrigerants, installed only in residential, commercial, or
industrial type occupancies, when actuated by motors or engines of not in
excess of 7½ horsepower. The holder of this class license may not service any
of the refrigerant-containing parts of the system.
      (3)   Class "B" license shall be limited to the installation and
servicing of refrigerating systems actuated by motors or engines of not in
excess of 7½ horsepower.
      (4)   Class "C" license shall govern the installation and servicing of
refrigerating systems unlimited as to horsepower and servicing.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-480. - List of contractors and supervising employees.
   A register or list of licensed refrigeration contractors and supervising
employees shall be maintained by the department, showing their respective names
and addresses, dates licenses issued, classification of licenses, and in case
of supervising employee, the name of employer and employment starting and
terminating dates of the supervising employee shall be shown.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-481. - Termination of services.
   Should the supervising employee's services terminate, the installation and
service operations of the employer shall cease within ten days after such
termination. It shall be unlawful for any person or employer to continue such
operations after the expiration of such ten-day period unless and until another
supervising employee has been registered on the list of supervising employees
in the office of the department. When the services of a supervising employee
have been terminated by an employer, the department shall be notified in
writing by both the employee and by the employer when such change takes place,
and the new supervising employee's name shall be forwarded by the employer and
entered on the register of supervising employees maintained by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-482. - Expiration and renewal.
   All refrigeration contractors' licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight
following August 31 of the same year that the contractor's state license
expires, and shall be renewable within 60 days thereafter, or if renewed after
such date, an examination as to fitness may be required by the board in its
discretion.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.12, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 99-802, 12-21-99)
Sec. 5-483. - Revocation and suspension.
   (a)   No license shall be suspended or revoked except for cause upon proof
of charges filed with the department by the director or authorized inspector,
specifying with reasonable detail the facts on which such suspension is based.
Among the grounds for suspending or revoking any license issued under this
article are falsification of any material fact in the application for a
license, carelessness or negligence in the performance of the licensee's duties
in connection with his work, showing that such licensee has violated or
permitted a violation of this article, or that this article or any other
ordinance has been violated in connection with work for which the licensee was
responsible, or of which the licensee was aware, or in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, should have been aware that such violation occurred.
   (b)   Upon the filing of such charges, the director shall suspend the
license of the person involved, and shall give to such licensee notice of a
hearing upon such charges, which hearing shall be held by the board of
examiners not less than ten days after the date of such notice unless an
earlier date is agreed upon in writing by the licensee affected. Such notice
shall be by personal service, or certified mail, and shall state the time and
place of such hearing and shall contain a copy of the charges. If such charges
are sustained by the board, the director shall immediately revoke the license
involved, or the board may modify or alter the suspension of the license or
reinstate it and shall notify the licensee in writing of such finding.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-484. - Reciprocal clause.
   The city shall permit refrigeration contractors legally licensed by other
municipalities of the state to engage in the business of installing,
constructing, altering, repairing or servicing or contracting to install,
construct, alter, repair or service refrigerating equipment covered by this
article, parts or accessories thereof, or appurtenances thereto, within the
corporate limits of the city upon registering with the department, and the
payment of a prescribed registration fee; provided that such municipalities
reciprocate in recognizing refrigeration contractors and supervising employees
duly licensed under the provisions of this article by granting them the same
privileges and charging substantially the same license and registration fees.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-485. - Conditions of participation in reciprocal licenses.
   The licensing ordinance, examinations, and examination procedures of such
municipalities having a desire to participate in reciprocal licensing shall be
substantially similar to the requirements set forth in this article, and their
regulations governing the installation and maintenance of refrigerating systems
shall meet recognized standards acceptable to the board. No refrigeration
contractor's license shall be recognized for the purpose of registration by the
city which has been issued by a municipality which has failed to approve by
affirmative action of its legislative body, the reciprocal licensing provisions
similar to those contained in this article.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-486. - Right to participate in reciprocal licensing.
   The right of any licensee to have the benefit of the reciprocating
provisions of this division shall be determined by the board based upon the
qualifications outlined in this article.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-487. - Payment of personal property taxes.
   No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any person under this
article, unless and until a certificate has been obtained from the city
treasurer to the effect that all personal property taxes levied and assessed
against such applicant for license have been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 3.17, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-488—5-505. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS
Sec. 5-506. - Mechanical refrigeration board.
   A mechanical refrigeration board is hereby created and established
consisting of five members as follows:
   The director of the department of public works, the superintendent or an
inspector from the department designated by him, and three members appointed by
the mayor in accordance with the provisions of section 8.8 of the Charter, one
of whom shall hold a refrigeration contractor's license, one a first class
stationary engineer's license, and one a mechanical engineer's license, all of
whom shall be residents of the city.
   The chairman of the board shall be elected by the members and shall have the
right to vote. In his absence, the vice-chairman, who also shall be elected by
the board, shall act as chairman. Three members of the board shall constitute a
quorum and the concurring vote of at least three members shall be necessary to
take action by the board. The board shall prescribe its own rules and
regulations for carrying out its functions and duties as herein prescribed.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 4.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-507. - Compensation.
   Each member of the mechanical refrigeration board who is not working on a
full time salary with the city shall be paid such sum as the council of the
city may from time to time determine for each examination or board of appeals
session attended by such member; provided, however, that the member shall not
be paid for attending more than 12 meetings in any one calendar year.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 4.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-508. - Powers and duties of the board.
   The powers and duties of the board shall be:
      (1)   Determine by examination as herein prescribed the qualifications
and ability of an applicant for a license. Such examination shall consist of
oral, written and practical tests and shall cover the theory and practice of
cooling, refrigeration, engineering and the interpretation of charts,
blueprints and plans for installations, repairing or alterations. The board
shall file with the department a written report of its findings and
recommendations in each case.
      (2)   Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship or involve
practical difficulties, the board shall have power upon appeal in specific
cases to authorize such variation or deviation from the terms of this article
as will not be contrary to the public interest, in order that the spirit of
this article shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 4.3(a, b), 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-509. - Right of appeal.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or order of the director
may take an appeal to the building board of appeals, which board is hereby
empowered and authorized to hear and consider such appeal. Such appeal shall be
taken within ten days after the decision, ruling or order complained of by
filing with the director a notice of appeal directed to the board, specifying
the grounds thereof and the relief prayed for. The director shall forthwith
transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the
decision, ruling or order appealed from has been taken.
   (b)   The board shall adopt appropriate rules giving a reasonable time for
hearing of the appeal which shall provide for giving due notice thereof by
ordinary mail to the parties in interest at their last known addresses. The
board shall decide the appealed question within a reasonable time. Except in
cases of emergency, such appeal shall act as a stay of any construction,
installation, alteration, repairing, ruling or order until either approved,
modified, or set aside by the board.
   (c)   A fee, as specified in section
5-534, shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the appeal is filed, and
if paid by check or money order, it shall be made payable to the city
treasurer. The board, upon hearing such appeal, shall either affirm, modify or
set aside any such decision, ruling or order.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 4.3(c, d), 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-510—5-525. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 5-526. - Required.
   No person shall install, construct, alter or make replacements of receivers,
condensers, evaporator condensers, cooling towers, compressors, piping, or any
change in piping from the original specifications or existing installation in
any part of a refrigerating system except as herein provided until such person
has filed an application with the department and received a permit for the work
specifically intended on each individual system, except as exempted from this
requirement in sectiion 5-527; provided that in cases of emergency the permit
shall be obtained within 72 hours from the time that the installation,
alteration or major replacement was started.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-527. - Exceptions.
   Permits will not be required for the installation, alteration or major
replacement of completely self-contained refrigerating units containing ten
pounds or less of refrigerant in domestic boxes used for the purpose of
preserving food, groceries and/or beverages in residential occupancies, nor for
the installation of units on commercial and privately owned vehicles used on
public thoroughfares for the purpose of producing refrigeration for trucks,
trailers, buses and similar conveyances, provided that such unit systems and/or
units and systems comply with all other requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-528. - Applications for permit.
   Permit applications shall be made on forms provided by the department and
shall contain information deemed pertinent by the department for the proper
description and completion of the work intended except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-529. - Ventilating or air circulating systems.
   Ventilating or air circulating systems to be used in conjunction with
refrigerating systems shall not be installed, or any alteration made, governed
by the installation provisions of this article relating to the safety of the
refrigeration system, without a permit issued by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-530. - Blueprints required.
   Blueprints or suitable sketches shall be submitted for all refrigerating
systems installed, except unit or other systems for which pertinent ordinance
requirements can be shown on the application for permits.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-531. - Details on blueprints.
   Blueprints shall be made in duplicate, shall be drawn to a workable scale
and shall show all pertinent data relating to the installation, such as
construction and location of machinery room and method of its ventilation; size
and location of piping, valves, fittings and safety devices; volume of rooms
where applicable to this article; location of ducts and plenum chambers and
protective devices appertaining thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-532. - Failure to obtain permit.
   All refrigerating systems installed, constructed or altered, or on which a
major replacement was made within the city without a permit having first been
obtained, as required in this division, shall constitute a violation of this
article. A written notice shall be given to the contractor and owner of the
refrigerating system of such condition, and, upon posting on the premises of a
stop work order, such refrigerating system, or part thereof, shall not
thereafter be operated until a permit is issued, an inspection made and
approval is granted by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-533. - Sale and purchase of refrigerants.
   The sale or purchase of gasses or liquids which are intended for use as
refrigerants, governed by this article in the city, shall not be made other
than from distributors, jobbers or manufacturers and by licensed refrigeration
contractors or persons having a permit from the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-534. - Fees for permits, licenses.
   The fees for permits and licenses under this article shall be as follows:
      (1)   Permit fee for the installation or alteration of each refrigerating
system or compressor unit.
         a.   Five horsepower or less, inclusive ..... $ 5.00
         b.   Six horsepower to 50 horsepower, inclusive ..... 10.00
         c.   Horsepower over 50 ..... 20.00
      (2)   Annual inspection fee, each refrigerating system or compressor
unit, except where annual maintenance permit is issued under the provisions of
the building code ..... 5.00
      (3)   Special inspection fee, each unit or system in the field ..... 5.00
      (4)   Original refrigeration contractor's license ..... 25.00
      (5)   Renewal contractor's license ..... 25.00
      (6)   Each registration under reciprocal provisions ..... 10.00
      (7)   Written examinations ..... 5.00
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-535. - Fees not to be refunded.
   Any and all monies paid as fees for permit or licenses issued under this
article shall be retained by the city treasurer, and no refund shall be made if
such permit or license has been granted and is later revoked, or is denied
unless there has been an error made by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-536. - Inspection license required.
   No person shall use or cause to be used any refrigerating system or
compressor unit which is subject to annual inspection under the provisions of
this article without first securing a license for such use from the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-537. - Annual inspection license.
   An inspection license shall be renewed annually for each refrigeration
system or compressor unit subject to annual inspections under the provisions of
this article.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 5.12, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-538—5-555. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION
Sec. 5-556. - Classes enumerated.
   (a)   Refrigerating systems or compressor units, other than multiple
domestic systems, shall be classified as follows, depending on the horsepower:
      (1)   Class A—Five horsepower or less, inclusive.
      (2)   Class B—Six to 50 horsepower, inclusive.
      (3)   Class C—Over 50 horsepower, inclusive.
   (b)   Buildings equipped with multiple domestic systems shall be classified
as follows, depending on the number of apartments:
      (1)   Class D—Systems serving ten apartments or less, inclusive.
      (2)   Class E—Systems serving 11 to 20 apartments, inclusive.
      (3)   Class F—Systems serving 21 to 30 apartments, inclusive.
      (4)   Class G—Systems serving 31 or more apartments.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 6.1, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-557—5-575. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - ACCIDENTS
Sec. 5-576. - Notification of accident by licensee.
   The holder of any license under this article knowing of an accident in which
there was personal injury or property damage shall immediately notify the
department of every such accident.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 7.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-577. - Unlawful to use system following accident.
   Where an accident involves damage to any part of a refrigeration system, or
in which there was a personal injury or property damage, it shall be unlawful
to use such refrigerating system until after an investigation is made and
approval for continued use is granted by a representative of the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 7.2, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-578—5-595. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 5-596. - Right of entry.
   The director and his authorized agents shall have the authority during
reasonable hours to enter any building, structure or premises within the city
without hindrance for the purpose of examining equipment licensed under this
article and enforcing the provisions covered thereby.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-597. - Inspections required.
   It shall be the duty of the director and his authorized agents to inspect
all refrigerating systems within the city, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-598. - Qualifications for refrigeration inspector.
   In addition to passing a civil service examination, the applicant for a
position as an inspector must have a heating, air conditioning and
refrigeration license with the city and have at least five years' experience
with refrigeration and air conditioning installations.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-599. - Inspection of equipment.
   (a)   The director or his authorized agents shall make an inspection of all
refrigerating systems or repairs or alterations thereto at the time of
installation where such installation, repair or alteration requires a permit
under this article.
   (b)   All refrigerating equipment and refrigerating systems installed must
comply with the manufacturer's instructions and be in accordance with this
article to the approval of the inspector. The director or inspector may
require:
      (1)   Additional precautionary measures where necessary to prolong the
life endurance of the equipment.
      (2)   The installation of a drier (in the liquid line) or a drier
replaced that has been exposed to air or moisture.
      (3)   A system vacuumed after pressure test and before charging.
      (4)   Vibration eliminators installed in the suction line or hot gas
line.
      (5)   Any other requirement that may be considered necessary during the
installation of refrigerating equipment or within a reasonable length of time
thereafter to safeguard the public.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-600. - Power to test and inspect.
   The director or his authorized agents are hereby empowered to make or cause
to be made such tests and inspections as are deemed necessary for the purpose
of the enforcement of this article with reference to the public health and
safety to ascertain the condition of the piping, tubing, fittings, apparatus
and machinery used in any refrigerating system.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-601. - Reports of inspectors.
   The inspectors of the department shall make a written report of each
inspection made under this article and file same in the records of the
department. When requested, a copy of such report shall be mailed to the owner
or holder of the licensed equipment.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-602. - Equipment found unsafe.
   If, upon annual or special inspection of equipment covered by this article,
such equipment should be found in an unsafe condition, the department shall
thereupon serve a written notice of the findings upon the owner or person in
charge of such equipment, stating a time when recommended repairs must be
completed, except that where the work or repairs required is in the nature of
an emergency, the neglect of which would endanger human life or the public
safety, such work or repairs may be ordered to be done forthwith, and the
equipment shall be sealed out of service until such work or repairs are
completed. After the service of such notice, it shall be the duty of the person
receiving such notice to proceed within the time allowed to make such repairs
or changes as are necessary to place such equipment in a safe condition. It
shall be unlawful to operate such equipment after the date stated in such
notice, unless an extension of time, in writing, has been obtained from the
department until such repairs or changes have been made and the equipment
accepted by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-603. - Power to put equipment out of service.
   The director shall have the power to close down and seal out of service any
refrigerating equipment for the following reasons:
      (1)   For failure to secure a license or to renew such license, after the
lapse of a 72-hour warning period.
      (2)   When in case of emergency, in the opinion of the director or his
authorized agent, any equipment governed by this article is in such condition
as to render it unsafe for operation.
      (3)   For willful failure to comply with orders issued by the department
for the correction of violations.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-604. - Notice of sealing out of service.
   Before sealing any refrigeration equipment out of service, the department
shall serve written notice upon the owner or person in charge of such
equipment, stating its intention to seal the equipment out of service and the
reasons therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-605. - Unlawful to remove seal.
   Any refrigeration equipment sealed out of service by the department shall be
plainly marked with a sign or tag indicating such fact and setting forth the
reason for such sealing, and any defacing or removal of such sign or tag, or
any tampering with or removal of such seal without the approval of the
department shall constitute a violation of this article, and any person found
guilty of such violation shall be subject to penalties.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 8.9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-606—5-620. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 5-621. - Application of division.
   In addition to the requirements, as provided in the American Standards
Association Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration A.S.A. B9.1-1958 adopted
by and incorporated into this article, the requirements as provided in the
following sections of this division shall also apply.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-622. - Soldered joints on copper tubing.
   All joints soldered (brazed in accordance with A.S.A. B-9 Code) on copper
tubing in the field or on the job on remote and other refrigerating systems
shall be fabricated with alloys having melting points of not less than 1,000
degrees Fahrenheit, except for servicing of approved self-contained units
containing six pounds or less of group one refrigerants and when approved by
the inspector or board.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-623. - Check valves.
   A discharge check valve shall be provided in the discharge line from each
compressor used on a refrigerating system containing more than 40 pounds of a
Group 2 or Group 3 refrigerant.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-624. - Equipment not covered by code.
   Upon recommendation by the department inspector and approved by the board,
the director may approve the use of any approved equipment design, material,
construction or device not specifically covered by this article but consistent
therewith.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-625. - Concealed equipment.
   Soft annealed copper tubing which is concealed shall be encased in rigid
conduit, except that such tubing completely buried in concrete may be encased
in flexible conduit. Hard copper tubing which is buried underground or under
the lowest floor of a building shall be encased in rigid conduit. Hard copper
tubing which is completely buried in concrete shall be encased in either rigid
or flexible conduit. Permanent inspection openings shall be provided in the
covering of concealed tubing joints. It shall be unlawful for owners,
contractors or workmen to lath over or in any way conceal any piping, outlet
boxes or other part of a refrigerating system until an inspection has been made
thereof and due notice given that the work has been passed upon by the
department. In case any obstruction has been placed so as to conceal any piping
or part of the installation before the department has made an inspection
thereof, the department may remove or cause to be removed any such lath or
obstruction, which may conceal the work so that proper inspection may be made.
Under urgent conditions, upon proper notification, it shall be the duty of the
department to make a proper inspection within 72 hours from the time it is
notified.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-626. - Certificate of approval.
   When any work, whether construction, installation, alteration or major
replacement, for which a permit is required under the provisions of this
article, has been completed to the satisfaction of the department, there shall
be issued a certificate of approval certifying that the installation is in
accordance with the provisions of this article and that the refrigerating
system may be operated. Such certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in the proximity of the compressor.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-627. - Other refrigerant.
   No refrigerating system shall be maintained or operated employing a
refrigerant other than what is specified in this article without a permit
issued by the department, upon such conditions consistent with the provisions
of this article as are deemed necessary in the interest of public safety by the
director.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-628. - Charging or removing refrigerants.
   Charging a system with a refrigerant or removing same therefrom shall be
done by a licensed refrigeration contractor or a supervising employee or other
authorized employee, provided that in case of fire or emergency, the system may
be discharged by the fire department.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-629. - Existing installations.
   If in good repair, existing installations may be continued in their present
form, provided that such installations conform basically to approved standards
and present no apparent hazards through methods of installation or operation.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-630. - Installation in residential zones.
   Refrigerating systems, or window or wall type refrigerating air
conditioners, installed in residential zones shall not protrude the exterior of
a building when such building is located less than ten feet from the lot line
and/or less than 20 feet from the nearest adjoining building, unless permission
is granted by the board.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 9.10, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-631—5-645. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - WATER SAVING EQUIPMENT
Sec. 5-646. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Primary water shall mean city water supplied by the makeup line to the
makeup float of a cooling tower or evaporative condenser.
   Secondary water shall mean water recirculated from the tower to the air
conditioner and back to the tower.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 10.2, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-647. - Subject to city provisions.
   (a)   All water saving equipment, including cooling towers, evaporative
condensers and air-cooled condensers, erected in the city shall be installed in
accordance with all applicable city ordinances and codes, including the
building, plumbing and electrical codes and the zoning ordinance.
   (b)   All water piping and drainage shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of the plumbing code of the city.
   (c)   All electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in accordance
with the provisions of the electrical code of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-91, §§ 10.1, 10.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-648. - Refrigeration contractor's permit.
   The refrigeration contractor may install all refrigeration equipment
including secondary water piping as a part of his original permit.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 10.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-649. - Color coding.
   All primary and secondary water piping shall be identified by color coding;
provided, however, that at least one foot of every 30 feet in each room of
primary water piping shall be painted blue, and at least one foot in every 30
feet in each room of secondary water piping shall be painted brown; provided,
further, that if the city inspector believes that more of any such piping
should be painted, he is hereby authorized to require such additional coloring
to be installed in any such case.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 10.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-650. - Permit.
   A licensed refrigeration contractor shall obtain a permit in accordance with
the provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances and codes of
the city whenever any structure as a part of a refrigeration system including
air conditioning equipment is being installed.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 10.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-651. - Plans and specifications.
   (a)   A mechanical pencil or line sketch shall be furnished for all
refrigeration systems up to and including 40 tons capacity. Such sketch shall
show among other things the kinds of piping and the location of the cooling
tower.
   (b)   Detailed structural and mechanical plans and specifications shall be
furnished for all refrigeration systems in excess of 40 tons capacity, which
plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed either by an architect
registered under the laws of the state, or by a civil or structural engineer so
registered.
   (c)   Such detailed plans and specifications shall show:
      (1)   Details of water saving equipment and how it should be erected and
supported.
      (2)   Location on the roof, or elsewhere if it is to be installed on or
above the ground level.
      (3)   The location and size of all primary and secondary piping.
      (4)   The electrical wiring in detail to the tower fan and pump.
      (5)   A sworn statement that they were prepared by or under the personal
supervision of such architect or engineer.
   (d)   All such sketches, plans and specifications shall be approved by the
department of building and safety before any permit therefor shall be issued.
(Ord. No. 81-91, § 10.5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-652—5-669. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - HEATING CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-670. - Code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the BOCA National Heating Code, Seventh
Edition, 1990. A copy of which shall be available in the office of the city
clerk.
Sec. 5-671. - Scope.
   This article shall establish minimum standards for, relate to and regulate
the construction, installation, replacement, repair or alteration in any and
all buildings or structures within the city of any piping, apparatus,
equipment, appliances, devices or accessories for steam, vapor, hot water, warm
air or any other type of heating systems, air conditioning plants, ventilation
systems, boilers, steam pressure vessels and boiler burner units, including
apparatus, equipment and piping for the generation and conveyance of steam for
any purpose up to 15 pounds per square inch pressure, the purpose and intent of
this article being to protect life and property from fire, to safeguard against
possible asphyxiation of persons and to protect them from injury by explosions
from either gas, steam or excessive water pressure.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 1.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-672. - Unfired pressure vessels excepted.
   Unfired pressure vessels, such as those containing compressed air or
refrigerants used in commercial refrigerating systems or similar vessels, are
not included within the terms and meaning of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 1.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-673. - Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the word "contractor," either unlimited or
limited, shall mean any person maintaining a business establishment and holding
himself out to the public as engaged in, having direct charge of and skilled in
the planning, laying out and superintending the installation, alteration,
replacement or repair of any heating, steamfitting, warm air furnace, air
conditioning, oil burner, gas burner or stoker system requiring a permit under
this article from the department in the city, and is familiar with the laws,
rules and regulations governing the same.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 1.10, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-674—5-690. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES
Sec. 5-691. - Required; examination, reexamination.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or work at the business or
trade of installing, replacing, altering or repairing any heating, ventilating
or air conditioning equipment or system in the city until he has first been
licensed to carry on such work, as provided for in this article. Every
applicant for a license shall have attained a minimum of 21 years of age and
shall, before such license is issued, pay the required examination fee to the
city treasurer and pass an examination given by the board of examiners as
provided in this article showing his ability and qualifications. Anyone failing
to pass such examination may apply again after a period of 30 days has elapsed
by paying the required fee to the city treasurer and taking the examination
above referred to, which procedure may be repeated by such person as many times
as he desires. When an applicant for a given classification has passed the
required examination prescribed by the board, the department shall certify such
fact to the city clerk and, upn the payment of the registration fee listed in
Chapter 12, Section 6, the city clerk shall issue the particular license
specified by the department to which such applicant is entitled.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 5-692. - Application.
   Every person desiring to be licensed under any of the classifications of
this division shall file with the secretary of the board of safety engineers an
application on forms to be furnished for such purpose by the department. The
application in affidavit form shall contain, in addition to other requirements,
the following:
      (1)   Name, age, business and home address of applicant.
      (2)   Qualifications of applicant.
      (3)   If applicant is a corporation:
         a.   Full and accurate corporation name.
         b.   When and where incorporated.
         c.   Full names and business and home addresses of officers of
corporation.
         d.   Name and qualifications of officer or supervisory employee
designated to take the examination for the corporation.
      (4)   If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of members
thereof and the name and qualifications of the partner or supervisory employee
designated to take the examination for the partnership.
      (5)   If applicant conducts business under a trade or assumed name:
         a.   Complete and full name and date of registration with county
clerk.
         b.   The name of person or persons doing business under such trade or
assumed name.
         c.   The name and qualifications of the individual or supervisory
employee who is to take the examination.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-693. - Performance of work restricted.
   No person shall install, alter, replace or repair heating, air conditioning,
oil burner, gas burner or stoker equipment, as required by this article, unless
he is licensed to do so under this division or unless a licensed heating
contractor is in charge.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-694. - Classification, limitation.
   Licenses required by this article shall be classified as follows and subject
to the limitations set forth:
      (1)   Class A gas. Listed gas designed sectional boilers having inputs of
not more than 1,000,000 B.T.U. per hour, utilizing a thermocoupletype safeguard
designed to shut off the main gas supply at not more than 75 seconds after
pilot flame failure, and all other gas fired equipment and appurtenances
limited to input ratings of less than 400,000 B.T.U. per unit.
      (2)   Class B gas. Gas fired equipment and appurtenances with all input
ratings (unlimited).
      (3)   Class A oil. Oil fired equipment and appurtenances designed for the
use of No. 1 or No. 2 fuel oils, as defined in U.S. Department of Commerce,
Commercial Standard CS 12-48, or latest revision thereof, having a maximum
firing rate of less than five gallons per hour.
      (4)   Class B oil. Oil fired equipment and appurtenances unlimited as to
size or capacity and designed for any grade of fuel oil.
      (5)   Fuel oil storage tanks only, but not including burner or burners.
      (6)   Space heating: 
         a.   Warm air. The installation and/or alteration of warm air
distribution systems.
         b.   Steam and hot water. The installation and/or alteration of steam
and hot water distribution systems.
         c.   Electrical heating. The design and installation of space boilers,
warm air furnaces and distribution systems therein, using electricity as the
only source of fuel. No work of installation, alteration or servicing of the
electrical element component shall be done, except by persons licensed in
accordance with article XII of this chapter.
      (7)   Coal fired equipment: 
         a.   Class A coal fired equipment, limited to input equivalent of
400,000 B.T.U. capacity per hour, per unit.
         b.   Class B coal fired equipment, with unlimited capacity.
      (8)   Sheet metal work only. The installation and/or alteration of all
types of sheet metal for all purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-695. - Issuance, insurance; refusal.
   (a)   Upon receipt by the department of the report of the board of
examiners, if such report recommends the granting of a license, the director
shall immediately certify to the city clerk that the applicant is entitled to a
license of the classification recommended, and the clerk shall thereupon issue
such a license.
   (b)   If the report from the board of examiners recommends a refusal to
issue a license, the director shall immediately notify the applicant in writing
of such refusal.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-696. - Insurance required for permits.
   Before a permit will issue for the repair, alteration or installation of any
heating, ventilating or air conditioning systems in the city, the permittee
shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance, or evidence of
insurance, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this
state insuring such permittee against claims for loss, injury or damage to
persons and property by reason of installation of any equipment being installed
by such permittee, all of which insurance shall cover public liability damage
for amounts of $10,000.00 for each person, $20,000.00 for each accident and
$10,000.00 property damage per accident. Every such certificate of insurance,
as above specified, shall contain a provision that before such insurance is
cancelled, a notice shall be given by the insurer to the city clerk of the
insurer's intention to cancel such policy not less than ten days after the
receipt of such notice.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-697. - Registration.
   Upon issuance of any license under this division, the name, business address
and classification of the licensee shall be entered on a register kept for that
purpose in the office of the city clerk, and such register shall be open for
public inspection at all reasonable hours.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-698. - Term of license.
   All licenses issued under this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight on
December 31 of each year and shall be renewable within 60 days thereafter.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-699. - Suspension or revocation of license.
   No license issued under this division shall be revoked except for cause upon
proof of charges filed with the department by the inspector, specifying with
reasonable detail the facts showing carelessness or negligence in the
performance of the licensee's duties in connection with his work, showing that
such licensee has violated or permitted a violation of this article, or that
this article has been violated in connection with work for which the licensee
was responsible and of which the licensee was aware or in the exercise of
reasonable diligence should have been aware that such violation had occurred.
Upon the filing of such charges, the director shall forthwith suspend the
license involved, and shall give to such licensee notice of a hearing upon such
charges, which hearing shall be held by the board of appeals not less than ten
days after the date of such notice unless an earlier date is agreed upon in
writing by the licensee affected. Such notice shall be by personal service or
registered mail and shall state the time and place of such hearing and shall
contain a copy of the charges. If such charges are sustained by the board of
appeals, the director shall immediately revoke the license involved and shall
notify the licensee in writing of such revocation.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-700. - Unlawful use of licenses.
   No person having procured a license under this division shall permit or
allow the use of his name by any other person, directly or indirectly, for the
purpose of obtaining a permit to do any installation, alteration, replacement
or repair of heating, air conditioning, ventilating, oil burner, gas burner or
stoker equipment in the city.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-701. - Unlawful display of signs.
   No person other than a licensed contractor shall engage in the business of
installing, altering, replacing or repairing heating, air conditioning,
ventilating, gas burner, oil burner or stoker equipment in the city, and no
person shall expose the sign of such licensed contractor or make any
advertisement pertaining thereto unless he shall have been first duly licensed
in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-702. - Termination of services of supervisory employee.
   Should the qualified supervisory employee's services terminate, the
installation and service operations of the employer shall cease, and it shall
be unlawful to continue such operations until another supervisory employee is
certified for the employer by the board of examiners, provided that a ten-day
period may be allowed for the employer, with the approval of the examining
board, to replace him by a qualified supervisory employee. The department shall
be notified in writing by both the employee and the employer when such change
takes place, and the new supervisory employee's name shall be entered on the
current license and application.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-703. - Reciprocal licenses.
   The city shall permit contractors engaged in the business of installing,
altering, repairing, servicing or contracting to install, alter, repair or
service heating, air conditioning, ventilating, oil burner, gas burner or
stoker equipment who are legally licensed by other municipalities of the state
to engage in the business of installing, altering, repairing or servicing or
contracting to install, alter, repair or service heating, air conditioning,
ventilating, oil burner, gas burner or stoker equipment within the corporate
limits of this city upon registration with the department and the payment of
the registration fee; provided that the municipality in which such contractors
are licensed reciprocates in recognizing contractors duly licensed under the
provisions of this division by granting them the same privileges and charging
the same license and registration fees; provided further, that the licensing,
ordinance, examination and examination procedures of such municipalities having
a desire to participate in reciprocal licensing shall be substantially equal to
the requirements set forth in this article, and their regulations governing the
installation, alteration, repairing and servicing of heating, air conditioning,
ventilating, oil burner, gas burner or stoker equipment shall meet recognized
standards acceptable to the department. No contractor's license shall be
recognized for the purpose of registration by the city which has been issued by
a municipality which has failed to approve by affirmative action of its
legislative body the reciprocal licensing provisions contained in this article.
A contractor shall obtain his license in the municipality wherein such
contractor maintains his principal place of business.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.21, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-704—5-720. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF SAFETY ENGINEERS
Sec. 5-721. - Compensation.
   Each member of the board of safety engineers, excepting the director and the
inspector, shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed and determined by
proper resolution of the city council for each examination or board of appeals
session attended by such member; provided, however, that such member shall not
be paid for attending more than 12 sessions in any one calendar year.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-722. - Quorum.
   Four members of the board of safety engineers shall constitute a quorum to
conduct any examination or to transact any business of the board.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-723. - Rules and regulations.
   The board of safety engineers shall have the power to make all necessary and
reasonable rules and regulations setting up standards as to qualifications of
applicants and for the conducting of examinations.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-724. - Duties.
   The duties of the board of safety engineers shall be to determine by
examination of such a kind as it may require, the qualifications and ability of
applicants for licenses. Such examinations shall consist of oral, written and
practical tests and shall cover the theory and practice of heating construction
and engineering and the interpretation of charts, blueprints and plans for
heating installations. The board shall file with the department a written
report of its findings and recommendations in each case. 
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-725. - Examination papers to be filed.
   All examinations and examination papers shall be open to persons holding
licenses of the classification for which the examination is being held, and all
written examination papers shall be kept on file in the department for a period
of not less than 60 days after the examination has been taken by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-726. - Time for holding examination.
   Examinations for a license under this division shall be held on the second
Friday of each month except when such Friday is a holiday, in which case it
shall be held on the following Monday. No sessions of the board of examiners
shall be held unless there are at least two applicants for examination. Special
sessions of the board of examiners may be called by the director when in his
discretion necessity may require it.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-727—5-745. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - FEES
Sec. 5-746. - Enumerated.
   The fees for examinations, licenses and registrations under this article
shall be as follows:
 
 Fee
 
      (1)   Examination or reexamination ..... $ 5.00
      (2)   Contractor's license ..... 25.00
      (3)   Contractor's license registration ..... 10.00
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-747. - Renewal.
   The renewal fees for all licenses and registrations under this article shall
be the same as the original license or registration fees provided for in
section
5-746.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 2.19, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-748—5-765. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 5-766. - Creation.
   There is hereby created a board of appeals, referred to in this division as
the board, which shall consist of the chairman of the board of examiners,
referred to in division 3 of this article, the chief of the fire department,
the corporation counsel, the director of building and safety and a heating
inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 3.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Sec. 5-767. - Organization.
   The director of building and safety shall be the chairman of the board and
shall preside at all meetings thereof; if at any time the chairman is not
present at any meeting of the board, if a quorum is present, such board shall
appoint a temporary chairman to act in their place. The director shall appoint
as permanent secretary to the board a qualified person from the department who
shall keep a record of all the minutes and proceedings of the board and be in
attendance at all of its meetings in so far as it is possible, send out any
necessary notices and perform such other duties as the board may delegate to
him.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 3.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Sec. 5-768. - Powers and duties.
   The board is hereby authorized and empowered:
      (1)   When it is impossible for a licensee under this article or an owner
to obtain the material specified for use in this article because of any
national emergency, or when it is undesirable to use the materials specified
because of improvements or new discoveries made, or when it is impractical or
undesirable for a licensee to follow the method of procedure prescribed by this
article, the board in its discretion may approve any material proposed as a
substitute for those mentioned in this article, or may in its discretion,
approve any method of procedure as a substitute for that herein prescribed, and
when such approval is given it shall have the force and effect of law.
      (2)   To hear and conduct appeals from rulings or decisions of the
inspector as specified in this article.
      (3)   To conduct investigations on any matters pertaining to the
effective operation and application of this article to the various matters
covered thereby.
      (4)   To make findings that shall be conclusive on all questions of fact,
whether arising from such investigations, appeals or otherwise.
      (5)   To make rules and regulations for carrying out the provisions of
this division.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 3.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-769. - Procedure on appeal.
   If any person desires to appeal to the board from any decision or ruling of
the inspector on any matter under this article, such appeal shall be made in
writing and filed with the secretary of the board. Where giving notice of
hearing on an appeal is not otherwise provided for in this article, the
secretary of the board shall give such notice to all the interested parties at
least ten days before the date of such hearing, either by personal service or
registered mail, and the hearing shall be held at such time and place in the
city as shall be therein stated. Proof of service of giving such notice shall
be made and filed with the board prior to the hearing.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 3.4, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-770—5-785. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTOR
Sec. 5-786. - Qualifications.
   In addition to the qualifications specified by the civil service rules of
the city for the classification of inspector, every person to be qualified for
such position under this article shall carry an unlimited journeyman's license,
issued under the terms of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 4.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-787. - Supervision of work.
   All construction, installation, alteration, replacement and repair work
within the city involving heating, ventilating, refrigeration and air
conditioning plants and equipment, subject to regulation by the provisions of
this article, in and for buildings of all classes shall be done under the
supervision and subject to the inspection and approval of the inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 4.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-788. - Enforcement; removal of construction.
   It shall be the duty of the inspector and his regularly authorized assistant
to enforce or cause to be enforced the provisions of this article; to supervise
all necessary tests and to make all necessary inspection of heating,
ventilating or air conditioning plants and equipment installed under this
article; to require such tests to be made as may be necessary to determine the
tightness and safety of any steam or hot water heating installation, or repair
or replacement of any portion thereof, or of any sheet metal ducts or heating
pipes connected therewith, or of oil or gas piping and equipment; and to
require the immediate removal of any material or construction found to have
been installed so as to conceal or cover up before its inspection and approval
by the inspector any newly installed portion of any heating, ventilating or air
conditioning system or plant.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 4.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-789. - Authority to stop construction.
   If the inspector or his assistant at any time discover that any work is
being done on any building or structures in the city, contrary to the
provisions of this article, such inspector or his assistant is hereby
authorized and directed to issue a stop work order as to such illegal or
improper construction, and to post a notice thereof on such improper work, and
if such work is being carried on contrary to the provisions of this article,
the person doing or performing such work shall be subject to prosecution for
such violation under the terms hereof, it being hereby intended that such stop
work order shall not in any way exonerate the wrongdoer from his criminal
responsibility under this section. After a stop work order has been issued, it
shall be unlawful for any work to be done by the person on the job until the
illegal or improper construction has been corrected and the stop work order
removed by the inspector or his assistant. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than the inspector or his assistant, to remove such stop work notice
posted as provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 4.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-790. - Determination of rating.
   The inspector shall determine the rating or capacity of any second-hand
boiler, furnace or device which is no longer manufactured, which is to be used
in connection with any heating or airconditioning system or plant, and for
which the above required test data, measurements, rating or capacity are not
available, as required by this article.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 4.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-791. - Request for inspection; concealment restricted.
   The heating, ventilating, refrigerating and air conditioning contractor
shall immediately notify the inspector upon the completion of the installation
or other work under this article that the work for which a permit had been
issued is ready for inspection and test in the case of a steam, hot water,
ventilating or air conditioning installation, or for inspection in the case of
warm air, oil burner, gas burner or stoker installation or other work under
this article, by registering the number of the permit and the address at which
is located the work to be inspected in the inspection register kept for that
purpose in the office of the department. It shall be unlawful for any
contractor, owner or his employees to cover up any work for which a permit has
been issued under this article until after such work has been inspected or
tested, or both.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 4.6, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-792—5-810. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - PERMITS
Sec. 5-811. - Required, application; exceptions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter,
replace or repair any heating, ventilating or air conditioning plant or
equipment, oil burner, gas burner or stoker, or to begin such work, which is
subject to regulation by the provisions of this article, in or for any building
in the city without first having a permit issued therefor. Applications for
such permit shall be made in writing by such person and a permit issued
pursuant thereto by the department prior to beginning any work governed by the
provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to fail or neglect to comply
with such provisions or of the permit issued pursuant thereto.
   (b)   Any person, when applying for any such permit, shall, upon demand of
the inspector, furnish all necessary plans in duplicate for such proposed
construction, installation, alteration, replacement or repair and use, all
proper and sufficient information relating thereto, and shall secure the
inspector's approval of such plans before such permit shall be issued.
   (c)   The department may waive the above requirement of a permit in the case
of alterations, replacements or repairs, anything in this article to the
contrary notwithstanding, to any existing heating, ventilating, air
conditioning plant or equipment where the estimated cost of such alteration,
replacement or repair, both as to labor and material, will not exceed $50.00,
if such alteration, replacement or repairs will not add to the required
capacity of such heating, ventilating or air conditioning plant or equipment
and will not, in the opinion of the inspector, be of such a nature as to render
an inspection of same necessary. No permit shall be required for repair,
replacement or alteration of any existing gravity warm air heating system, the
cost of which both as to material and labor shall not exceed $25.00.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 5.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-812. - Test data, measurements, ratings, capacities.
   Before a permit shall be issued by the department for the installation,
alteration, replacement or repair of any steam or hot water boiler, warm air
furnace or any device performing some specific service in connection with any
heating, ventilating or air conditioning system or plant, the capacity of which
device might affect in whole or in part the efficiency of the system or plant,
or produce a dangerous condition on the premises, the contractor installing,
altering, replacing or repairing such boiler, furnace or device or the
manufacturer of same, shall furnish the inspector with such test data,
measurements, ratings, capacities or other information as may be required by
the inspector for the purpose of determining ratings or capacities of such
boiler, furnace or device in accordance with the engineering provisions of this
article.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 5.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-813. - Certificate required.
   All test data, measurements, ratings or capacities submitted to the
inspector, as required in section
5-812, shall be accompanied by an engineer's certificate as to the correctness
of the same; such certificate to be made by an engineer employed by the
manufacturer of the boiler, furnace or device for which the test data
measurements, ratings or capacities are submitted.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 5.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-814. - Issuance restricted.
   No permit for the construction, installation, alteration, replacement or
repair of any oil burner, gas burner, stoker, heating, ventilating or air
conditioning plant or equipment shall be issued by the department to any person
unless he is duly licensed as required by this article to do such work.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 5.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-815. - Owner's privilege.
   Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit any bona fide owner from
personally installing, altering, replacing or repairing any heating,
ventilating or air conditioning plant or equipment in a one-family dwelling in
which he lives or plans to live, if a permit to do so is issued by the
department; provided, however, before such permit will issue, the owner shall
file an application in writing, signed and sworn to by such owner personally,
upon a form of application prescribed by the department of building and safety,
and shall pass an examination in a satisfactory manner prescribed by the
heating board of appeals, which examination shall show that such owner is able
and competent by experience and training to install, alter, replace or repair
such equipment in a safe manner and without the likelihood of injury to the
public.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 5.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-816. - Fees.
   (a)   The department shall, before issuing any permit under this article,
require the payment by the applicant for such permit of a permit fee in the
amount set forth in this section and for the purpose herein provided:
      (1)   Power plants generally. For any permit for the installation or
construction of a power plant or a boiler, or furnace and boiler, in connection
with any such plant, for each such boiler, or boiler and furnace or power plant
to be constructed or installed therein, where the cost of the proposed work
does not exceed $300.00, a fee of $3.00; for each additional $50.00 cost, an
additional fee of $1.00 will be required.
      (2)   Power plants, alterations of. For any permit for alterations,
replacements or repairs to any existing power plant, or boiler, or furnace and
boiler in connection with a power plant, required by the terms of this article,
a fee of $2.00.
      (3)   Gravity warm air heating systems. For any permit for the
installation of a gravity warm air heating system, $4.00. For any permit for
alterations, replacements or repairs to any existing gravity warm air heating
system or furnace in connection with such system, $2.00.
      (4)   Mechanical warm air heating or air conditioning system. For any
permit for the installation of a mechanical warm air heating system and each
such heating system to be installed, $5.00. For any permit for the installation
of a mechanical warm air heating system and the duct work and equipment of an
air conditioning system in connection therewith, for each such heating and air
conditioning system to be installed thereunder, $5.00.
      (5)   Mechanical warm air heating, etc., alterations. For any permit for
alteration, replacement or repairs to any existing mechanical warm air heating
system or duct work and equipment in any existing air conditioning system,
$3.00.
      (6)   Steam or hot water heating systems. For any permit for the
installation of a steam or hot water heating system or for the installation for
use in connection with fan heating system of a steam or hot water heating
plant, where the cost of the proposed work does not exceed $1,000.00, $5.00,
and $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00 cost.
         a.   For any permit for the installation of a steam or hot water
boiler in connection with any existing heating system or plant, $3.00.
         b.   For each sheet metal duct work in connection with cooling,
ventilating or any other type of system, a permit fee of $5.00, where the cost
of the proposed work does not exceed $10,000.00; and $1.00 for each additional
$5,000.00 cost or fraction thereof.
      (7)   Cooling piping and equipment. For any permit for the installation
of pipe duct work and equipment designed to accomplish the required cooling in
connection with the ventilating or summer air conditioning of buildings or
spaces therein, for the first 10,000 square feet of floor area, $5.00; and
$1.00 for each additional 1,000 square feet of floor area. Any permit for
alterations or repairs to any such cooling piping or equipment, $3.00.
      (8)   Stokers and powdered fuel burners. For any permit for the
installation, alteration, replacement or repair of a stoker or stokers, for
each stoker included in such permit, or for the equipment therewith, the
required fee shall be $3.00.
      (9)   Gas burners. For any permit for installing, altering, replacing or
repairing gas burners, or gas burning equipment for use in connection with the
heating system, the fee charged shall be $3.00 for each gas burner or its
equipment included in such permit.
      (10)   Gas fired unit heaters. For any permit for the installation of gas
or oil unit heaters, for each such heater separately metered, $3.00.
      (11)   Gas water radiators. For any permit for installing gas water
radiators the fee charged shall be $2.00 for each such device included in the
permit.
      (12)   Oil burners for heating systems. For any permit for the
installation of an oil burner, $3.00. For replacement or repair of an oil
burner or oil burner equipment, $2.00.
      (13)   Fuel oil storage tanks. For fuel oil storage tanks up to and
including 275 gallon capacity, the permit fee shall be $2.00 for storage or
auxiliary tanks over 275 gallon capacity and not exceeding 600 gallons, the
additional permit fee shall be $2.00 for each tank. For outside storage tanks,
the permit fee shall be $5.00 for each tank.
   (b)   However, when an inspector is required to make over three inspection
calls on any one job, an additional inspection fee of $3.00 per call will be
required.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 5.6, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-817—5-835. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - BOILERS
Sec. 5-836. - Foundations.
   Low pressure steam boilers, hot water furnaces, and hot water heaters shall
be supported upon concrete or other fireproof floors, but if not brick set, may
be supported on wood floors if protected below with four inches of brick, tile
or concrete laid over one-eighth inch plate turned up one inch on all sides,
such protection to extend four feet beyond the front of apparatus and two feet
beyond sides and back.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-837. - Protection of objects near boilers.
   All wood lath and plaster and other combustible ceilings and beams over and
for a minimum distance of four feet on all sides from such boiler and not less
than three feet from the top of the boiler to the ceiling shall be shielded
with approved metal or other fire-resistive materials. The material to be
applied shall leave an air space of not less than one-half inch between the
material and the ceilings or beams. The sides as well as the bottom of beams,
shall be protected. The distance from the top of the boiler to such shield
shall be not less than 12 inches. No combustible partition shall be within
three feet of the sides and back and five feet from the front of any boiler,
unless such partition shall be covered with fire-resistive material to a height
of at least three feet above the floor, and the fire-resistive material shall
extend from the end or the back of the boiler to at least four feet in front of
it; in which case the distance shall not be less than two feet in front of the
sides and four feet from the front of the boiler. If the above requirements for
clearance cannot be complied with, when required by the inspector, boiler rooms
shall be enclosed with incombustible walls or partitions and ceilings in such
manner as may be required by the building code of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-838. - Low pressure boilers.
   (a)   Low pressure boilers are hereby determined to include all boilers
carrying a pressure of not more than 15 pounds per square inch of steam
pressure and not more than 30 pounds per square inch of water pressure.
   (b)   Ratings for all low pressure cast iron and steel boilers shall be
selected in accordance with the recommendations for low pressure boilers as
determined by the Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning Contractor's National
Association, Engineering Standards, and all rules contained therein, and
amendments thereto, shall apply to all boilers governed by the provisions of
this article; provided however, that any low pressure boiler having an approved
rating from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers shall be acceptable
under this article.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-839. - Grate area.
   All boilers used for heating shall have grate area and evaporating capacity
sufficient for the amount of radiation served in accordance with the Net Load
Recommendations for Heating Boilers as published by the Heating, Piping and Air
Conditioning Contractor's National Association, except that no round cast iron
boiler with grate diameter less than 17 inches and containing less than five
sections, ash pit, fire pot, two intermediate sections and dome, shall be
permitted.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-840. - Boiler trimmings—Steam, vacuum and vapor.
   Every low pressure steam heating boiler shall be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   A safety valve of approved type with lever handle set at 15 pounds
and of sufficient size to dissipate all steam which can be generated in the
boiler without permitting the pressure in same to exceed 15 pounds per square
inch.
      (2)   Water column with try cocks and gauge glass connected directly to
the boiler independent of other connections.
      (3)   Steam pressure gauge of approved type with brass syphon loop
mounted at top of water column or, if placed more than five feet from water
column connection, shall be of approved size. No connections of any kind except
water column, blow-down, automatic feeder or low water cutoff connections shall
be permitted from steam or water connections from boiler to gauge glass or
pressure gauge.
      (4)   A permanent makeup or feed water connection of size approved by the
inspector, but in no case smaller than one-half inch, with globe valve placed
in same within easy reach of the floor with an approved type check valve
between shutoff valve and boiler shall be made to each boiler.
      (5)   Connection not less than one inch in size, equipped with hose end
or connected to blow-off piping to permit complete drainage of boiler.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-841. - Same—Water.
   Every low pressure hot water heating boiler shall be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   Water relief valve of approved make with lever handle, side outlet
not less than one inch in size, set to open at 30 pounds per square inch
pressure.
      (2)   Altitude gauge of approved make.
      (3)   Thermometer of approved make.
      (4)   Boiler feed connections. A permanent makeup or automatic feed water
connection of proper size, but in no case smaller than one-half inch, with
globe valve placed in same within reach of floor, shall be made to each boiler.
      (5)   Drain connection shall be not less than three-fourths inches in
size, equipped with hose end or connected to blow-off piping to permit complete
drainage of boiler.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-842. - Smoke pipes—Clearances.
   The clear distance between a smoke pipe or metal breaching and combustible
material or construction, including plaster or wood lath, shall be not less
than 24 inches; provided that such clearances may be reduced to 12 inches when
all combustible materials are protected with not less than one-quarter inch of
asbestos millboard placed at least one inch from the surface, to be protected
and extending the full length of the smoke pipe, and not less than 12 inches
beyond it on both sides, or such combustible material or construction may be
protected by some covering of equivalent safety placed at least one inch from
the surface to be protected and extending the full length and on both sides of
the smoke pipe, as above set forth.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-843. - Same—Through roof.
   No metal or crock smoke pipe shall pass through the roof or wall of any
building not wholly fireproofed, except in the case of a gas heater, a fume or
smoke pipe therefrom may be passed through the roof, in which case a special
permit shall be first obtained from the department; provided, however, the
foregoing requirement shall not prevent the issuing of, and the department is
hereby authorized to issue, a special permit for a period of not to exceed 90
days to allow a smoke pipe through the wall or roof of a construction shanty
designed to house workmen during the progress of any construction work. If a
permit is granted to pass such a pipe through a roof which is not wholly
fireproofed, the smoke pipe shall be protected in the following manner: A
galvanized iron ventilating thimble of the dimensions hereinafter stated shall
be installed: in the case of a smoke pipe, the diameter of the outside guard
shall be not less than 12 inches and the diameter of the inner guard shall be
not less than eight inches larger than the smoke pipe; and for all furnaces, or
where similar large hot fires are used, the diameter of the outside guard shall
be not less than 18 inches and the diameter of the inner guard shall not be
less than 12 inches larger in diameter than the pipe. The smoke pipe thimbles
shall extend from the under side of the ceiling or roof beams to at least nine
inches above the roof, and they shall have openings for ventilation at the
lower end where the smoke pipes enter, and at the top of the guards above the
roof. When a smoke pipe of a boiler passes through a roof, it shall be guarded
by a double ventilating thimble, as above specified, with outside and inside
guards 36 inches and 24 inches, respectively, larger than the diameter of the
smoke pipe of the boiler. This shall not be taken to apply to reinforced
concrete roof, or other roof which is wholly fireproofed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-844. - Same—Construction.
   Smoke pipes from heating boilers and furnaces, except domestic heating
boilers and furnaces, shall be constructed of iron or steel not lighter than
No. 20 gauge, or of equally safe material, and shall be extended full size
without restriction from smoke connection on boiler or furnace to the chimney.
Smoke pipes from domestic heating boilers and furnaces shall be constructed of
iron or steel not lighter than No. 24 gauge, or of equally safe material. All
smoke pipes shall be fitted with dampers of approved design.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-845. - Same—Connections prohibited.
   No smoke pipe or vent from any oil or gas fired boiler shall be connected
into the breeching or smoke pipe from a coal burning boiler or furnace, but
shall be provided with separate connection entirely, nor shall any horizontal
flue from a gas fired boiler be connected to any chimney flue which takes gases
from any other heating unit of any nature whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-846. - Same—Connection required.
   Every furnace or boiler shall have suitable connection to an adequate
chimney or smoke stack which shall conform to the requirements of the building
code.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 6.11, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-847—5-865. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - HEATING SYSTEM
Sec. 5-866. - Heat loss.
   For the purpose of this division, the method of computing heat losses shall
be based on approved engineering practice using the British thermal unit system
of computation, as set forth by the American Society of Heating and Ventilating
Engineers, or similar methods as approved by the inspector. In addition to
actual heat loss through building construction, sufficient allowance shall be
made for ventilation requirements either on the basis of air changes per hour,
as set forth in section
5-877, or on a basis of infiltration.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-867. - Radiation—Generally.
   Any form of radiation approved by the inspector, after a test has been made
as to safety and quality of material, may be used on any heating system, except
that no radiators, either direct or indirect, carrying a pressure of more than
15 pounds per square inch shall be used in any building defined in the building
code as a public or residence building. No cast iron direct radiator shall in
any case be operated under a steam pressure exceeding ten pounds per square
inch or water pressure in excess of 30 pounds per square inch.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-868. - Same—Table of heat emissions.
   The heat output of direct steam radiators shall be figured not to exceed the
following emissions per square foot per hour with steam at two pounds pressure
and air temperature at 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
 
                         British Thermal Steam units British Thermal Hot Water
                                                     units
Cast iron tube radiators 240                         160
.....
Cast iron wall radiators 265                         175
.....
Single tier pipe coils   300                         200
.....
 
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-869. - Same—Necessity to convert into equivalent of BTU.
   In selecting boiler sizes, all radiation to be served shall be converted
into equivalent direct radiation figures based on 240 British thermal units per
square foot emission for steam, and 160 British thermal units for water.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-870. - Same—Equivalent for unit heaters.
   Equivalent direct radiation for unit heaters, indirect heaters, unit
ventilators and stack heaters shall be computed from manufacturer's data either
by dividing British thermal units output by 240, or pounds condensation per
hour by 4.0 in the case of steam, and in the case of hot water by dividing
British thermal units by 160.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-871. - Welding.
   All gas and electric arc-welding on gravity forced hot water, low pressure
heating systems shall be tested to meet the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-872. - Gas radiators and heaters.
   All gas radiators and heaters shall be of an approved, enclosed, vented
type, bearing the seal of the American Gas Association and shall be
automatically controlled in such a manner that the valve is completely shut off
upon failure of gas supply. Such radiators or heaters shall have legs not less
than six inches high, and the distance from the radiator or heater to the wall
shall be not less than five inches.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-873. - Steam heating—Piping.
   (a)   Black standard steel or wrought iron pipe with steam pattern cast iron
fittings shall be used on all steam heating systems except under special
conditions when, if approved by the inspector, other equally safe material may
be used.
   (b)   In general, piping shall be arranged to pitch in the direction of flow
of steam or condensate and shall be adequately dripped and vented. Maximum
pressure drop shall not exceed one-half pound total.
   (c)   As far as possible, boilers shall be located to permit the return of
condensate by gravity to the boiler and on such gravity systems, a check valve
or Hartford loop shall be installed in the main return to the boiler. On cast
iron boilers of the exterior return drum type, the main return shall be
branched at the boiler to connect to each such drum.
   (d)   Equalizer of the size, at least one-half the diameter of the boiler
tappings, of the main steam load shall be provided from the main supply of the
boiler to the wet return connection at the boiler in each case, but in no case
shall such equalizer be less than two inches in diameter.
   (e)   In one or two pipe gravity steam heating systems, the low point of the
steam main or "dry" return shall be at an elevation not less than 27 inches
above the normal boiler water line.
   (f)   No piping shall be laid in any coal bin unless protected by suitable
tile or other approved material to keep piping from direct contact with coal.
   (g)   No steam or return piping shall be buried directly in concrete without
protection by tile pipe and waterproofed covering with drain at end of the
crock pipe, nor shall wet return piping other than threaded cast iron pipe or
standard brass pipe having not less than 85 percent copper content be buried
below or in concrete floors. All trapped returns must have a full size plugged
tee or drain cock at lowest point.
   (h)   In building of frame construction where steam pipes are installed with
two inches of wood joints, studs, flooring or other combustible construction,
they shall be protected by asbestos or other insulation material not less than
three-fourths inch in thickness.
   (i)   Steam and return piping shall be run to permit expansion and
contraction without putting any undue strain on pipe or fittings using swing
joints or expansion joints to accomplish the above.
   (j)   No cutting of girders, beams, joists, studs or other structural
members to permit passage of heating pipes will be permitted, except as
approved by the building inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-874. - Same—Temperature control valves.
   No thermostatically operated temperature control valve or trap shall be
installed on steam mains or returns, unless adequate provision, subject to
approval of the inspector, is made to prevent the retaining of water in the
system and its proper return to the boiler.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-875. - Hot water heating—Piping.
   (a)   Brass, copper, black standard steel or wrought iron pipes and fittings
shall be used on all hot water heating systems except under special conditions
when, if approved by the heating board of appeals, other safe material may be
used.
   (b)   No part of the piping on a hot water heating system shall be laid in
any coal bin unless protected by suitable removable tile or other approved
material to keep piping from direct contact with coal and to permit
examination.
   (c)   Hot water piping, used for under the floor space heating, commonly
known as radiant heating, shall be buried in concrete of sufficient strength
and thickness to carry the floor load as provided for in the building code,
with a minimum thickness of three inches with at least two inches of concrete
over such piping and shall be laid level on a solid foundation over a four-inch
gravel fill, as recommended by the manufacturer's specifications, to eliminate
any possibility of air pockets in the system, with provisions made for drainage
at one or more points. Radiant heat piping shall be made of wrought iron,
copper, or brass with welded, brazed or soldered joints. All copper radiant
heat piping shall be tested by the installer with water, air, or gas at 60
pounds per square inch for a period of 30 minutes without any drop in pressure,
to the satisfaction of the heating inspector. Wrought iron and brass radiant
heat piping shall be tested by the installer with water, air or gas at 200
pounds per square inch for 30 minutes without any drop in pressure to the
satisfaction of the heating inspector. Hot water heat piping installed in
floors of dwellings which are built directly on the ground, at grade level,
shall be installed on a solid slab of cement concrete at least one inch in
thickness over a four-inch gravel fill or on a solid slab of zonolite concrete
or its equivalent at least one inch in thickness, over a four-inch gravel fill
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. A vapor barrier of
asphalt-saturated building paper equal to a 30-pound felt with a four-inch lap,
shall be installed over the zonolite or cement concrete base under the piping.
One inch asphalt insulation must be installed along the outer edge of the floor
slab and extend two feet under the floor as a border insulation to be placed
over the moisture barrier, in accordance with Sketch No. 1 shown herewith.
   (d)   Piping installed in the ceiling of dwellings for space heating shall
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications with proper
insulation to prevent undue heat loss or the accumulation of moisture on the
ceiling.
   (e)   All supply and return piping run in exterior walls, except in cases
opening directly to rooms through which they pass, shall be insulated with
asbestos or other approved covering at least three-fourths inch thick.
   (f)   All low points in any hot water heating system shall be provided with
means for drainage.
   (g)   All hot water heating pipes shall be run to permit expansion and
contraction without undue strain on the pipe or fittings, using swing joints or
expansion joints to accomplish the above.
   (h)   No cutting of girders, beams joists, studs or other structural members
to permit passage of hot water heating pipes will be permitted, except as
approved by the building inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-876. - Same—Expansion tanks.
   (a)   Each hot water heating system shall be provided with an expansion tank
of sufficient capacity to allow for expansion of all water in the system from
50 degrees Fahrenheit to 220 degrees Fahrenheit.
   (b)   In open systems the expansion tank shall be installed above the
highest radiator served and shall be connected directly to the boiler with one-
inch pipe, with no valve of any description in this line between boiler and
tank.
   (c)   Each such tank shall be equipped with open vent at top terminated
within the walls of the building. An overflow pipe not less than three-fourths
inch in size shall also be provided, terminated in basement or other approved
location over sink or floor drain. No valves of any description may be placed
in vent or overflow pipes from open system expansion tanks.
   (d)   In closed systems an approved water relief valve with threaded side
outlet and lever handle for testing shall be provided on each closed expansion
tank with outlet extended to floor or other approved location.
   (e)   In all closed systems there shall be installed an automatic boiler
feed valve set for a maximum pressure of 18 pounds, to be not less than one-
half inch in size.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-877. - Air changes.
   The following table shows air changes which take place under average
conditions exclusive of air provided for ventilation:
Kind of room                           Number of air changes taking place per
or building                            hour
Rooms, 1 side exposed .....            1
Rooms, 2 sides exposed .....           1½
Rooms, 3 sides exposed .....           2
Rooms, 4 sides exposed .....           2
Rooms with no windows or outside doors ½ to ¾
.....
Entrance halls .....                   2 to 3
Reception halls .....                  2
Living rooms .....                     1 to 2
Dining rooms .....                     1 to 2
Bath rooms .....                       2
Drugstores .....                       2 to 3
Clothing stores .....                  1
Churches, factories, lofts, etc. ..... ½ to 3
 
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-878. - Minimum requirements in determining radiating surface.
   The following are minimum requirements for determination of amount of direct
steam or hot water radiating surface to be installed in steam and hot water
heating systems:
      (1)   The amount of equivalent direct radiation to be installed in a
given room, where unenclosed radiators are to be employed, shall be as
determined by the following formulae:
 
    H
S = 240 (for steam) (1)
    H
S = 150 (for gravity hot water) (2)
    H
S = 220 (for forced hot water system) (3)
 
   Where:
H = heat loss of the room in BTU per hour, as determined by the methods herein
provided, and
S = equivalent direct radiating surface in square feet.
      (2)   For the purposes of this division, the equivalent direct radiation
in square feet for any unenclosed radiator shall be defined as the minimum
guaranteed heat emission of that radiator measured BTU per hour, divided by 240
for direct steam, 150 for gravity hot water radiation, 220 for forced hot water
heating.
      (3)   For various other water (or steam) temperatures, various emissions
per square feet are shown in the following table:
Temperature of Water  Heat Emission
in Radiator           Per Square Feet
150 degrees .....     110 BTU per hour
160 degrees .....     130 BTU per hour
170 degrees .....     150 BTU per hour
180 degrees .....     170 BTU per hour
190 degrees .....     190 BTU per hour
200 degrees .....     210 BTU per hour
215 degrees .....     240 BTU per hour
225 degrees .....     260 BTU per hour
240 degrees .....     295 BTU per hour
Note: The above emissions are for a radiator in air at 70 degrees Fahrenheit
 
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-879. - Enclosed radiators.
   When direct radiator enclosures are to be used in the increase or decrease
of heat emission from the direct radiators, such radiators shall be governed by
provisions of the Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning Guide, as published by
American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-880. - Convectors or concealed heaters.
   Ratings for convectors or concealed heaters shall be determined as set forth
in the Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning Guide, as published by American
Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-881. - Unit heaters.
   Coal, gas and oil fired unit heaters are to be installed according to the
engineering standards set forth by the Heating, Piping, and Air Conditioning
Contractors National Association, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-882. - Gas or oil fired floor type furnaces.
   No furnace shall be installed in the floor of any auditorium, public hall,
public assembly room or commercial building, but such furnace may be installed
in single residences, subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   The floor around the furnace shall be braced and double-headed with
a framework of material not lighter than the joists. The inside dimensions of
the framework shall be approximately one-half inch longer and wider than the
furnace to be installed.
      (2)   All floor furnaces, including those having single or dual wall
register outlets, shall be installed as approved without alterations,
extension, or changes of any kind in the furnace.
      (3)   No automatic pilot shutoff shall be installed on a floor furnace
that has not been approved for such equipment by the American Gas Association.
      (4)   All floor furnaces shall be equipped with a pressure regulator
approved by the American Gas Association.
      (5)   The bottom of the floor furnace shall have a clearance under it of
at least 12 inches above the bottom of the pit. The ground around the sides of
such furnace shall be excavated to form a "basinlike" pit having at least 24
inches on all sides of such furnace. This facilitates any servicing that may be
required, and allows ample air for proper combustion.
      (6)   Whenever such excavation exceeds 12 inches in depth or water
seepage is apparent under the house, a watertight pan shall be used. The pan
shall be made of not less than 24-gauge galvanized iron or 16-ounce copper. The
pan shall be suitably anchored in place, and the walls shall extend at least
six inches above the grade level, and shall have 24 inches clearance on all
sides.
      (7)   Adequate provisions shall be made for easy access to the furnace
under the house by means of an opening in the foundation wall at least four
inches by 24 inches.
      (8)   All flue pipes for floor furnaces and central heating furnaces
shall be connected to a masonry chimney or a properly designed vent flue.
      (9)   Every vent pipe or connection between the appliance and the chimney
or flue shall not be smaller than the size of the vent collar of the appliance,
and in no case shall the internal area be less than seven square inches (three-
inch pipe). Vent pipes leading from heating appliances for fuel other than gas,
when converted to gas fuel, may be reduced from original size on the basis of
one square inch of area for every 7500 BTU of fuel delivered to the appliance
burner.
      (10)   Where the appliance has more than one vent connection, or where
more than one appliance is connected to the same vent, the area of the vent
pipe shall equal the combined area of the vents for which it acts as a common
carrier to the flue. All connections to the lateral run shall be made with "Y"
connections.
      (11)   All vents shall extend through roof as near ridge as practicable
with laterals in the attic not less than 30 degrees from the horizontal.
      (12)   Height of the vent must be two feet above the highest portion of
any structure within 15 feet from the place where the vent extends above the
ridge.
      (13)   The installation of a cap or other device on the outlets of an
appliance vent, which in any way obstructs the free passage of the products of
combustion to the outside atmosphere, is prohibited.
      (14)   Vent pipes passing through any closet or other enclosed space used
for the storage of clothing, household goods, or other combustible materials
shall be Type "B" vents, as set forth in the engineering standards of the
Heating, Piping, and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association, and
amendments thereto, or shall be in a vitreous lined masonry chimney.
      (15)   Maximum length of lateral vents shall not be more than 75 percent
of vertical height of vent or chimney.
      (16)   All lateral vent pipes shall be supported at every joint by
perforated strap iron not less than 1/16 inch in thickness securely fastened to
the floor joists.
      (17)   Vent pipes shall not be closer than two inches to any combustible
material, and in all cases where vent pipes are less than four inches from any
combustible material, the same shall be protected with asbestos mill board of
not less than one-fourth inch thickness.
      (18)   Where said Type "B" vents are used, it shall not be necessary to
use the mill board as required in subsection (17) of this sectiion.
      (19)   In underfloor areas, the minimum pitch upward of lateral runs of
vents from the appliance must be at least one-half inch per foot.
      (20)   Floor furnaces shall be installed so that the connection from the
draft diverter to the flue can be made without the use of more than two 45-
degree elbows. The installation of 90-degree elbows in lateral vent piping is
prohibited.
      (21)   Floor furnaces shall not be vented to a masonry or metal flue
which has any side exposed to the weather, or to an unheated space for its
entire length.
      (22)   Connections of lateral vent pipes to transite or other Type "B"
vents must be made with fittings designed by the vent manufacturers for this
purpose.
      (23)   The installation of dampers or stops in the vent pipe attached to
any appliance equipped with a draft diverter is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.16a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-883. - Gravity warm air heating—Generally.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this division, be construed to have the meaning as herein defined:
      (1)   A warm air furnace shall consist of a direct fired heater, over the
exterior surface of which the air passes to be directly heated by the radiant
heat of combustion.
      (2)   A gravity warm air heating plant shall consist of one or more warm
air furnaces, enclosed within casings, together with necessary air or
recirculating pipes, ducts, boxes and fittings, smoke pipes and fittings,
dampers, registers, borders, faces and grilles, the same being intended for
heating the buildings in which they may be installed, the motive head producing
flow in such heating plant depending on the difference in weight between the
heated air leaving the casings and the cooler air entering the bottom of the
casing.
      (3)   The incorporation of a booster fan, blower or any power driven
device for the purpose of accelerating the air circulation in a gravity warm
air heating plant shall be construed as changing the classification of such
gravity system to a mechanical forced air heating system.
      (4)   The installation, alteration or repair of gravity warm air heating
systems shall be governed by the Standard Gravity Code, as published by the
National Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association, and amendments
thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-884. - Same—Size of registers.
   All registers shall have a free area at least equal to the area of the
basement pipes to them, and shall be of the approximate width of the stacks or
fittings to which they are attached.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-885. - Same—Size of furnace.
   The required furnace size shall be determined according to the table as
hereinafter set forth, based upon the area of all heat pipes leading from the
furnace, as follows:
 
Size of furnace        Maximum total area of all pipes from furnace
18-inch fire pot ..... 250 square inches
20-inch fire pot ..... 350 square inches
22-inch fire pot ..... 450 square inches
24-inch fire pot ..... 525 square inches
26-inch fire pot ..... 600 square inches
28-inch fire pot ..... 700 square inches
 
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-886. - Same—Gas or oil fired furnaces.
   In the use of any gas or oil fired furnace with any gravity warm air heating
system, deviations from the requirements of this division shall be allowed only
in connection with the furnace itself, and such deviations shall be subject to
the approval of the inspector. The rating of each such gas or oil fired furnace
shall be determined in accordance with the best engineering practice.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-887. - Same—Furnaces; construction, installation of.
   The construction and installation of all warm air furnaces hereafter
installed in connection with gravity warm air heating plants in the city,
except as elsewhere in this division otherwise provided, shall comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The location of the furnace shall be such as to equalize the length
of warm air pipes as far as possible, yet give necessary preference to pipes
supplying rooms having unusual requirements.
      (2)   Furnace foundation of brick, cement, or other like incombustible
material shall be provided. Such foundation shall extend at least 36 inches in
front of furnace casing, and at least 15 inches at rear and sides of furnace
casing. Foundation shall be level.
      (3)   Where it is necessary to place a furnace on combustible floor, not
less than four inches of hollow tile shall be used in every instance, having
joints matched in such a way that air passage will be free from side to side,
so that at no time will the removal of ashes or the handling of coal close up
these openings. Such foundation shall be constructed upon and covered with
continuous sheet metal plates, of weight not less than No. 24 U.S. Standard
gauge, having all joints substantially riveted or double seamed and the bottom
sheet to have the edges turned up at least one inch. This floor covering shall
extend under the whole of the firebox and ash pit of the furnace and outwardly
not less than 12 inches on all sides and rear of casing or base ring, and 36
inches in front.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-888. - Mechanical warm air heating.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to the construction,
application and installation of air duct systems and self-contained units
employing mechanical means for the movement of air and used for forced air
heating systems.
      (1)   A mechanical warm air heating plant shall consist of one or more
warm air furnaces enclosed within casings, together with necessary
appurtenances thereto, consisting of warm air supply pipes and fittings, cold
air or recirculating pipes, ducts, boxes and fittings, smoke pipes and
fittings, dampers and registers, faces and grilles, fans or blowers, the same
being intended for heating the buildings in which they may be installed. The
circulation of air within such a system shall be dependent upon the motive
power furnished by a fan or blower, and the duct work in connection therewith
shall be designed especially for such system; provided, however, that the
incorporation of a booster fan, blower or any power driven device for the
purpose of accelerating the air circulation in a gravity warm air heating plant
shall be construed as changing the classification of such gravity system to a
mechanical system.
      (2)   The amount of air to be provided for each room or space to be
heated or conditioned shall be determined in accordance with the Technical Code
for the Design and Installation of Mechanical Warm Air Heating Systems, as
published by the National Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association,
with amendments thereto.
      (3)   A warm air all year air conditioning system shall include a
mechanical warm air heating plant, such as defined in section
5-883(2), together with such other devices and such automatic controls as will
secure simultaneous control of the temperature, motion and humidity and a
reduction in the dust and odor content of the air employed in the ventilation
of rooms, but not provided with such devices and automatic controls as will
provide for cooling and dehumidifying in summer.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-889. - Wall stacks.
   Wall stacks for the purpose of conducting gravity warm air shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of the building
code of the city, as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 7.23, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-890—5-905. - Reserved.
DIVISION 10. - VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING
Sec. 5-906. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Air conditioning shall mean provision for the simultaneous automatic control
of the temperature, motion, and humidity and a reduction in the dust content
and odors for air employed in the ventilation of rooms. The three
classifications of air conditioning which shall be recognized under this
division shall be as follows:
      (1)   Winter air conditioning, which shall include the proper
distribution of the cleaned, humidified and heated air to and within the spaces
to be conditioned.
      (2)   Summer air conditioning, which shall include the proper
distribution of the cleaned, dehumidified and cooled air to and within the
spaces to be conditioned.
      (3)   All year conditioning, which shall provide for all the services
enumerated in subsections (1) and (2) above.
   Partial cooling shall mean a device designed and employed to accomplish the
partial cooling of the air in a room or rooms, either by means of direct
expansion coils or water coils employing chilled water as a cooling medium, and
located either within the room or rooms to be so partially cooled, or
immediately adjacent thereto.
   Ventilation shall mean the process of supplying or removing air by natural
or mechanical means, to or from any space. Such air may or may not have been
conditioned.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-907. - Information to be submitted.
   (a)   The plans and specifications of all air conditioning or partial
cooling installations submitted for approval under this article shall set forth
the heat transmission coefficients for barriers and the amounts and sources of
heat loss and gain. The design temperatures and relative humidity shall be
recorded for air outside and inside, for condensing air or water, and for the
heat transferring medium.
   (b)   These governing design factors and temperatures shall be such as to
produce an effective result at least equal to those set forth by the Heating,
Ventilating, Air Conditioning Guide, as published by the American Society of
Heating and Ventilating Engineers, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-908. - Air filters.
   (a)   Air filters shall be so installed as to be readily accessible for
inspection and removal for cleaning or replacement. Duct connections to and
from filters shall change size or shape gradually to insure even distribution
of air over entire filter area. Filters installed close to outside air inlet
shall be protected from the weather by suitable louvers, in front of which a
one-inch mesh wire screen shall be provided.
   (b)   The contractor installing such work should post in a conspicuous place
adjacent to the furnace a notice reading substantially as follows: "To insure
proper air delivery, the filter contained in this unit must be cleaned or
renewed at least once each year."
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-909. - Air washers.
   The following provisions shall govern the design, construction and
installation of air washers when incorporated as a part of any mechanical warm
air or air conditioning system:
      (1)   Air shall be uniformly distributed over washer inlet.
      (2)   Spray nozzles shall be so spaced and arranged that spray will
completely cover cross sectional area of washer above tank.
      (3)   Air velocity through washer shall not be less than 300 feet per
minute nor greater than 600 feet per minute.
      (4)   Provision shall be made to prevent entrained moisture being carried
past washer outlet.
      (5)   Drain and overflow connections from washer tank shall not be
directly connected to sewer or wash line, but shall, in all cases, drain to
open receptacle.
      (6)   Fresh water connection shall be so arranged that there will be no
possibility of tank water being drawn back into water supply line in the event
of lack of pressure in supply line.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-910. - Refrigerating equipment and refrigerants.
   All refrigerants, cooling equipment, piping and specialties installed and
used in connection with air conditioning shall be subject to the requirements
of the "American Standard Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration," as
approved by the American Standards Association, and as published by American
Engineering and Industrial Standards.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-911. - Recommendations of technical organizations.
   Except as otherwise specifically prescribed in this article or in duly
promulgated rules, the published recommendations of the following technical
organizations, recognized as authoritative in the field involved, shall be
deemed to be generally accepted as good practice in both heating, ventilating
and air conditioning work:
      (1)   Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning Guide, as published by
American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers.
      (2)   American Standard Safety Code of Mechanical Refrigeration, as
approved by American Standards Association, and published by American
Engineering and Industrial Standards.
      (3)   Standards for the Installation of Air Conditioning, Warm Air
Heating, Air Cooling and Ventilating Systems, as recommended by National Fire
Protection Association.
      (4)   Technical Code for the Design and Installation of Mechanical Warm
Air Heating Systems, as published by National Warm Air Heating and Air
Conditioning Association.
      (5)   The Standard Gravity Code for the Design and Installation of
Gravity Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association.
      (6)   Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning Contractors National
Association Engineering Standards, as developed by the Committee on Standards
of the Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association.
      (7)   Net Load Recommendations for Heating Boilers, as published by the
Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-912. - Wall stacks.
   (a)   Wall stacks for the purpose of conducting forced air shall be
constructed and installed as provided in this section.
   (b)   All single wall stacks or wall pipes, heads, boots, ells, tees,
angles, and other connections shall be made of bright tin not lighter than IC,
or of galvanized iron not lighter than 26 U.S. Standard gauge; provided,
however, that aluminum with a sheet thickness of not less than .020 inch may be
used for forced air heating plans only; provided further that any aluminum duct
ten inches or larger shall be cross-broken and bracing angles installed. And
all transverse joint connections shall be of the aluminum sheet thickness
embracing as hereinafter indicated:
Aluminum
Sheet Thickness Maximum Side
Inch B & S Gauge Inch Transverse Joint  Bracing
                      Connections
Aluminum
Sheet Thickness Maximum Side
Inch B & S Inch Transverse Joint                                                             Bracing
     Gauge      Connections
           Up
.020 24    to   S, drive, pocket or bar slips on 7'10" centers.                              None
           12
           13
.025 24    to   S, drive, pocket or bar slips on 7'10" centers.                              None
           24
           25
.025 22    to   S, drive, 1" pocket or 1" bar slips on 7'10" centers.                        1 × 1 × 1/8 " angles, 4' from joint
           30
           31
.032 20    to   Drive, 1" pocket or 1" bar slips on 7'10" centers.                           1 × 1 × 1/8 " angles, 4' from joint
           40
           41   1 1/8 " angle connections, 1½" pocket or 1½" bar slips with 1 3/8 × 1/8 "
.032 20    to   bar reinforcing on 7'10?                                                     1½ × 1½ × 1/8 " angles, 4' from joint centers
           60
           61   1½" angle connections or 1½" pocket or 1½" bar slips 3'9" maximum centers
.040 18    to   with 1 3/8 × 1/8 " bar reinforcing.                                         1½ × 1½ or 1/8 " dia. angles or 1½ × 1½ × 1/8 " angles, 2' from joint
           90
.051 16    91 & 2? angle connections or 1½" pocket or 1½" bar slips 3'9? maximum centers   1½ × 1 ½ × 1/8 " dia. angles or 1½ × 1½ × 1/8 " angles, 2' from joint
           up   with 1 3/8 × 1/8 " bar reinforcing.
 
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-913. - Ventilation of restaurant type cooking equipment.
   The following provisions shall apply to ventilation of restaurant type
cooking equipment:
      (1)   Hoods over such equipment shall be constructed of noncombustible
materials, with tight joints and have a clearance of at least 18 inches from
all unprotected combustible materials.
      (2)   Ducts from hoods over such equipment shall be constructed of No. 18
U.S. gauge or heavier steel, with tight joints and separated at least 18 inches
from all unprotected combustible material.
      (3)   The ducts shall constitute an independent system in no manner
connected with any other ventilating system.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-914. - Laboratory and factory hood vents.
   The following provisions shall apply to educational and industrial
establishments.
      (1)   Where fans are installed to remove acid fumes, corrosive gases or
other irritating gaseous products from hoods, kettles, drains or similar
devices used in educational or industrial establishments, the discharge from
such fans or blowers shall be carried up to the roof of the building and so
located as to preclude the possibility of constituting a nuisance or menace to
occupants of the building or adjacent structures.
      (2)   Unless specially constructed fireproof flues of acid-resisting
material and approved design are used, such exhaust fans shall be placed near
the roof of the building in which they are located so that all portions of the
duct work and vertical flues in the building passing through occupied spaces
shall be under suction.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-915. - Location and accessibility of fans.
   No fans with motors, pulleys, belts or other moving parts shall be installed
in such a manner as to make any of the bearings or moving parts inaccessible
for easy oiling, inspection and repair. All duct work enclosing bearings shall
be provided with access doors to permit inspection, and, if required by the
inspector, oil gauge glasses shall be brought out through such duct work.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-916. - Source of air for fan restricted.
   No fan used to force air to any parts of a building regularly occupied shall
take its air from any boiler room, open basement, garage or other location
where fire or noxious fumes are liable to be introduced to other parts of the
building through the system.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-917. - Fire dampers.
   Where ventilating ducts pass through fire-resistive walls or floors,
automatic fire dampers actuated by fusible link shall be provided as required
by the inspector. Such dampers shall be of design approved by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, and shall be provided with means for easy
resetting without dismantling duct work.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 8.12, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-918—5-935. - Reserved.
DIVISION 11. - STOKERS
Sec. 5-936. - Scope.
   Under this division is included any mechanically operated device which
introduces solid fuel into a furnace or boiler and has as part of its equipment
a mechanically operated fan or blower designed to force air for combustion
through such fuel bed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-937. - Combustion space.
   No stoker shall be installed unless sufficient combustion space is available
in the furnace to permit the device to operate at its full rated capacity
without producing smoke or excessive fly ash under normal conditions.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-938. - Draft.
   No stoker shall be installed in any boiler or heater where the stack or flue
is of insufficient size or height to take off all products of combustion
without building up positive pressure in the furnace at all firing periods.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-939. - Stoker controls.
   Every stoker operated by an electric motor shall be equipped with a low
voltage release device which, in case of current failure at the motor, will
prevent the restarting of the stoker automatically when the electric current is
again resumed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-940. - Stoker switch.
   Each mechanical stoker shall be equipped with an automatic stoker switch of
approved make installed in the smoke flue which will stop stoker when flue gas
temperature exceeds 650 degrees Fahrenheit, or starts when the temperature
drops below 200 degrees Fahrenheit.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-941. - Data to be given.
   Each application for stoker installation shall state the maximum firing rate
of the equipment in pounds per hour fired, the kind and quality of coal to be
fired and the cubic feet of combustion space available in the boiler or heater
in which the stoker is to be installed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-942. - Where prohibited.
   No mechanical stoker using forced draft will be permitted in any sheet iron
warm air furnace, unless lined with at least a two-inch thickness of fire
brick.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-943. - Undergrate blowers—Scope.
   Under sections
5-944 through
5-947 is included any mechanically operated fan or blower introducing air for
combustion into the ash pit of any furnace, heater, stove or boiler.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-944. - Same—Draft.
   No undergrate blower or fan shall be installed where the stack or flue is of
insufficient size to prevent the building up of a positive pressure in the
furnace at all firing periods.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-945. - Same—Stoker switch.
   Every undergrate blower shall be equipped with a stoker switch installed in
the smoke flue so wired as to shut off the blower when flue gas temperature
exceeds 650 degrees Fahrenheit.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-946. - Same—Data to be given.
   Each application for undergrate blower installation shall state the maximum
capacity of the blower or fan to be used, the size and type of heater or boiler
under which the blower is to be installed, and the kind of fuel to be burned.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-947. - Same—Where prohibited.
   No undergrate blower shall be installed in any sheet iron warm air furnace,
unless lined with at least two-inch fire brick.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 9.12, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-948—5-965. - Reserved.
DIVISION 12. - OIL BURNERS
Sec. 5-966. - Application of division.
   The construction, arrangement and manner of installation of all oil burners
and oil burner equipment installed for use in connection with heating systems,
and the alteration, replacement or repair of all oil burners and oil burner
equipment used or to be used in connection with heating systems, shall conform
to the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-967. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Oil burner shall mean any device for use in connection with a heating
system, designed to burn fuel oil having a flash point of 130 degrees
Fahrenheit, or higher, as determined by the tag closed tester in accordance
with the method of test adopted by the American Society for Testing Materials
(A.S.T.M. Designation D-56-21), and having a fuel tank or container with a
capacity of more than ten gallons connected thereto.
   Oil burner equipment shall include oil burners and all tanks, piping, pumps,
control devices and accessories connected to the burners; provided, however,
this division shall not apply to portable burners not requiring connection to a
flue, such as oil stoves, oil heaters and oil lamps equipped with a wick or a
mechanical device, the movement of which is essential to flame adjustment.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-968. - Certificate of approval—Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agents, to install any oil burner
in the city until an application for approval of such make or type of burner,
on a form similar to that set forth immediately hereafter, shall have been
filed with the department and a certificate of approval of such burner issued
by the department. The inspector shall issue a certificate of approval or of
disapproval within 30 days after the filing of any such application.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-969. - Same—Application.
   The form of the application for a certificate of approval under this
division shall be as follows:
The undersigned hereby requests that a Certificate of Approval be issued for
the oil burner described below:
      1.   Address where burner will be installed _____
      2.   Name of burner _____
      3.   Type of burner _____
      4.   Name of manufacturer _____
      5.   Address of manufacturer _____
      6.   Kind of fuel recommended for burner _____
      7.   Length of time burner has been on market _____
      8.   List approvals by state, city or recognized laboratories:
   Name _____
   Date _____
      9.   Attach blue print of assembly drawing showing construction of
device, indicating moving parts, oil passages and air passage.
      10.   Application filed by ____________ at Dearborn, Michigan, this
____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19
____________ .
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-970. - Same—Standards for approval.
   The inspector shall approve any oil burner listed by the Underwriters'
Laboratory or any other nationally recognized inspection board or laboratory.
Oil burners not listed by the Underwriters' Laboratory or any other nationally
recognized board or laboratory shall not be approved until they have been
inspected and tested by some recognized laboratory capable of making such a
test and inspection, and the certificate showing such inspection and test shall
be forwarded to the department. This inspection and test shall cover
arrangement of parts, suitability of material, strength of parts, electrical
control, thermostatic arrangement, reliability of automatic features,
positiveness of ignition and safeguards against flooding.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-971. - Installation of used oil burners.
   Any person licensed to install, alter, repair or replace oil burners in the
city shall install a used burner for use in connection with a heating system
only after he shall have furnished the inspector with a statement that such oil
burner has been put in first class operating condition, and a letter from the
purchaser acknowledging that such purchaser is buying a used oil burner.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-972. - Fuel oil—Specifications.
   The grade of fuel oil used with any burner shall be one which tests and
experience have shown to be suitable for use with that burner. The oil shall
have a flashpoint not less than 130 degrees Fahrenheit, and shall be free from
acid, grit, and fibrous or other foreign matter likely to clog or injure the
burners or valves.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-973. - Same—Commercial standards.
   The commercial standards (grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 for domestic and
industrial fuel oils, set up by the U.S. Government, Department of Commerce,
Bureau of Standards Bulletin CS 12-29, issued November 7, 1929) shall
constitute standard grades for fuel oil sold or delivered to oil burner plants
within the city. It is declared a violation of this division for any person to
deliver or put into the storage tank of an oil burner plant a grade of oil
inferior to that ordered by the purchaser.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-974. - Same—Approval tag required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to supply or deliver fuel oil to any
tank or container used in connection with or attached to a fuel oil burner
unless such fuel oil burner and equipment shall have been inspected and
approved by the inspector or his assistant and an approval tag securely
attached to the filler pipe of such tank or container.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-975. - Use of nonautomatic burners limited.
   Oil burners, which are not equipped with automatic means for preventing
abnormal discharge of oil at the burner, shall not be installed or operated in
any location where a competent attendant will not be constantly on duty at the
premises where the burner is located, while the burner is in operation.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-976. - Gravity feed to burners.
   Gravity feed shall be used only with burners arranged to prevent abnormal
discharge of oil at the burner by automatic means specifically approved for the
burner with which it is used.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-977. - Supply tanks capacity.
   (a)   Gravity supply tanks shall not exceed 275 gallons individual capacity.
Where more than one gravity supply tank is used, such tanks shall be connected
to the feed pipe leading to the burner through a manually operated, approved
three-way valve in such a way that only one tank can discharge its contents at
one time.
   (b)   On multiple tank installations, the fill pipe shall be so arranged
that both tanks will fill equally, and the vent pipe shall extend well above
cross connections between tanks to prevent air binding when filling.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-978. - Level device.
   Where oil is supplied to the burner by gravity and a constant level device
is not incorporated in the burner assembly or in an auxiliary tank used in
connection with an automatic pump, an approved constant level device shall be
installed in the oil feed line at the gravity tank or as close thereto as
practicable. The vent opening of such constant level device shall be connected
by piping or tubing to the gravity tank vent pipe.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-979. - Pressure feed.
   (a)   Pressure tank feed shall be used only with burners arranged to prevent
abnormal discharge of oil at the burner by automatic means specifically
approved for the burner with which it is used.
   (b)   Pressure tanks shall not exceed a capacity of 60 gallons, and shall
not be operated at pressures exceeding 50 pounds per square inch. They shall be
equipped with a reliable pressure gauge, approved by the A.S.M.E., and with an
automatic relief valve piped to discharge outside of buildings.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-980. - Underground tanks—Installation.
   Underground tanks shall be so buried as to have a cover of earth not less
than two feet thick, or shall be covered with not less than one foot of earth
on top of which shall be placed a slab of reinforced concrete not less than
four inches thick. The slab shall be set on a firm, well tamped earth
foundation and shall extend at least one foot beyond the tank in all
directions. Where tanks are buried underneath buildings, such a concrete slab
shall be provided in every instance.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-981. - Same—Foundations.
   Underground tanks shall be set on a firm foundation and surrounded with soft
earth or sand well tamped in place. Where necessary to prevent floating, they
shall be securely anchored or weighed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-982. - Oil tanks—Enclosure.
   Oil supply tanks, when located outside buildings and not buried underground,
must be totally enclosed, as provided in section
5-986.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-983. - Same—Installation inside buildings.
   Oil supply tanks larger than 60 gallons capacity shall not be located in
buildings above the lowest story, cellar or basement.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-984. - Same—Location.
   Unenclosed inside storage tanks and auxiliary tanks shall not be located
within five feet, horizontally, of any fire or flame.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-985. - Same—Storage.
   Inside storage and auxiliary tanks shall be securely supported by
substantial incombustible supports to prevent settling or sliding.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-986. - Same—Installation specifications.
   (a)   Oil supply tanks located inside buildings shall not exceed 275 gallons
individual capacity or 550 gallons aggregate capacity, in one building, unless
installed in an enclosure or casing constructed as follows:
      (1)   The walls of the enclosure shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete at least six inches thick or of brick at least eight inches thick, and
shall be bonded to the floor. The space between the tank and the enclosure
shall be completely filled with sand or well tamped earth.
      (2)   Where the floor or other construction immediately above the tank is
of fire-resistive construction capable of safely sustaining a load of 150
pounds per square foot, the walls of the enclosure shall be carried to a height
not less than one foot above the tank and the space filled with sand or well
tamped earth to the top; otherwise, the enclosure shall have a top of
reinforced concrete at least five inches thick or of equivalent construction.
   (b)   Instead of an enclosure as above described, the tank may be encased in
reinforced concrete not less than six inches in thickness, applied directly to
the tank so as to completely eliminate any air space.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-987. - Same—Capacity generally.
   In buildings of ordinary construction, the nominal gross capacity of oil
tanks shall not exceed 5,000 gallons.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-988. - Same—Capacity in fire-resistive structures.
   In fire-resistive buildings, the nominal gross capacity of oil tanks shall
not exceed 15,000 gallons.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.23, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-989. - Same—Gross capacity.
   In any building, if in a fire-resistive or detached room cut off vertically
and horizontally, in an approved manner, from other floors of the main
building, the nominal gross capacity of tanks shall not exceed 50,000 gallons,
with an individual tank capacity not exceeding 25,000 gallons.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.24, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-990. - Construction—Capacity.
   (a)   Underground tanks and tanks inside buildings shall be constructed of
steel or wrought iron of a minimum gauge (U.S. Standard) in accordance with the
following table, except that for tanks of 181 to 275 gallons capacity,
installed in buildings, and without masonry enclosures, the minimum gauge shall
be No. 14 steel, or wrought iron thinner than No. 7 gauge used in the
construction of underground and enclosed tanks shall be galvanized.
Capacity, Gals.  Minimum Thickness Weight Lbs. per Sq. Ft.
7 to 275         16 gauge          2.50
276 to 560       14 gauge          3.125
561 to 1,100     12 gauge          4.375
1,101 to 4,000   7 gauge           7.50
4,001 to 12,000  ¼ in. (nom)      10.00
12,001 to 20,000 5/16 in. (nom)    12.50
20,001 to 30,000 3/8 in. (nom)     15.00
 
   (b)   If adequate internal bracing is provided, tanks of 12,001 to 30,000
gallons capacity may be built of one-fourth-inch plate; for tanks larger than
1,100 gallons capacity, having adequate internal bracing, a tolerance of ten
percent incapacity is permitted.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.25, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-991. - Same—Specifications.
   (a)   Joints shall be riveted and caulked, brazed, welded or made tight by
some equally satisfactory process. Tanks shall be tight and sufficiently strong
to bear without injury the most severe strains to which they may be subjected
in practice. Shells of tanks shall be properly reinforced where connections are
made. All connections to underground tanks, outside aboveground tanks, and
tanks inside buildings shall be made through the top of tank above the liquid
level, except that tanks of not over 275 gallons capacity may have one bottom
connection for gravity feed and one opening for an approved key stem gate valve
to facilitate cleaning or for a scavenging line to be run to the outside and
capped oiltight when not in use.
   (b)   Where tanks are located so that the top of the tank is above the level
of the suction inlet of the pump supplying oil to the burner or burner
assembly, a siphon breaking device consisting of an anti-siphon valve and
vacuum tank, Underwriter's vacuum siphon breaker, siphon breaking pump set, or
equivalent devices to prevent siphoning, shall be installed; provided, however,
that in the case of a single tank not exceeding 275 gallons capacity, or a
multiple tank installation so connected by means of an approved three-way tank
installation, so connected by means of an approved three-way valve that only
one tank may be drawn from at a time, the installation of the above-mentioned
antisiphon devices may be omitted. There must be separate valves on each
battery from the header.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.26, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-992. - Pressure tanks—Design.
   Pressure tanks shall be designed for at least six times the maximum working
pressure.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.27, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-993. - Same—Outside coating.
   Tanks shall be thoroughly coated on the outside with tar, asphaltum or other
suitable rust-resisting paint. Where placed in corrosive soil special
protection may be required.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.28, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-994. - Same—For heavy oils.
   For fuel oil heavier than 35 degrees A.P.I., tanks may be made of concrete,
in accordance with the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for
the construction of concrete fuel oil storage tanks, as recommended by the
National Fire Protection Association.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.29, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-995. - Tank vents.
   Storage tanks shall be equipped with an open vent or an approved
automatically operated vent, arranged to discharge to the open air. Vent
openings and vent pipes shall be of ample size to prevent abnormal pressure in
the tank during filling but not smaller than three-fourths-inch pipe size for
tanks up to 500-gallon capacity; one-inch pipe for tanks up to 1,000. The vent
from oil tanks shall be increased one-half inch in diameter for each 1,000
gallon capacity on oil tanks over 1,000 gallons in size.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.30, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-996. - Same—Draining.
   Vent pipes shall be arranged to drain to the tank. The lower end of the vent
pipe shall not extend through the top into the tank for a distance of more than
one inch.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.31, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-997. - Same—Termination.
   Vent pipes shall terminate outside of buildings at a point not less than two
feet measured vertically or horizontally from any window or other building
opening and not less than one foot above fill cap, nor less than eight feet
above the ground. Outer ends of vent pipes shall be provided with a
weatherproof hood or return bend. Vent pipes of tanks containing heaters shall
be extended to such a height that oil vapors discharging from the vent will be
readily diffused without danger of ignition.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.32, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-998. - Same—Cross connections prohibited.
   Vent pipes shall not be cross connected with fill pipes or return lines from
burners.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.33, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-999. - Vent and fill pipes.
   Fill and vent pipes shall not be run through windows or coal-chutes unless
such openings are totally enclosed with masonry to prevent oil from entering
building during filling operation.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.34, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1000. - Tank fill and overflow pipes.
   Underground tanks and storage tanks inside buildings shall be filled only
through fill pipes terminating outside of buildings at a point at least two
feet from any building opening at the same or lower level. Fill terminals shall
be closed tight, when not in use, by a metal cover designed to prevent
tampering.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.35, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1001. - Auxiliary tanks—Filling.
   Auxiliary tanks shall be filled by pumping from storage tanks.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.36, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1002. - Same—Overflow equipment.
   Auxiliary tanks other than vacuum tanks shall be equipped with an overflow
pipe draining to the storage tank, at least one size larger than the supply
pipe.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.37, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1003. - Same—Gravity and pressure.
   Overflow pipes of auxiliary gravity tanks shall have no valve or
obstructions. Overflow pipes of auxiliary pressure tanks shall be provided with
interconnected valves or other means for automatically venting the tank during
filling.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.38, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1004. - Oil gauging.
   All tanks in which a constant oil level is not maintained by an automatic
pump shall be equipped with an approved method of determining the oil level.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.39, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1005. - Test wells.
   Test wells shall not be installed inside buildings and, where permitted for
outside services, shall be closed tight when not in use by a metal cover
designed to prevent tampering.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.40, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1006. - Gauging devices.
   Gauging devices such as liquid level indicators or signals shall be
installed so that oil or vapor will not be discharged into the building from
the fuel supply system.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.41, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1007. - Gauges, kinds not in use.
   No glass gauge, or any gauge, the breaking of which will permit oil to
escape from the tank, shall be used.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.42, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1008. - Oil pumps—Specifications.
   Oil pumps shall be of approved type, secure against leaks, and shall be
rigidly fastened in place.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.43, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1009. - Same—Automatic.
   Automatic pumps not an integral part of the burner shall be arranged to stop
automatically in case of total breakage of the supply line to the burner.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.44, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1010. - Same—Duplicate pumps.
   In isolated locations, where fire protection equipment is dependent upon a
heating plant fired by an oil burner, oil pumps supplying the burner shall be
installed in duplicate.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.45, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1011. - Piping—Minimum specifications.
   All piping shall be standard full weight wrought iron, steel, or brass pipe
with standard fittings or approved brass or copper tubing with approved
fittings.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.46, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1012. - Same—Sizes.
   Pipe used in the installation of domestic type burners shall not be smaller
than 3/8 -inch iron pipe size; pipe used in the installation of industrial type
burners shall not be smaller than ½-inch iron pipe size. Copper or brass tubing
used in the installation of domestic type burners where the oil flows by
gravity from the tank to the burners shall not be smaller in size than 3/8 -
inch outside diameter, .049-inch wall thickness tubing. For other than domestic
installations such copper or brass tubing shall not be smaller than 3/8 -inch
inside diameter, .049-inch wall thickness tubing. For industrial type burners
such copper or brass tubing shall not be smaller in size than the equivalent of
the iron pipe size mentioned above, with wall thickness not less than .049-
inch.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.47, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1013. - Same—Installation.
   Piping shall be rigidly secured in place and protected from injury in a
workmanlike manner, and where necessary shall be protected against corrosion.
Where practicable, oil piping shall be buried underground or in a concrete
floor or placed in a metal-covered pipe trench.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.48, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1014. - Same—Connections.
   Pipe joints and connections shall be made tight in a workmanlike manner.
Union and tubing fittings shall be made of approved standard type. Unions
requiring gaskets or packing, and right and left couplings, shall not be used
in oil lines.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.49, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1015. - Same—Allowances.
   Proper allowances shall be made for expansion, contraction, jarring and
vibration. Pipe lines, other than tubing, connected to underground tanks,
except fill lines and test wells, shall be provided with double swing joints
arranged to permit the tank to settle without impairing the efficiency of the
pipe connections.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.50, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1016. - Same—Strainers.
   Oil supply lines to burners shall be provided with approved strainers.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.51, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1017. - Valves—Installation.
   Readily accessible shutoff valves of approved type shall be installed in oil
supply lines near each burner and close to gravity and pressure supply tanks.
Shutoff valves of approved type shall be installed on each side of oil
strainers which are not a part of the oil burner unit and on the discharge and
suction side of oil pumps which pump directly to the burner but which are not a
part of the burner unit.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.52, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1018. - Same—When relief needed.
   Where a shutoff valve is installed in the discharge line of an oil pump, an
approved pressure relief valve shall be connected into the discharge line
between the pump and the shutoff valve and arranged to return surplus oil to
the storage tank or to bypass it around the pump.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.53, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1019. - Same—Control.
   Control valves shall be provided with stuffing box of liberal size,
containing a removable cupped gland designed to compress the packing against
the valve stem and arranged so as to facilitate removal. Valves shall be
designed to close against the supply, and prevent withdrawal of stem by
continued operation of the handwheel. Packing affected by the oil or by heat
shall not be used.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.54, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1020. - Preheating of oil.
   Preheating of oil, where necessary, shall be done by steam, hot water or
approved electric heaters. Heaters shall be substantially constructed with all
joints made oil tight. Thermometers shall be installed at suitable locations to
indicate the temperature of the heated oil. Heaters shall be by-passed or
provided with suitable means to prevent abnormal pressure.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.55, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1021. - Tests of covered tanks and piping.
   After installation and before being covered, tanks of 1,000 gallons capacity
or more, and piping, shall be tested hydrostatically, or with equivalent air
pressure at a pressure not less than 1½ times the maximum working pressure but
not less than five pounds per square inch at the highest point of the system.
Instead of a pressure test, suction lines may be tested under a vacuum of not
less than 20 inches of mercury. Such tests shall be made by the installer, in
the presence of the inspector, and shall continue for at least 30 minutes
without a noticeable drop in pressure or vacuum.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.56, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1022. - Oil burner controls.
   Oil burner equipment shall be provided with some means for manually stopping
the flow of the oil to the burner, from a conveniently located point at a safe
distance from the burner. With electrically driven equipment this may be
accomplished by a switch in the motor supply circuit, placed near the entrance
to the room where the burner is located. A quick-closing valve in the oil
supply line may be used.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.57, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1023. - Automatic shut down devices.
   Automatically operated oil burners used in connection with vapor, hot water,
steam or warm air heating systems shall be equipped with approved automatic
device to shut down the burner in the event of undue pressure in a steam boiler
or overheating within a hot water boiler or warm air furnace. Each steam boiler
shall be equipped with a low water cut-off.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.58, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1024. - Atomizing supply, cutoff.
   In systems where steam or air used for atomizing the oil, the equipment
shall be so arranged that in case of interruption of the atomizing supply, the
oil supply will immediately shut off.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.59, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1025. - Automatic shut-off on failure of ignition.
   All oil burners shall be equipped with an approved automatic device for the
control or shutoff of the flow of oil in case of failure of the oil in the
combustion chamber to ignite.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.60, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1026. - Installation of controls.
   On all installations where operation of burner is controlled by an aquastat,
pressurestat or furnacestat, a second control either aquastat, pressurestat or
furnacestat, shall be installed in the 110-volt line ahead of all other
controls, as a high limit or safety control.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.61, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1027. - Installation of burner.
   Oil burners shall be securely installed in a workmanlike manner, in
accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer, by qualified mechanics
experienced in making such installations.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.62, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1028. - Conversion from coal; installation.
   Where oil burners are installed in furnaces originally designed for solid
fuel, the ash door of the furnace shall be removed or bottom ventilation
otherwise provided to prevent the accumulation of vapors in the ash pit, unless
the burner is of a type which mechanically purges the ash pit.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.63, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1029. - Oil burners in boilers and furnaces.
   Boilers and furnaces in which oil burners are installed shall be connected
to flues having sufficient draft at all times to assure safe operation of the
burner. Smoke pipe dampers, if any, shall be removed or locked in the desired
position and shall be such that they cannot close off more than 80 percent of
the internal cross section area of the smoke pipe. All check drafts must be
kept closed at all times.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.64, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1030. - Rooms for oil burners—Adequate air supply.
   Rooms in which oil burners are located shall be provided with adequate
ventilation to assure continuous complete combustion of the oil.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.65, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1031. - Same—Instructions posted.
   Complete instructions for the care and operation of the oil burner equipment
shall be conspicuously posted near the oil burner and shall be maintained in
readable condition by user, and there shall be displayed, near the heating
plant, a card which shall read as follows:
   NOTICE: The heating code requires that pipe dampers shall be removed or
locked in the desired position and no damper closing off more than 80 percent
of the pipe area shall be allowed. All check drafts must be kept closed at all
times.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.66, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1032. - Industrial oil burners, plans furnished and posted.
   Contractors installing industrial oil burner systems shall furnish diagrams
showing the main lines and controlling valves, one of which shall be posted
near the oil burner equipment and another at some point which will be
accessible in the case of fire at the burners.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.67, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1033. - Modifications.
   Where the circumstances or conditions of any particular installation are
unusual and such as to render the strict application of this division
impracticable, the inspector may permit such modifications as will provide a
substantially equivalent degree of safety.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.68, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1034. - Fireproofing.
   It shall be the duty of each licensed installer, when installing an oil
burner in connection with a heating plant, to install such fireproofing,
adjacent to the smoke pipe thereof, as may be required to comply with the
following provisions:
      (1)   No metal smoke pipe shall pass through any floor or be nearer than
12 inches to any wood or other combustible portion of the building except as
noted below. All combustible material within 18 inches shall be covered with a
metal or asbestos shield extending at least one foot on each side of the smoke
pipe, and in the case of smoke pipes of a greater diameter than 12 inches and
of less area than six square feet shall be kept at least 16 inches away from
any woodwork. Such woodwork shall be protected as before specified for the
smaller smoke pipes, a distance of three feet on each side of such smoke pipes.
      (2)   Where metal smoke pipes of 12 inches or less in diameter pass
through a wood or plastered stud partition, they shall be surrounded either by
a body of brick, hollow tile, or other incombustible fireproof material of a
thickness of at least four inches around such smoke pipes; or they shall be
surrounded by a sheet metal thimble of two concentric rings at least two inches
apart, and the entire thimble so constructed that there will be a free
circulation of air between the two rings forming the same. Smoke pipes of a
diameter of six inches or less may have thimbles with one inch air space.
      (3)   Where a new smoke pipe is installed, it shall be lockseamed or
riveted, with all joints lapped not less than 1½ inches and rigidly secured,
and shall have a proper thimble for making tight connection to the chimney
flue.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.69, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1035. - Request for inspection, concealment of work.
   Immediately upon the installation of the tanks and concealed piping of an
oil burner installation, the installer thereof shall notify the inspector that
such tanks and piping are ready for inspection by registering the number of the
permit and the location of the work in the inspection register book kept for
that purpose in the office of the inspector. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cover up any such tanks or piping until the same shall have been
inspected and approved by such inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.70, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1036. - Pilot light.
   Gas pilot, acetylene or any other gas possessing a wider range of
explosiveness in a mixture with air and coal gas, or water gas, is prohibited
for use in the gas pilot of any fuel oil burner.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.71, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1037. - Fire extinguisher required.
   In the single residences, every oil burner installation shall have near the
entrance to the furnace room, and readily accessible for convenient use in
emergency, a hand fire extinguisher of at least a quart capacity, approved by
the National Board of Fire Underwriters for extinguishing combustible oil
fires; provided, however, that installations of oil burning equipment in
multiple dwellings, commercial establishments of any kind or description where
the public congregates or persons are permitted to be present on invitation or
otherwise, such installations shall have accessible in the furnace room for
immediate and convenient use in emergency, a fire extinguisher of at least 2½-
gallon capacity, approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and which
shall be foam type or its equivalent; provided further, that in case of great
hazard or danger to the public, the chief of the fire department may, in
writing, require further or additional fire extinguishing apparatus in order to
safeguard public property and life.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 10.72, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-1038—5-1055. - Reserved.
DIVISION 13. - GAS BURNER INSTALLATIONS
Sec. 5-1056. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Gas burner shall mean a device for the final conveyance of the gas, or a
mixture of gas and air, to the combustion zone of a conversion gas burner, gas
fired unit heater or water radiator, gas fired boiler, heater or furnace used
in connection with a space heating system.
   Gas burner equipment shall include gas burners and all piping including
supply piping from meter to appliance shutoff valve, blowers, control device
and accessories connected to the burners.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.2, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-1057. - Conformity required.
   The construction, arrangement and manner of installation of all gas burners
and gas burner equipment hereafter installed for use in connection with heating
systems, and the alteration and repair hereafter of all gas burners and gas
burner equipment used or to be used in connection with heating systems, shall
conform to the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1058. - Permit required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agents to install any gas burner
until an application for a permit shall have been filed with and a permit
issued by the department of building and safety.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1059. - Application for permit.
   The application for a permit to install a burner under the provisions of
this division shall be in the following form:
The undersigned hereby requests that a permit be issued to install the gas
burner described below:
      1.   Address where installation is to be made _____
      2.   Name of burner _____
      3.   Type of burner _____
      4.   B.T.U. input _____
      5.   Name of manufacturer _____
      6.   Address of manufacturer _____
      7.   Kind of fuel recommended for burner _____
      8.   Length of time burner has been on market _____
      9.   Name of approving laboratory and the certificate number _____
      10.   Application filed by _____
      11.   at Dearborn, Michigan, this ____________ day of ____________ /
____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ .
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1060. - Approval of permit application.
   (a)   The department shall issue a permit for installing any gas designed
furnace or boiler which has been approved by the American Gas Association. It
shall be unlawful to install or cause to be installed in the city any such
furnace or boiler which has not first been approved by the American Gas
Association.
   (b)   A list of all conversion type gas burners shall be maintained by this
department, which, through the arrangement of parts, suitability of materials,
strength of parts, electric or other control, thermostatic arrangement,
sensitivity of automatic features, positiveness of ignition, and possibility of
explosion, have been found, by best or acceptable proof from the American Gas
Association or some equally competent laboratory, to be acceptable to the
heating board of appeals and this department for use in the city under the
provisions of this division.
   (c)   Before a permit will be issued for a conversion type gas fired burner,
each applicant for the installation of such burners must furnish the department
with a photostatic copy or other suitable evidence of the approval or the
official certification by the American Gas Association; provided, however, that
if a particular trade name of burner is listed for the current year in the
Directory of Approved Gas Appliances and listed Accessories, or a supplement
thereto, as published by the American Gas Association Testing Laboratories,
evidence of further approval or certification will not need to be furnished by
the applicant.
   (d)   In addition to the approval or certification by the American Gas
Association, as hereinabove required for conversion type burners, such
conversion type burner must meet the two following requirements:
      (1)   If the burner is of the single port spreader flame type, the main
body of the burner including mixer head and mixer tube shall be of wrought iron
or wrought steel construction. The burner head shall be of wrought iron, alloy
cast iron, or other heat resisting alloys. The spreader plate shall have a
thickness of one-fourth inch if it is constructed of wrought iron, alloy
wrought iron, other heat resisting alloys, or ceramic material, but if the
spreader is made of metal containing at least 25 percent of nickel or chrome
alloy, or some other equally heat resisting metal, the spreader need not be
more than one-eighth inch thick.
      (2)   If the burner is a drilled multiple port type, the cast iron burner
heads with raised drill ports shall be installed without baffles.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1061. - Installation of used gas burners, procedure required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, licensed to install, alter, repair or
replace gas burners within the city, to install any used gas burner or for the
inspector to issue any permit authorizing him so to do, until such licensee
shall have first submitted with his application for such permit a copy of the
purchase order describing the used burner that is to be installed and a
statement by the purchaser acknowledging that to be the case, together with a
statement by such licensee that such burner has been properly reconditioned and
will comply in every way with code requirements for new equipment as to
operation, safety standards and adjustments.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1062. - Ventilation.
   Gas burners shall not be installed in an appliance located in a room where
the normal facilities for ventilation do not permit proper combustion of gas,
unless special provision is made for supplying sufficient air for complete
combustion.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1063. - Flues—Generally.
   All appliance flues through which flue gases are conducted shall be
thoroughly cleaned and examined for leaks and draft conditions before
installation is to be made.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1064. - Same—Installation.
   Means shall be employed which will prevent the flue pipe from entering
beyond the inner wall of the chimney flue. Flue pipe shall be cemented to the
chimney wall so as to prevent infiltration of cold air.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1065. - Same—Corrosive-resistant materials.
   Material used for flue pipe shall be such as to resist the corrosive action
of flue gases.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1066. - Same—Support, location.
   Flue pipe shall be well supported to prevent sagging, shall be adequately
insulated from and in no case shall be located closer than four inches to
combustible building materials.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1067. - Same—Relocation.
   Flue pipe shall be relocated, where necessary, to avoid sharp turns or other
constructional features which would create excessive resistance to the flow of
the flue gases.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1068. - Same—Replacement.
   Where flue pipes are rusted or burned out, they shall be replaced by new
pipe.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1069. - Same—Adjustable damper.
   The proportioned section at the flue outlet of the appliance eliminates the
necessity of using an adjustable damper in the flue pipe.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1070. - Same—Dampers permanently kept open.
   Where dampers are an integral part of the boiler or furnace, they shall be
removed or permanently secured in the wide open position, except such dampers
the function of which is to alter the passage of flue gases through the
appliances, which shall be locked in such a position as not to interfere with
the normal operation of the burners.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1071. - Draft hood—Installation.
   (a)   A draft hood or its equivalent should be installed which is designed
to:
      (1)   Insure the ready escape of the products of combustion in the event
of no draft, backdraft or stoppage beyond the appliance.
      (2)   Prevent a backdraft from entering the appliance.
      (3)   Neutralize the effect of stack action of the flue upon the
operation of the appliance or in the appliance itself.
   (b)   Such device must be approved by the American Gas Association, together
with the appliances and appurtenances thereto.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1072. - Same—Location.
   The draft hood shall be located at a point not lower than the top of the
highest flue passage in the appliance.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1073. - Same—Alternate location.
   The draft hood should ordinarily be located adjacent to the appliance. In
cases where it appears desirable to place the draft hood at a distance from the
appliance, the size of the restricted section may be modified according to the
length and rise of the flue pipe.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1074. - Same—Revertible type.
   Appliances of the revertible flue type shall have the draft hood located at
least one foot higher than the top of the highest flue passage. In all boilers
or furnaces of the revertible flue type, not specifically designed for the use
of gas fuel, proper provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of gas
in any part thereof, subject to the approval of the inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1075. - Area of flue pipe, draft hood.
   (a)   The internal cross sectional area of the section of the flue pipe
between the outlet of the appliance and the draft hood shall be such as to
provide not less than one square inch of flue area per 7,500 hourly BTU input.
In no case shall this section of flue pipe be less than three inches in
diameter, and it shall not be larger than the next integral inch diameter above
the size given in the following table:
   Minimum Permissible Flue Sizes for Gas Burner Installations 
Input of Flue Area of Flue    Diameter of Flue
Pipe—Inches�Outlet—Sq. In.Pipe—Inches 
52,500        7.0             3
94,500        12.6            4
147,000       19.6            5
212,250       28.3            6
288,750       38.5            7
377,250       50.3            8
477,000       63.3            9
 
   Based on 1 sq. in. flue area per 7,500 B.T.U. per hour input.
   (b)   In cases where the outlet from the appliance is larger than the above
indicated size, an orifice plate may be inserted or a section of the flue pipe
restricted to the size indicated.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1076. - Baffles not to be used.
   No baffles shall be applied which will interfere with the proper combustion
of the gas.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1077. - Heating surfaces.
   The heating surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned before burners are
installed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1078. - Gastight.
   The combustion chamber and all flue gas passages shall be gastight.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1079. - Doors.
   In converted burners, the fuel door of the heating appliance must be
arranged to relieve pressure due to puffs or backfire caused by delayed
ignition.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.23, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1080. - Installation—Generally.
   Gas burners of all types shall consist of factory assembled and tested units
and shall be accompanied by complete and comprehensive installation and
operation instructions.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.24, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1081. - Same—Location.
   The burner or burners shall be located according to the manufacturer's
instructions and shall be securely fastened in place to prevent twisting,
sliding or dropping out of position.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.25, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1082. - Same—Accessible for cleaning.
   The burners shall be so installed as to be readily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.26, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1083. - Same—Combustion control.
   The burner or burners shall be so installed that no part of the flames
impinge so as to cause incomplete combustion.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.27, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1084. - Same—Air shutter adjustment.
   Air shutters shall be adjusted to produce a good flame at the prevailing gas
pressure.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.28, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1085. - Same—Secondary air openings.
   Where secondary air is necessary, secondary air opening or openings shall be
provided of sufficient area to supply an adequate amount of air for complete
combustion.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.29, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1086. - Same—Controls.
   Where an automatic secondary air control is provided, the construction shall
be such that in case the control fails in any way, either the gas will be shut
off or the secondary air door will remain open.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.30, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1087. - Pilots—Required.
   Either a thermostatic pilot, so constructed and adjusted that no gas can
flow through the main burner unless the pilot flame is burning, or some other
similar type of safety device serving this same end shall be employed. The
operation of this safety device shall not depend on the closing of an electric
circuit to shut off the main gas supply.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.31, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1088. - Same—Fixed in stationary position.
   Pilot burners shall be supported in such a manner that their position
relative to the main burner or burners will be fixed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.32, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1089. - Same—Accessible.
   Pilot burner or burners shall be so placed that they can be safely lighted,
and they shall be readily accessible or removable for cleaning.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.33, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1090. - Same—Connection of lines.
   Pilot lines shall be connected to vertical main gas supply lines or to the
side or top of horizontal lines ahead of all controls, except pressure
regulators, and shall be susceptible to independent control.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.34, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1091. - Same—Thermostatic safety.
   Thermostatic safety pilots shall be so adjusted that main gas supply will be
shut off within three minutes after flame has been extinguished.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.35, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1092. - Shut-off valve—Required.
   A manually operated shutoff valve shall be installed at each appliance to
shut off the entire gas supply to the appliance in cases of emergency.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.36, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1093. - Same—Location.
   The shutoff valve shall be so located that it is readily accessible and
shall clearly indicate the "on" and "off" positions or direction of rotation to
open or close.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.37, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1094. - Electric control valves.
   Electric control valves shall be installed according to the instructions
furnished by the manufacturer and comply with article XII of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.38, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1095. - Gas pressure regulators.
   A gas pressure regulator shall be installed on all gas burner installations
for heating purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.39, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1096. - Safety devices—Required.
   The boiler or furnace shall be equipped with safety devices arranged to
limit high steam pressures or water temperatures, as well as high air
temperatures in warm air furnaces.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.40, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1097. - Same—Independent of shut-off main gas supply.
   Safety devices operated electrically shall not depend upon the closing of a
circuit to shut off the main gas supply. This requirement shall not be
construed as prohibiting the use of electrical regulating devices, provided the
required safety devices are also installed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.41, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1098. - Low water cutoff.
   Each gas fired steam boiler shall be equipped with a low water cutoff.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.42, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1099. - Forced primary air control.
   When air under pressure is used in connection with gas supply, effective
means shall be provided to prevent the air from going back into the gas piping.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.43, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1100. - Piping in line direct from meter.
   All gas piping installed for the service of the gas burners to be used in
connection with any heating system shall be supplied by an independent line
direct from the meter.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.44, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1101. - Adjustment of pilot and burners.
   After the piping has been thoroughly purged, the pilot burner shall be
lighted and adjusted and the burners put into operation in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.45, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1102. - Pilot operation—Generally.
   Pilot flames shall effectively ignite the gas at the main burner or burners
and shall be adequately protected from drafts. A device which is at least equal
in performance to the draft hood shall be interpreted as fulfilling the second
part of this requirement as far as chimney drafts are concerned.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.46, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1103. - Same—Flames not to be extinguished.
   Pilot flames shall not become extinguished when the main burner or burners
are turned on or off in a normal manner, either manually or by automatic
controls.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.47, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1104. - Same—Luminous flame.
   Luminous flame pilots shall be adjusted so as not to show carbon deposits.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.48, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1105. - Electrical devices, approval.
   All automatic or electrical devices used in connection with the operation
and repair of gas burners must be approved by the American Gas Association or
some other nationally recognized board before a permit will be issued therefor
to install such device.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.49, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1106. - Summer cooling.
   Gas burners equipped with summer switches for cooling purposes must have a
key type switch installed.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.50, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1107. - Flame—Regulation.
   The flames from each burner shall freely ignite the gas from adjacent
burners or from each constant burning pilot when operating at the prevailing
gas pressure or when the main control valve is regulated to deliver about one-
third the full gas rate, except where additional pilots are provided.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.51, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1108. - Same—Not to flash.
   When ignition is made in a normal manner, the flames shall not flash outside
the appliance.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.52, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1109. - Same—Not to burn in mixer.
   Burners shall not expel gas through air openings in mixer faces when
operating at the prevailing pressure.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.53, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1110. - Appliance operation, oxygen concentration pressure.
   The concentration of oxygen in the flue products shall in no case be less
than four percent, nor more than ten percent. The rate of flow of the gas shall
be adjusted to within plus or minus five percent of the required hourly BTU
input rating at the manifold pressure specified by the manufacturer. When the
prevailing pressure is less than the manifold pressure specified, the gas rate
shall be adjusted to the prevailing pressure.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.54, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1111. - Appliance—Method of test.
   The appliance shall be allowed to operate until the stack temperature
becomes stabilized, after which a sample of the flue products shall be taken at
a point in the flue after the outlet of the appliance but ahead of the draft
hood and analyzed for carbon dioxide and oxygen.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.55, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1112. - Same—Checked by inspector and installer.
   The various controls of the appliance shall be checked by both inspector and
installer to insure their proper operation.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.56, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1113. - Instructions to the customer—Required.
   The customer shall be thoroughly instructed by the installer as to the
proper and safe operation of the appliance before it is placed in continuous
service.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.57, 11-4-81)
Sec. 5-1114. - Same—Printed and posted.
   Suitable printed instructions shall be supplied by the installer and posted
in a prominent position near the appliance.
(Ord. No. 81-65, § 11.58, 11-4-81)
Secs. 5-1115—5-1129. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - ELECTRICAL CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-1130. - Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the National Electrical Code, 1999, as
amended, with current Michigan amendments added by the state electrical board.
A copy of such code shall be available in the city clerk's office.
(Ord. No. 97-704, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 00-817, 4-18-00)
Sec. 5-1131. - Short title.
   The short title of this article shall be the Electrical Code of the City of
Dearborn, Michigan.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 1.1, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1132. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Department shall mean the department of building and safety in the city.
   Director shall mean the director of building and safety in the city.
   Inspector shall mean the electrical inspector whose duties are defined and
set forth in this article, and such word shall include in its meaning all
assistants, agents or persons authorized to assist or carry on the work of
electrical inspection under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 1.2, 2-13-91; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-1133. - Exceptions.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following, anything in
this article to the contrary notwithstanding.
      (1)   The installing of radio receiving sets and equipment; provided,
however, the installation of convenience outlets for power to supply such radio
set shall be governed by the provisions of this article.
      (2)   Minor repair work, the replacement of lamps, or the connection of
portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed.
      (3)   The installation, alteration or repair of equipment for the
operation of signals, or the transmission of intelligence where such work is an
integral part of the communication system owned and operated by a telephone
company in rendering its duly authorized service as such company, where such
person or company is subject to the jurisdiction of the state public service
commission.
      (4)   The repairing or maintaining of household electrical apparatus or
appliances.
      (5)   The installation, alteration or repair of electric wiring for the
generation and primary distribution of electric current, or the secondary
distribution system up to and including the meters where such work is an
integral part of the system owned and operated by an electric light and power
company in rendering its duly authorized service, where such company is subject
to the jurisdiction of the state public service commission.
      (6)   Any work involved in the manufacture, test or repair of electrical
apparatus, appliances or equipment in a manufacturer's plant but not including
any permanent wiring other than that which is a part of the testing equipment.
      (7)   Any wiring in or on a home and accompanying outbuildings owned,
occupied or to be occupied by the person performing the installation,
alteration or repair of wiring devices, appliances and appurtenances, providing
the inspector deems such person qualified to perform such work, and such person
obtains a permit as required by this article.
      (8)   Any work involved in the manufacture, installation, test or repair
of electrical apparatus, appliance or equipment in conjunction with the
operation of elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters, hoisting machinery, or other
similar electrical equipment, where such work is done on wiring or beyond the
final switch, fuse or circuit breaker on the circuit supplying such equipment.
      (9)   Any work involved in the operating, maintenance, servicing or
repairing of theatrical equipment such as motion picture equipment,
stereopticons, public address systems, spotlights, or other electrical stage
equipment connected or attached to existing permanently installed wiring for
which a permit has been obtained and the installation approved.
      (10)   Any installation of electric wiring and equipment in connection
with carnivals, circuses or other commercial amusements of a temporary and
transient character, provided the person applying for the permit satisfactorily
identifies himself to the inspector that he is a regularly employed electrician
with such carnival, circus or commercial amusement, obtains the necessary
permit therefor and pays the fee required by this article; provided, however,
that the issuance of a permit is subject to the right and authority in the
inspector to prevent the supplying, or to cut off or order cutting off of
electric power, if the provisions of this article as to installation have not
been complied with.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 1.3, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1134. - Enforcement officers.
   (a)   The inspector and any agents designated by the director are hereby
empowered to perform the duties and functions and are hereby given like
authority of regularly authorized and appointed police officers of the city in
the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
   (b)   In addition to the qualifications specified by the civil service rules
of the city for the classification of inspector, every person to be qualified
for such position under this article shall carry an electrical journeyman's
license, issued under the terms of this article.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 1.4, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1135. - Responsibility.
   This electrical code shall not be construed to lessen the liability of any
person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring,
apparatus, or equipment for damages to the person or property caused by any
defect therein, and shall not be construed so as to impose any liability upon
the city by reason of the requirements for inspection, as set forth in this
article.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 7.3, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1136. - Ohm's law.
   Electrical Formulas
   Ohm's Law Made Easy
(Ord. No. 91-511, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1137. - Electrical diagrams.
   Electrical Diagrams
diagrams on 1819 here
(Ord. No. 91-511, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1138. - Terminal markings and connections.
   Diagrams and text to go here from page 1820.
(Ord. No. 91-511, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1139. - Electrical formulas.
   Useful Electrical Formulas for Determining Amperes, Horsepower, Kilowatts,
and KVA
   Please pu text that goes here from pages 1821 and 1822. Also if better copy
USE AND OFFSET??
 
Residential kitchens hood fans          Wall fan minimum 250 C.F.M. Min. 250
                                        C.F.M.
Any pit or depression below floor level 6 air changers per hr. systems capable
Class 1                                 of continuously
div. 1
Basement or underground parking         6 air changes per hr.
 
   Effective valve of voltage or current
   RMS valve (root-mean-square) voltage or current of an AC circuit.
   Effective (RMS) voltage or current as read by volt meter or ammeter. RMS
valve is 0.707 of the maximum or pack value.
   Example:
   Ammeter reading is 70 AMP; volt meter reading 115 volts
/n70 / .707 = Peak Amperes
/t115 / .707 = 162 Peak Voltage
   Number of Electrons
   Ampere rate of flow of electricity equal to one coulomb per second.
   Coulomb = 6.24 × 10 18 electrons or electron charges.
   Ampere = 624,0000000000000000 electrons per second.
   FULL-LOAD CURRENTS IN AMPERES—SINGLE-PHASE CIRCUITS
   Full-load current = KVA x 1000 / Circuit Voltage
KVA  120  240  480  2400 4160 4800 7200 7620 12,000 14,400
3    25.0 12.5 6.3  1.25 .72  .63  .42  .39  .25    .21
5    41.7 20.8 10.4 2.08 1.20 1.04 .69  .66  .42    .35
10   83.3 41.7 20.8 4.17 2.40 2.08 1.39 1.31 .83    .69
15   125  62.5 31.3 6.25 3.61 3.13 2.08 1.97 1.25   1.04
25   208  104  52.1 10.4 6.01 5.21 3.47 3.28 2.08   1.74
37.5 313  156  78.1 15.6 9.01 7.81 5.21 4.92 3.13   2.60
50   417  208  104  20.8 12.0 10.4 6.94 6.56 4.17   3.47
75   625  313  156  31.3 18.0 15.6 10.4 9.84 6.25   5.21
100  833  417  208  41.7 24.0 20.8 13.9 13.1 8.33   6.94
167  1392 696  348  69.6 40.1 34.8 23.2 21.9 13.9   11.6
250  2083 1042 521  104  60.1 52.1 34.7 32.8 20.8   17.4
333  2775 1388 694  139  80.0 69.4 46.3 43.7 27.7   23.1
500  4167 2083 1042 208  120  104  69.4 65.6 41.7   34.7
 
   FULL-LOAD CURRENTS IN AMPERES—THREE-PHASE CIRCUITS
 
Full-load current = KVA × 1000
                    1.732 × Circuit Voltage
 
KVA   208  240  480  2400 4160 4800 7200  8320  12,000 12,470 13,200 14,400
9     25.0 21.7 10.8 2.17 1.25 1.08 .72   .63   .43    .42    .39    .36
15    41.6 36.1 18.0 3.61 2.08 1.80 1.20  1.04  .72    .69    .66    .60
30    83.3 72.2 36.1 7.22 4.17 3.61 2.41  2.08  1.44   1.39   1.31   1.20
45    125  108  54.1 10.8 6.25 5.41 3.61  3.13  2.17   2.08   1.97   1.30
75    208  130  90.2 18.0 10.4 9.02 6.01  5.21  3.61   3.48   3.28   3.01
112.5 312  271  135  27.1 15.6 13.5 9.02  7.81  5.41   5.21   4.92   4.51
150   416  361  180  36.1 20.8 18.0 12.0  10.4  7.22   6.95   6.56   6.01
225   625  541  271  54.1 31.3 27.1 18.0  15.6  10.8   10.4   9.84   9.02
300   833  722  361  72.2 41.7 36.1 24.1  20.8  14.4   13.9   13.1   12.0
500   1388 1203 601  120  69.4 60.1 40.1  34.8  24.1   23.2   21.9   20.1
750   2082 1804 902  180  104  90.2 60.1  52.1  36.1   34.7   32.8   30.1
1000  2776 2406 1203 241  139  120  80.2  69.4  48.1   46.3   43.7   40.1
1500  4164 3608 1804 361  208  180  120.3 104   72.2   69.4   65.6   60.1
2000  5552 4811 2406 481  278  240  160.4 138.8 96.2   92.6   87.4   —
 
(Ord. No. 91-511, 2-13-91)
Secs. 5-1140—5-1155. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[4] 
Footnotes:
--- (4) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-868, adopted January 15, 2002, repealed in their
entirety §§ 5-1156—5-1162, 5-1164, and 5-1165. Said sections pertained to the
board of building examiners and derived from Ord. No. 91-511, §§ 1—3, 5—7, 9,
10, adopted February 13, 1991.
Secs. 5-1156—5-1162. - Reserved.
Sec. 5-1163. - Duties of inspector.
   There shall be employed in the department an electrical inspector who shall
be appointed by the director in accordance with the civil service provisions of
the charter. Such inspector shall be directly responsible to the director. The
inspector shall have the following duties:
      (1)   He shall carry out and enforce the terms and provisions of this
article.
      (2)   He shall approve all plans and specifications before permits are
issued under this article covering any work or operations governed by this
article involving the construction, installation, alteration, maintenance or
repair of electrical equipment, wiring, apparatus or devices. If any of such
proposed work or operations do not conform to the requirements of this article,
such permit shall be refused until compliance with this article is made.
      (3)   He shall prepare, subject to the supervision and approval of the
board of review, the examination questions and the acceptable answers thereto
of applicants for licenses under this article, and he shall hear and conduct
all such examinations and correct the examination papers, except as herein
otherwise provided, which examinations may consist of written questions and
answers, oral questions and answers, or practical demonstrations or any
combination of such written and oral questions and demonstrations, which shall
be sufficient to prove the competency of the applicant for the license applied
for. All oral questions and answers shall be reported stenographically and the
transcript thereof made a part of the examination records of the applicant. All
such examination questions shall be kept in the personal files or possession of
the inspector and shall not be left or remain in the general files in the
department; provided, however, that all such answers to the examinations shall
be regarded as confidential and shall be open to inspection only by the members
of the board of appeals, its secretary, or by the applicant himself. After the
electrical inspector has conducted the examinations provided for in this
section and has corrected the written examination papers, as well as the
transcript of the oral examination, and determined the grade or score thereon,
such papers shall be delivered to the board of review for review and approval
or disapproval by it, after which such papers shall be filed with the secretary
of the board.
      (4)   He is hereby authorized to file proceedings to suspend the license
of any person holding a license under this article with the secretary of the
board of review, or to file such proceedings with such secretary to suspend the
permit of any person to whom a permit has been issued under this article for
any of the following reasons:
         a.   Violating the provisions of this article or any law applicable to
the work or operation being performed by such licensee or employee under his
direction, or violating or failing to obey any order of the inspector which he
is authorized under this article to make.
         b.   Making any false statement or representation of material fact in
any application for license or permit to be issued under this article.
         c.   For a master electrician licensee to serve or attempt to serve
under more than one licensed electrical contractor at the same time.
         d.   For a master electrician licensee to fail to notify in writing
the department within 72 hours of the change of employment of such licensee,
where such employment was necessary to qualify his employer as an electrical
contractor.
         e.   For an electrical contractor licensee to take out a permit for
the benefit of another person who is not a licensee of this city to enable such
other person to evade the requirements of the licensing provisions of this
article, or to allow other persons to apply for permits on such license.
         f.   For an electrical contractor licensee not to be or not to have in
his employ a master electrician licensee.
      (5)   He shall be and he is hereby authorized to withdraw the proceedings
to suspend any license or permit without the necessity of a hearing before the
board of appeals, if and when the work or operation in violation of this
article has been made to conform to the provisions of this article or changed
so that it will not be a menace to the public safety.
      (6)   He shall inspect, and if satisfactory, approve all construction,
installation, alteration, replacement or repair work hereafter made or
operations carried on within the city involving any wiring, apparatus,
material, equipment, or device subject to regulations by the provisions of this
article in buildings or structures of all classes in the city.
      (7)   He shall make all necessary tests and inspections of apparatus and
equipment governed by the provisions of this article to determine that such
apparatus or equipment will not be injurious to public safety and will not
create a fire hazard. If such test or inspection shows that any apparatus or
equipment is likely to be injurious to the public safety, he shall not permit
such apparatus or equipment to be installed.
      (8)   He may, in his discretion, and he is hereby authorized to order the
immediate removal of any covering, wiring, construction, alteration or repairs
found to have been installed and concealed or covered up before its inspection
and approval, which wiring, construction, apparatus or equipment is governed by
the provisions of this article.
      (9)   If the inspector at any time discovers that any work or
construction is being done on any buildings or structures in the city, contrary
to the provisions of this article, or any statute now existing or hereafter
adopted, such inspector is hereby authorized and directed to issue a stop work
order as to such electrical work or construction, and to post a notice thereof
on such improper work.
         a.   If such work or construction is being carried on contrary to the
provisions of this article or any such statute, the person doing or performing
such work shall be subject to prosecution for such violation under the terms
hereof, it being hereby intended that such stop work order shall not in any way
exonerate the wrongdoer from his criminal responsibility thereunder.
         b.   After a stop work order has been issued, it shall be unlawful for
any work or construction to be done by any person or persons until the illegal
or improper installation, alteration, repairs or construction has been
corrected and the stop work order removed by the inspector.
         c.   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the inspector to
remove such stop work notice posted as provided in subsection (a) of this
section. If a stop work order is issued by the inspector, he may in his
discretion take into his possession the permit for the construction,
installation or alteration of any electrical wiring, materials or equipment
covered thereby.
      (10)   He shall prepare such forms of applications for permits or
licenses, as required by the provisions of this article.
      (11)   He shall approve the application for electrical contractor's
license and for licenses issued under the provisions of section 5-1193, when
such applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article.
      (12)   He is hereby authorized to give written orders to the clerks in
the department that, and when such orders have been given, no further permits
are to be issued to any licensee under this article when such licensee is
violating the provisions of this article in any way.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 2.8, 2-13-91)
Secs. 5-1164, 5-1165. - Reserved.
Sec. 5-1166. - Right of entry; turning off power.
   The inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any
buildings or structures covered by the provisions of this article in connection
with which a permit has been requested, or has issued at any time previously
thereto, in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making
any inspection or test of the installation of electric wiring, material,
equipment or devices therein or thereon. He shall have the authority to turn
off or cause the turning off of any and all electric power, or to cut or
disconnect in cases of emergency any wires where such electric power is
dangerous to life or property.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 2.11, 2-13-91)
Secs. 5-1167—5-1185. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES[5] 
Footnotes:
--- (5) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-868, adopted January 15, 2002, repealed in their
entirety §§ 5-1187—5-1191. Said sections pertained to licensing for
journeyman's electricians, and derived from Ord. No. 91-511, §§ 3.1—3.4, 3.6,
adopted February 13, 1991.
Sec. 5-1186. - Required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or
trade of journeyman or master electrician in the installation, alteration,
maintenance or repair of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures
for light, heat, power, or other purposes, without exclusion for low voltage
apparatus, in or about buildings or structures within the city, unless such
person has first procured a license from the city clerk’s office, and paid the
fee as listed in
Chapter 12, Section 6.
    (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to work or operate as an
electrical contractor in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of
electric wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power or
other purposes, without exclusion for low voltage apparatus, in or about
buildings or structures within the city, without first having procured an
electrical contractor's license.
(Ord. No. 91-511, §§ 3.1, 3.5, 2-13-91; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Secs. 5-1187—5-1215. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1060, adopted Oct. 3, 2005, deleted §§ 5-1192—5-1199
in their entirety. Former §§ 1192—5-1199 pertained to licenses and derived from
91-511, §§ 3.7—3.13, 7.6, adopted Feb. 13, 1991.
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 5-1216. - Required, application.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or make any electrical
construction, installation, alteration, wiring or repairs in or upon any
building, structure, fixtures or apparatus in the city requiring the use of
electric current, without exclusion for low voltage apparatus, without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the department. Applications for such permit
specifying the address where the work is to be done, the owner of the premises
at such address, and describing in detail the work to be done shall be made by
the licensee who will do the work. A blueprint or sketch of the proposed work
shall accompany the application, if requested by the inspector. The permit
shall be issued only to such applicant who must be a licensee, only after the
applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article, and after the
application therefor has been approved by the inspector. In the event of a
failure to make application for permit within 24 hours of the time work is
started, the fee shall be increased by 100 percent above the amount stated in
the schedule of fees hereinafter set forth or $100.00, whichever is greater.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.1, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1217. - Maintenance work excepted.
   It will be unnecessary for the owner who regularly employs electricians
licensed under this article to apply for a permit in order to perform
electrical maintenance or make repairs on the premises of such owner or
employer.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.2, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1218. - Homeowners.
   (a)   Permits will only be issued under this division to homeowners who are
occupying the one-family home and will continue to occupy the home for a period
of at least one year. No permits will be issued to persons who do not occupy
the home or will be selling the home within one year. An affidavit for the
homeowner to sign with these stipulations shall be a part of the application
form. If the owner intends to occupy the property once repairs are made, a
homeowner's permit may be issued with the approval of the inspector.
   (b)   The following procedure shall be followed in obtaining a homeowner's
permit:
      (1)   Homeowner must make application for permit with the building
department.
      (2)   At the time of application for the permit, the homeowner must
submit proof of ownership, i.e., deed, tax bill, land contract. They must also
provide proof of residency (i.e., driver's license, voter registration or three
pieces of mail which have been received addressed to them at the property).
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.1, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1219. - Voluntary revocation.
   After a permit has been issued under this division and if construction has
not been started pursuant to such division, permittee desiring a revocation of
such permit may, within a period of 90 days from the date of issuance, apply to
the department therefor, and after approval thereof by the inspector, and upon
surrender of such permit and receipt for fees paid, such permit shall thereupon
be revoked, and upon authorization in writing by the department, a refund of
such permit fee shall be made by the department of finance.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.1, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1220. - Fees.
   The fees required for permits under this division shall be paid to the city
treasurer prior to the time that a permit is issued for the work described in
the amount stated; provided, however, that if any permit issued by the
department does not describe all of the work which has been done or is being
done, the inspector is hereby empowered to order the permittee to obtain a
permit and pay the additional prescribed fee covering such work.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.3, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1221. - Inspection; connection.
   At various stages of installation or progress of the work, when an
inspection should be made, or upon the completion of the wiring of or
installation in any building or structure or part thereof, it shall be the duty
of the person performing such work to notify the inspector to inspect the
installation as soon as possible, and if such work is found to be fully in
compliance with the requirements of this article and does not constitute a
hazard to life or property, the inspector, upon application of the permittee,
may issue a certificate of inspection showing compliance with the provisions of
this article. Before any of the electric wiring, apparatus or equipment covered
by any permit issued under this division is connected up to the current and
used, the approval in writing by the inspector to put such electric wiring,
apparatus or equipment into use must be first obtained. In the case of new
installations and the issuance of a certificate of inspection upon final
completion of the job, it shall authorize the connection to the electric
current and the turning on for use. All wires which are to be hidden from view
shall be inspected before being concealed. Any person desiring an inspection as
herein required shall notify the inspector, giving him at least 24 hours within
which to make the required inspection.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.4, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1222. - Voiding of certificate of occupancy.
   If the approval in writing by the inspector to put the electric wiring,
apparatus or equipment covered by any permit into use has not been obtained, as
herein required, or if the owner, occupant or permittee has not requested that
a final inspection be made, or has not completed or caused such electrical work
to be completed in preparation for such final inspection, and if such
unapproved electric wiring, apparatus or equipment has been connected to the
electric current and is being used therewith, such failure to obtain the
written approval from the inspector before using such electric wiring,
apparatus or equipment shall be the basis of voiding and shall void the
certificate of occupancy issued or to be issued in accordance with the
provisions of this Code. The failure of the owner, occupant or permittee to
obtain such approval from the inspector before using such electric wiring,
apparatus or equipment, as required by this article shall also constitute a
violation of this article and shall be punishable as therein provided for any
violation thereof.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.5, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1223. - Reinspection; disconnect current.
   (a)   The inspector shall make periodically, without charge, a reinspection
of the electrical wiring, equipment or apparatus in buildings or other
structures which are installed in the city, and when any such wiring, equipment
or apparatus is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person
owning, using or operating the same shall be notified and shall make the
necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, apparatus or
equipment in a safe condition within 15 days from the date of such notice. The
inspector is hereby empowered and authorized to disconnect or order the
discontinuance of electric power to such wiring, apparatus or equipment found
to be in a defective condition until such wiring, apparatus or equipment has
been made safe in accordance with the provisions of this article and as
directed by the inspector.
   (b)   If a reinspection is made necessary because inferior or illegal
workmanship or materials are used in connection with the work covered by any
permit issued under this article, a flat charge of $25.00 shall be made by the
city for each such reinspection against the permittee, and until such charge is
paid, such permittee shall not be entitled to take out or have issued to him
any other or additional permits by the department. Such failure to pay shall
constitute a violation of the provisions of this article by such permittee.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.6, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1224. - Prerequisites for issuing certificate of inspection.
   No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electrical
installation or construction is in strict conformity with the requirements of
this article and the statutes of the state. Approved methods of construction
for safety to persons and property as laid down in the National Electrical Code
and approved by the American Standards Association are hereby recommended as
good practice to be followed in the installation of electrical wiring.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 4.7, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1225. - Carnival and circus wiring, permit required.
   It shall be unlawful to install electrical wiring, apparatus or materials
for or by carnivals, circuses or other commercial amusements of a temporary or
transient character in the city, unless and until a permit has been issued as
specified in this article.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.8, 2-13-91)
Secs. 5-1226—5-1240. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION
Sec. 5-1241. - Approved materials.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to install or use any electrical wiring, device,
apparatus or equipment designed for attachment to, or installation on, any
electrical circuit or system for heat, light or power that is not of good
design and construction and safe and adequate for its intended use. The
inspector shall have power to disapprove the use or installation of such
materials not fulfilling these requirements. Wiring, devices, apparatus or
equipment approved by such generally recognized authorities as United States
Bureau of Standards, Electrical Testing Laboratories of New York, or
Underwriters' Laboratories shall be held to have the approval of the inspector
unless explicitly disapproved by such inspector for reasons of faulty design
and poor construction involving danger to person or property.
   (b)   The inspector shall inspect devices, apparatus and equipment offered
to the public for use in installation to see that such items conform to the
above requirements when requested to do so.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.1, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1242. - Prerequisites for installation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install any wiring or electrical
devices in a building or structure previous to the roughing in of heating or
plumbing construction, or before the roof on such building or structure is
completed.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.2, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1243. - Presence of licensee may be required.
   The inspector reserves the right to require a representative of the
electrical contractor licensee to be on the job when final inspection is made.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.3, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1244. - Submission of plans and specifications.
   (a)   A detailed set of plans and specifications shall be submitted with the
application for a permit for any electrical installations, alterations,
repairs, or wiring in the following types of buildings or structures:
      (1)   Commercial.
      (2)   Manufacturing.
      (3)   Amusement.
      (4)   Religious.
      (5)   Educational.
   (b)   Such plans and specifications shall show the number of circuits, mains
and submain conductor sizes, wattage per outlet, and methods of construction
drawn with symbols of a standard form. Such plans and specifications shall be
prepared by a registered architect or engineer, and must be approved by the
inspector prior to the issuance of a permit for such work.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.4, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1245. - Blueprints available on job.
   Blueprints or plans, after being approved by the inspector, shall be
available for use by the inspector on the job at any time during the course of
construction.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.5, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1246. - Notice of inspection.
   Any notice of wiring inspection shall be posted in or on the job only by the
inspector.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.6, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1247. - Removal of violation notices.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a violation notice from the
premises by anyone other than the inspector or his authorized agent.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 5.7, 2-13-91)
Secs. 5-1248—5-1265. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - SPECIFIC CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 5-1266. - Amendments to electrical code.
   The following sections of the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition are
hereby revised as follows:
   (a)   Section 230. 
      (1)   Service equipment for residential occupancies of four units or
less. Single phase 100 amp service panel boards rated 125 ampere providing
space for 20 full size overcurrent devices with 100 amp main. Service cable
shall be armored type assembly enclosed by concentric neutral.
      (2)   Service equipment for multiple dwellings of over four occupancies.
One main service and disconnect means for necessary connected load. Unless all
current is through a bank of metering devices grouped in such a manner that
there will be a maximum of six disconnects, all such multiple dwellings must
have individual service disconnects. Where six or more two-wire branch circuits
are installed, 100 ampere service is necessary. All others the service
disconnecting means shall have a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
      (3)   In computing the maximum number of 15 or 20 ampere breakers per
bus-bar pole is based on ten amperes for each over current device (U. L. CTL
concept). Difficulties with subpanels and so-called half-size and duplex-type
circuit breakers replacing full size circuit breakers, on the basis of two
poles for one, leads to doubling the number of branch circuit over-current
devices, and resulting in overcrowding with wiring and overheated panel boards.
Where no physical means for installation of all overcurrent devices necessary
exists, anticipated seizure rating has to be increased.
      (4)   Service panel.
         a.   Panel not intended to be used as a junction box or for mounting
devices, bell transformers, handy boxes for receptacles.
         b.   Install service entrance cable perpendicularly (avoid unnecessary
outside horizontal run) directly from meter can to service panel.
         c.   Distribute conductors entering top of service panel (use knock-
outs provided) dissipation of heat and withdrawal of conductors without damage
to their insulation is not possible.
         d.   Mount service panel in vertical position.
         e.   Conductors other than service entrance cable shall not occupy
same entrance knockout in service panel.
         f.   A No. 6 service grounding electrode copper conductor shall be
bonded effectively to a cold water galvanized or copper pipe no smaller than
three-fourths inch trade size. Bond water meter.
         g.   Not more than one conductor shall be connected to the neutral and
grounding bar by a single (screw) pressure connector.
         h.   Two conductors on one circuit breaker or fuse device is
prohibited.
         i.   Provide grounding bar for grounding conductors.
      (5)   Existing main panels, sub-panels, fuse blocks, knob-tube platforms,
and associated hardware located in basement, garage or apartment hallways or
closets shall be removed. Enclosure in plastered wall can be used as a junction
box after removing devices or apparatus connected within.
   (b)   Article 220-32. Minimum size of conductors. 
      (1)   Residential occupancies, four dwelling units or less, each service
entrance conductor shall be minimum three-wire, copper, No. 2 A.W.G.
      (2)   In all other occupancies over four dwelling units demand factors
shall be permitted National Electrical Code article 220-32.
(Ord. No. 91-511, §§ 6.1, 6.2, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1267. - Service entrance conductors.
   (a)   Overhead. Overhead service entrance conductors on or in all buildings
of other than single and up to and including four-family dwellings shall be
installed in rigid conduit, electrical metallic tubing or busway, or other
similar approved means. A minimum vertical clearance abovegrade shall be 12
feet for service drop conductors to all buildings used for other than
residential purposes. For single and two-family services, see article 230
section 24. Service entrance cables extended horizontally along the exterior of
building shall be supported at least every three feet. Horizontal runs adjacent
to alleys or driveways shall be elevated at least eight feet abovegrade.
Service cable shall be equipped with service cable weatherhead above point of
attachment.
      (1)   Service entrance conductors underground shall have a depth of not
less than 30 inches measured from present surface of ground or final grade,
whichever is lower. Conductors entering a building shall be protected to the
point of entrance. Where the enclosure or raceway is subject to physical
damage, the conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, schedule 80
rigid P.V.C.
      (2)   Service drops, supports or brackets shall not be attached to
chimneys or to fire or parapet walls extending above the roofline. A suitable
support shall be provided at all locations.
   (b)   Temporary service. All outdoor temporary service equipment must be
enclosed in a raintight enclosure or equipment approved for outdoor use with
suitable provision for locking. One-hundred- twenty-five volt, single-phase 15
or 20 ampere receptacles shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection
for personnel.
   (c)   Location. Service equipment shall not be located in coal bins,
bathrooms, lavatories or clothes closets. Where practicable, it should be
located in the basement or utility room. If installed in a finished wall in the
living area, it is recommended that provisions be made for addition of extra
circuits when reserve capacity exists. Recessing panelboards into plastered
walls or totally enclosed panelboards shall be avoided; accessibility and
working space are very necessary to provide easy access for maintenance,
circuit additions and heat transfer. In single- and two-family dwellings, this
equipment shall be at least four feet from the deck grade, shall not be subject
to mechanical injury or shall be provided with suitable protection. Sufficient
clearance and accessibility shall be provided when installed in basement near
laundry trays, oil tanks, or other permanently installed obstructions.
   (d)   Dead front requirement. Direct current 0-30 ampere and single phase 0-
125 ampere service equipment shall be dead front in residential occupancies up
to and including four-family occupancies and shall be designated service
equipment or suitable for use as service entrance equipment. Dead front
equipment is equipment having no live parts exposed whereby accidental contact
may be made.
   (e)   Two hundred ampere service. Consult local inspection authority when
service equipment is 200 ampere or larger.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.3, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1268. - Extension cords.
   (a)   Porcelain or metal shell sockets or any key socket on cord pendants
are not permissible within reach of grounded portion of building.
   (b)   Remove extension cords supplying laundry appliances and illegal light
fixtures. The use of an extension cord represents a conflict with requirements
of code in that it would serve as a substitute for laundry receptacle to be
located near the appliance. Extension cords are intended for temporary use with
portable appliances, tools, and similar equipment which are not normally used
at one specific location.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.4, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1269. - Bathrooms and laundry rooms.
   Bathrooms and laundry rooms require mechanical ventilation in accordance
with the BOCA National Mechanical Code, 1990. Metal duct and separate switch
shall be provided. Commercial locations shall be operated simultaneously with
the light on one switch.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.5, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1270. - Built-in exhaust fans.
   Duct work and wiring for exhaust fans must be completely installed before
calling for inspection. A permit shall be required for each fan to be
installed.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.6, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1271. - Cables.
   Steel, nonmetallic sheath or other cables terminating at lighting or other
outlets for fixtures or wiring devices shall be stripped, and all joints made
up before rough-in inspection.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.7, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1272. - Nonmetallic sheath cable.
   All grounding conductors must be parallel with nonmetallic sheath cable. All
outlets shall be grounded.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.8, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1273. - Types of wiring prohibited.
   Open conductors installed on exterior of buildings are prohibited except
secondary wiring for gas tube lighting, which may be installed with approved
cable. Overhead conductors between buildings to signs, floodlights, garages and
outbuildings are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.9, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1274. - Underground wires and cables.
   (a)   When installed under concrete driveways, walks, floors or footings
shall be in conduit or other suitable raceways so they may be readily removed
or replaced. Vertically out of trench steel conduit (ells and riser) or
schedule 80 PVC shall be provided for physical protection.
   (b)   All direct burial cable or conductors or wiring in conduit shall be
installed a minimum of 18 inches belowgrade and shall be suitably protected
from mechanical injury.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.10, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1275. - Wire connectors.
   Wire connectors, U.L. approved, when used, shall be of a type having metal
conductors.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.11, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1276. - Maximum watts per circuit.
   The maximum allowable connected watts per circuit of No. 14 wire shall be
1200 watts, 80 watts per ampere.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.12, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1277. - Single phase motors.
   AC single phase motor of one-sixth horsepower or larger shall be on separate
circuit unless each motor is provided with running protection.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.13, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1278. - Minimum wattage requirements.
   The following minimum requirements for wattage shall be observed in
constructing, installing, altering or repairing residence lighting outlets;
      (1)   Living rooms, dining room, library, den, ceiling, 200 watts;
sidewalls, 75 watts.
      (2)   Sun parlor, bedroom, recreation room, ceiling, 100 watts;
sidewalls, 75 watts.
      (3)   Bathroom, kitchen, breakfast room, pullman diner, utility room,
ceiling, 100 watts; sidewalls, 50 watts.
      (4)   Basement, porch, pantry, vestibule, hallways, attic, closets,
toilets, 50 watts.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.14, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1279. - Wattage schedule.
   The following wattage schedule shall be observed in the constructing,
installing, altering or repairing of residence receptacle outlets.
      (1)   In living room, library, den, one outlet for each 12 linear feet of
wall space or major fraction thereof. Doors, arches, windows, mantles, and
including any wall space two feet or more in width or free-standing bar-type
counters, shall be included in measurement. Each outlet shall be 120 watts.
      (2)   In dining room, sun parlor, bedroom, first or second floor hall,
one outlet for each 12 linear feet of wall space or major fraction thereof.
Doors, arches, and windows shall be included in measurements. Each outlet shall
be 120 watts except bedroom, which shall be 80 watts.
      (3)   In kitchen, breakfast room or utility room, at least two 20-ampere
small appliance circuits, in addition to a separate 20 ampere circuit for the
refrigerator or freezer. Outlets installed within six feet of kitchen sink
above countertop surfaces shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection for personnel, with a minimum of four outlets. Not more than six
outlets shall be connected to each circuit. Counter space wider than 12 inches
requires receptacle outlet.
      (4)   In bathroom or washroom at least one ground-fault circuit-
interrupter receptacle installed not less than 30 inches and not more than 48
inches above the floor adjacent to the wash basin and not more than four feet
from the basin, 120 watts. Extending G.F.C.I. receptacle device in series
outside of individual bathroom is not permitted. G.F.C.I. receptacle device is
required for each bathroom.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.15, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1280. - Residence special outlet wattage schedule.
   The following residence special outlet wattage schedule shall be observed in
constructing, installing, altering, or repairing of various rooms indicated:
      (1)   Bathroom built in heater, fireplace, laundry, motors for heating
furnaces and garage doors, according to rating of device, but shall be not less
than 1200 watts each.
      (2)   Transformers for control equipment shall be at least 100 watts
each. A separate transformer shall be provided for each of the following:
         a.   Gas heater control.
         b.   Heating plant control.
      (3)   Chime transformers shall be 50 watts each.
      (4)   Single-phase, 15-20 ampere receptacle shall be installed in a
basement, shall have ground-fault circuit, interrupter protection for
personnel, shall be rated 120 watts, in addition to any provided for laundry
equipment.
      (5)   Receptacle installed for the attachment of portable cords shall be
rated not less than 15 amperes, 125 volts, or 15 amperes, 250 volts, and shall
be mounted on vertical walls.
      (6)   At least one individual branch circuit of not less than 15 ampere
capacity shall be installed for the heating equipment. A readily accessible
disconnect switch shall be mounted on the exterior of the heating equipment or
on a surface adjacent to the heating equipment. Heating equipment which is not
readily accessible shall have an additional disconnect installed at the nearest
readily accessible location.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.16, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1281. - Minimum requirements for dwellings.
   The following minimum requirements must be observed in the constructing,
installing, altering, or repairing of single and multiple dwellings:
      (1)   No branch circuit shall be connected to serve more than one
apartment.
      (2)   Distribution panels shall be located in the apartment which they
serve or in a public space, and shall not be located in bathrooms.
      (3)   Stairways shall be provided with lighting outlet or outlets that
will adequately light each stair section.
      (4)   Unless served from a separate house meter, stairway outlets shall
be controlled from the circuit or apartment using same.
      (5)   Three-point switches shall be installed on all stairway lighting
outlets.
      (6)   Separate bell transformers shall be installed for each apartment,
unless a common transformer is connected to the house meter bell, chime or
enunciating system and contact switch required at residential entrances.
      (7)   Halls, corridors and passageways in all multiple dwellings and
motels shall have at least one light outlet every 20 feet or major fraction
thereof.
      (8)   Basements shall have one light outlet minimum for each 200 square
feet. Furnace, laundry and enclosed or partitioned area must be provided with a
light outlet.
      (9)   Clothes closets and storage spaces shall have at least one light
outlet installed therein. A wall switch control shall be provided at the
entrance to each clothes closet. Clearance between the fixture and a storage
area where combustible material may be stored is not less than 18 inches,
(fluorescent fixture six inches clearance). Recessed fixture shall have thermal
protection. Attics with scuttle holes must have a light near the opening and a
light required back of all knee-walls.
      (10)   Laundry washing machine receptacle outlet shall be a separate
circuit of 20 ampere capacity and shall be at height of the laundry trays and
within six feet of intended location of the equipment. The circuit must
terminate in an outlet box on the wall. Mechanical protection (E.M.T.) for
circuit below ceiling level must be provided. This receptacle shall be rated 20
ampere, grounding type 125 volts.
      (11)   A lighting outlet shall be placed over each set of laundry trays,
and may be connected to same circuit as that serving the laundry equipment.
      (12)   Bathrooms and washrooms shall have switches controlling all lights
therein. Mechanical fans shall be installed in all bathrooms and toilet rooms.
See sections
5-1270 and
5-1271.
      (13)   Wall switches shall be required for every habitable room; in
bathrooms, hallways, stairways, attached garages, and detached garages with
electric power, and outdoor entrances or exits.
      (14)   An approved grounding type receptacle within sight of equipment
and readily accessible at rear wall with a disconnecting means heavy duty 3-
wire No. 16 service cord shall be provided for residential food waste grinders.
A control switch above the counter mounted adjacent to the sink. Recess outlets
into walls. Separate 15 amp circuit shall be provided.
      (15)   A convenience outlet ground-fault circuit interrupter shall be
installed on front and one on rear of each dwelling. These must be on a
separate circuit, and each outlet must be separately switched. Switches must be
separated from each other.
      (16)   A spotlight shall be installed on the rear of each residence at a
height sufficient to provide lighting for rear yard; must be switched at or
near side door if one is provided. Fixture must be directional so light can be
adjusted not to trespass property boundaries.
      (17)   Multiple dwellings and motels which do not have a central air-
conditioning system must provide at least one 220-volt convenience outlet in
close proximity to an outside window in each dwelling unit.
      (18)   Halls, corridors, and passageways in multiple dwelling and motels
shall have at least one convenience outlet installed, spaced so no electrical
cord will require to reach over 30 feet.
      (19)   A 20 ampere 120 volt No. 12 A.W.G. conductor shall be largest size
branch circuit permitted in attached and detached residential garages. All
overcurrent devices must be located at service panel; when more than one
circuit is provided, a potential of 120 volts must be maintained. All circuits
are to originate from same bus at service panel board. Garage branch circuits
shall serve garage only.
      (20)   Every newly constructed single or multiple dwelling unit shall be
provided with smoke detectors. The detectors shall be approved or listed by a
recognized independent testing laboratory and, when actuated, shall provide an
alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the individual dwelling unit. A
minimum of one smoke detector shall be located in each of the following areas:
         a.   In each apartment, suite or sleeping area.
         b.   In the basement at the head of the landing leading to the ground
level floor.
         c.   Any other areas of the dwelling which, by reason of the dwelling
layout, would not be protected by detectors located in subsection a. or b.
above. Each detector shall be interlocked and electrically wired and connected
to any lighting circuit.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.17, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1282. - Commercial requirements.
   (a)   The following specifications must be complied with in the
constructing, installing, altering or repairing of commercial buildings or
structures.
      (1)   Distribution panels shall be located in the office, offices, store
or stores, which they serve or in a readily accessible place and shall not be
located in washrooms or toilets. Service entrance conductors for all buildings
used for other than residential purposes shall be installed in rigid conduit or
electrical metallic tubing.
      (2)   Service equipment. Minimum 100 ampere service equipment with No. 2
A.W.G. CU type RH., or equal wire, shall be provided for stores, apartment
houses, industrial plants, machine shops, service garages or occupancies
greater than four units, operating on a voltage of less than 300 volts to
ground and less than 1,200 amperes capacity shall be required for connected
load and floor area of more than 300 square feet. A main switch with four
wires, three blades solid neutral, or one three wire, three blade switch for
power and one three wire, two blade solid neutral for lighting shall be
required. Where the voltage to ground of service exceeds 300 volts, the current
issue of the National Electric Code, as adopted by the state, shall be
followed. Service to be protected from mechanical injury, where abutting an
alley or driveway, to a minimum height of at least six feet above the earth.
All commercial services must be installed either in rigid steel conduit,
approved for outside use, or of designed copper bus service, suitable for type
of occupancy of building.
      (3)   Coil cabinet (ct's used for metering over 200 amp services) shall
not be used as junction box, raceway or distribution center. Conductors of size
1/0 or larger shall be permitted to be connected in parallel, electrically
joined at both ends to form a single conductor, and terminate at a bus,
disconnect or auxiliary gutter.
      (4)   No. 12 wire shall be the minimum size conductor permitted and have
over current protection of 15 amperes for maximum 1,200 watts connected
lighting load. Rigid conduit or E.M.T. or flexible conduit must be used.
Exception-conduit shall have wire fill marked for inspection if conductors are
counted, when applying the provisions of National Electrical Code Note 8 of
Table 310-16.
      (5)   Receptacle plug outlets in industrial plants, machine shops,
service garages or similar occupancies, shall be limited to four per circuit.
      (6)   Special outlets, store type buildings, in addition to other code
requirements, at least one three-fourth-inch rigid metal conduit or E.M.T.
shall be provided from the distribution panel to a point approximately midway
on each longitudinal wall and at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed
thereto. These outlet boxes to be flush with facing of finish wall. This
requirement is for first floor only unless specifically omitted in approved
electrical plan.
      (7)   Receptacle plug outlets shall not be on a circuit with lighting
outlets except in residences or residential portions of other buildings.
      (8)   Exit and emergency light requirements shall be installed in a
three-fourths-inch conduit with no other wiring. Duo-voltage unit equipment
shall originate from the same panelboard as that of the normal lighting
circuits and is provided with a circuit breaker with a lock-on feature.
Emergency illumination shall include all required means of egress lighting,
illuminated exit signs and all other lights as necessary to provide required
illumination.
      (9)   When a drain is installed in a transformer room, such a drain must
have a liquid seal of not less than three inches in depth. This seal may be
supplied by water which is permitted to bypass into the trap from a water
supply connection to a basin fountain or similar fixture or such seal may be
made of a nonexplosive liquid such as a low grade engine oil.
      (10)   Elevator escalator machine rooms shall be wired for at least one
lighting and one convenience outlet.
      (11)   A sign outlet rated at 1,500 watts consisting of an approved
fitting with blank cover shall be provided for each store section or new or
remodeled buildings with new fronts, located at least ten feet above sidewalk
on front wall, connected with three-fourths inch minimum size conduit. Sign
conduit to be rigid or E.M.T., where practical, and installed independent of
other outlets or conductors. At least one circuit of No. 12 wires with 20
ampere double pole lock type switch shall be installed for each out-of-door
sign outlet.
      (12)   A 125-volt, single-phase receptacle outlet ground-fault circuit-
interrupter protection for personnel shall be located on the same level and
within 20 feet of rooftop heating, air-conditioning and refrigeration
equipment. Receptacle outlet shall not be connected to load side of equipment
disconnecting means. Install disconnect on outer surface or within six feet of
each unit, easily located during emergency. Each office or commercial building
to have one 220 volt receptacle outlet, preferably near an outside window for
air-conditioning, unless building has an overall air-conditioning unit.
      (13)   All alarm wiring be installed in a separate conduit. This wiring
must be an approved system and installed in strict accordance with
manufacturers recommendations and Life and Safety Code 101 and N.F.P.A. 72.
      (14)   The minimum size of commercial service shall be four No. 2 copper
conductors, three phase required.
      (15)   Masonry walls must have proper channels for conduit or conduits to
be installed in walls when constructed.
      (16)   No installation of plumbing equipment, refrigeration equipment,
space heating equipment, duct work, cabinet partitions, or materials shall be
made which will render the wiring in any electrical service equipment,
distribution panel, outlet, splice, junction box or pull box inaccessible.
Minimum clearance of three feet (horizontal) must be maintained from electrical
equipment.
      (17)   Bathroom and washrooms in commercial building shall have wall
switches controlling all lights therein. Mechanical fans shall be installed in
all bathrooms and toilet rooms. See sections
5-1270 and
5-1271. Receptacles shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection.
      (18)   All raceways underground or in concrete to equipment located
outside the building in gasoline dispensing stations or similar properties
shall be rigid metal conduit, galvanized or sheradized and not smaller than
three-fourths inch. Raceways shall be run to each pump on the islands with a
sealoff at the pump and another at first opening on supply end.
      (19)   Type AC cable is a fabricated assembly of insulated conductors in
a flexible metallic enclosure. A green grounding conductor shall be included.
      (20)   Flexible metal conduit shall be one-half inch minimum; a green
grounding conductor shall be included and properly terminated. Exception:
three-eighths inch permitted for furnace and boiler wiring.
      (21)   Electrical equipment, conduit or devices shall not be mounted
directly on roof or parapet walls. Maintenance coating applied to roofs and
parapets coat and seal electrical equipment preventing safe operation and
access having a deteriorating effect. Coated and concealed conduits are very
hazardous.
      (22)   A detailed set of plans and specifications shall be submitted with
the application for building permit for any wiring or alteration to the
electrical system.
   (b)   The electrical drawing must include such details as lighting layouts,
circuiting, switching, copper conductor and conduit sizes. Also, wattage,
schedule, panel schedule, service location, riser diagram, calculations and
proposed method of construction drawn with symbols of a standard form.
Designer's responsibility is to comply with National Electrical Code and this
article.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.18, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1283. - Gas-tube lighting exceeding 600 volts.
   The following minimum requirements shall govern the constructing,
installing, altering or repairing of gas-tube lighting exceeding 600 volts:
      (1)   All wiring and accessories used in the fabrication of gas-tube
lighting systems shall be of approved material.
      (2)   Transformers shall be of the enclosed type and shall be installed
so as to be accessible at all times. Secondary voltage rating shall not exceed
15,000 volts, 120 milliamperes.
      (3)   Transformers not incorporated in fixtures shall be equipped with
standard steel outlet boxes for primary connections.
      (4)   Transformers shall be equipped with approved housing for secondary
connections, PK's and quick connect connectors.
      (5)   Transformers in exposed show-windows or with inside wall signs
shall be equipped with externally operable switch mounted on transformer, which
shall open all primary conductors, switches shall be indicating type.
Mechanical protection facing or backing on gas-tubing at a height of less than
eight feet shall be provided.
      (6)   Gas-tube lighting fixtures using more than one transformer shall be
so connected that disconnecting switch controlling primary will de-energize all
conductors.
      (7)   Transformer shall be provided with center tap on secondary winding,
which shall be grounded to transformer case.
      (8)   All series connections shall be made with approved connectors,
using GTO 15 UL high-voltage cable, and where overall connecting cable is
installed in plenum walls, high voltage shield insulator incased in one-half
minimum greenfield shall be provided.
      (9)   Warning sign stating high voltage shall be posted at each
transformer visible to a service man.
      (10)   All transformer cases, outlet boxes and metal parts shall comply
with article 250 grounding, National Electrical Code.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.19, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1284. - Temporary light and power facilities.
   (a)   Where electric lighting for temporary barricades is used, it shall be
on independent circuits and arranged to burn continuously, lamps shall be
protected by suitable guards or by elevation.
   (b)   Branch circuits for construction purposes supplying energy for
temporary light and power outlets shall be not smaller than No. 12 A.W.G. for
distances less than 125 feet from source of supply. Circuits in excess of 125
feet shall be not less than No. 10 A.W.G. Receptacles shall be 125 volt, single
phase, 15 or 20 ampere, and it shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection for personnel; not more than four such outlets per circuit. Lighting
outlets shall be limited to eight per circuit.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.20, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1285. - Theatres and places of assembly.
   (a)   National Electrical Code articles 518 and 520 and requirements of
section 8 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code Handbook shall be complied with for
theatres and places of assembly.
   (b)   Any portable electrical equipment employed by vaudeville, stock
companies or other shows shall be inspected.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.21, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1286. - Communication systems.
   (a)   Lighting conductors: a separation of five feet shall be maintained
between open conductors of communication systems on buildings and lighting
conductors.
   (b)   Grounding conductor: insulated No. 14 A.W.G. shall comply with article
800 National Electrical Code.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.22, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1287. - Community antenna television systems.
   (a)   The coaxial cable shall be permitted to deliver low-energy power to
equipment directly associated with the radio frequency distribution system, if
the voltage is not over 60 volts and if the current supply is from a
transformer or other device having energy-limiting characteristics.
   (b)   Bond CATV system coaxial cable sheath to the electrical power ground.
The earth ground shall not be used as an equipment grounding conductor or
bonding conductor, as it will not have the low-impedance path needed.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.23, 2-13-91)
Sec. 5-1288. - Mechanical execution of work.
   Electrical equipment shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner.
This article is not intended as a design specification nor an instruction
manual for untrained persons.
(Ord. No. 91-511, § 6.24, 2-13-91)
Secs. 5-1289—5-1305. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - PLUMBING CODE
Sec. 5-1306. - Code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the current Plumbing Code adopted by
the State of Michigan. A copy of such code shall be on file in the city clerk's
office.
(Ord. No. 97-705, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 06-1096, 9-18-06)
Sec. 5-1307.   Registration fee.
   No person shall engage in any plumbing work in the city unless such person
has first procured a license from the city clerk’s office, and paid the fee as
listed in
Chapter 12, Section 6. For the purposes of this section, plumbing work shall
mean any work that falls under the current Plumbing Code adopted by the State
of Michigan.
(Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Secs. 5-1308—5-1330. Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-1097, adopted Sept. 18, 2006, deleted §
5-1307 in its entirety. Former §
5-1307 pertained to adoption of code amendments and derived from Ord. No. 99-
789, adopted Aug. 17, 1999.
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNS[6] 
Footnotes:
--- (6) ---
*Editor's note—Ord. No. 18-1621, adopted July 17, 2018 amended Art. XII in its
entirety. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. No. 81-112, adopted Nov. 4, 1981; Ord. No. 83-281, adopted Aug. 16, 1983;
Ord. No. 8-455, adopted July 5, 1989; Ord. No. 89-461, adopted Aug. 1, 1989;
Ord. No. 98-731, adopted Aug. 5, 1998; Ord. No. 00-838, adopted April 3, 2001;
Ord. No. 01-848, adopted May 1, 2001; Ord. No. 02-879, adopted March 19, 2002;
Ord. No. 02-905, adopted July 16, 2002; Ord. No. 02-906, adopted July 16, 2002;
Ord. No. 05-1039, adopted June 6, 2005; Ord. No. 05-1053, adopted Aug. 1, 2005;
Ord. No. 05-1054, adopted Aug. 1, 2005; Ord. No. 06- 1064, adopted March 6,
2006; Ord. No. 06-1098, adopted Oct. 2, 2006; Ord. No. 09-1244, Sept. 21, 2009;
Ord. No. 11-1334, adopted Oct. 3, 2011; and Ord. No. 14-440, adopted Oct. 21,
2014.
Sec. 5-1331. Purpose.
   (a)   This article promotes safe, well-maintained, vibrant and attractive
residential and business districts while reasonably accommodating the need for
signs to function for the purposes for which they are intended. The regulations
contained in this article are written to directly address these purposes and
intents and to provide the least restrictive means to accomplish their ends.
   (b)   The regulations contained in this article recognize that the
individual's right to convey a message must be balanced against the public's
right to be free of signs which unreasonably compete with one another and
negatively impact traffic and safety. This article provides a consistent set of
sign regulations providing businesses and individuals with an opportunity to
attract the public, while providing uses that are substantially the same in
character with similar treatment.
   (c)   While this article recognizes that signs and outdoor advertising are
necessary to promote commerce, improve navigation and provide public
information, failure to require reasonable regulation of signs may lead to poor
identification of individual businesses, deterioration and blight, conflicts
between different types of land uses, and negative impacts on traffic safety.
Oversized, moving or improperly placed signs can, if not regulated, become a
nuisance, cause depreciation of property values, pedestrian and driver
confusion and distraction, and endanger the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18)
Sec. 5-1332. Intent.
   The intent of this article is to:
   (1)   Support the Master Plan's various character areas such as Great
Neighborhoods, Main Street Michigan Avenue, and Destination Commercial
Districts, as well as to support the purposes and recommendations of various
Area Specific Plans and special plans adopted in support of orderly development
of the city.
   (2)   Ensure that signs are located, designed, constructed, installed and
maintained in a way that protects public health, safety and welfare.
   (3)   Prohibit signs that are structurally unsafe, poorly maintained, and/or
cause unsafe traffic conditions by distracting motorists.
   (4)   Protect the aesthetic quality of neighborhoods and commercial
districts.
   (5)   Ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is
protected.
   (6)   Reduce conflict between public signs used for purposes of traffic
safety, identification of traffic controls, and other governmental purposes,
and private signs.
   (7)   Reinforce and support the desired character of each zoning district in
a manner that takes into consideration building scale and massing, lot size,
building setbacks, transparency, street dimensions, travel speed and pedestrian
presence so that signs contribute to the streetscape and aid in creating a
"sense of place."
   (8)   Allow for adequate and effective signs for business identification and
other appropriate commercial and non-commercial speech.
   (9)   Allow for the dissemination of public information as may be required
by law.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18)
Sec. 5-1333. Definitions.
   The words and phrases set forth below shall have the meaning stated when
used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   Awning shall mean a roof-like covering of canvas, or similar material, over
a door or window to provide protection against the sun, wind or rain
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6392.png]
 
   Banner shall mean a sign made of fabric, cloth, paper or other non-rigid
material that is typically not enclosed in a frame.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6394.png]
 
   Building sign shall mean a sign that identifies the building, rather than a
specific tenant of that building, commonly used in multi-tenant buildings to
identify strip commercial centers or office towers. In case of single tenant
buildings, the tenant and building sign may be the same sign.
   City shall mean the City of Dearborn.
   Department shall mean the Department of Economic Development.
   Director shall mean the director of the Department of Economic Development.
   Display area shall mean the gross area of the display panel or that area of
the wall or surface which is bounded by a series of straight lines which
enclose the complete sign unit, notwithstanding any physical separation between
parts.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6396.png]
 
   Electronic open sign means any electronic sign that is placed in a window or
affixed to a wall of a building, and which exclusively displays the word "open"
during the hours that the building or building unit is open to the public for
its usual business purpose.
   Electronic signs shall include electronic message boards and changeable
message centers, multimedia or computer-controlled variable message and display
signs, scrolling marquees, LED signs, and similar devices, whether standing
alone, incorporated within another sign, affixed to a building, or displayed in
a window so as to be visible from a roadway. The definition shall include
electronic open signs as defined in this article except as otherwise provided
in this article.
   Flag shall mean an item made of cloth, nylon, vinyl, or similar material,
varying in shape, size, color or design, usually attached at one end to a staff
or cord, used primarily as a symbol of a nation, state or organization.
   Ground sign shall mean any freestanding sign supported by and anchored
directly to the ground on privately owned property. Ground signs shall include
pole and monument signs.
   Glare shall mean any light emanating directly from a light source that has
the potential to create visual discomfort or momentary blindness when viewed.
   Historical signs and markers shall mean non-commercial plaques which tell
the story of some event, personality or a combination of the two of some
historical significance within the community.
   Message-casting (or projected) signs shall mean signs that are displayed by
"shooting", "casting", or "projecting" laser light, visible light beams, and/or
light images onto the ground, sidewalk, wall, or other visible surface, or into
the sky as part of a sign.
   Monument sign shall mean a ground sign mounted on a base directly to the
ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6398.png]
 
   Person shall mean a natural person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, or
voluntary association.
   Projecting sign shall mean any sign that extends beyond the building wall,
where the horizontal sign surface is not parallel to the building wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6400.png]
 
   Roof sign shall mean any sign mounted on or over the roof of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6402.png]
   Sandwich board sign shall mean any sign that is constructed of two flat
pieces joined at the top with a hinge device so that the sign stands up as an
inverted "V."
   Sign shall mean any announcement, declaration, figure, billboard,
illustration, insignia or display (including bulbs and other lighting devices)
when designed and placed so as to attract general public attention. Such signs
shall be deemed to be a single sign whenever the proximity, design, content or
continuity reasonably suggests a single unit, notwithstanding any physical
separation between parts.
   Sign lighting shall mean any electric lighting element designed to
illuminate a sign to provide for its visibility in low-light or night time
conditions. This includes external lighting that reflects off the surface of
the sign and internal lighting that halos the sign, illuminates the sign face
from within and electronic message signs.
   Temporary sign shall mean any sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas,
plastic, cardboard, wall board, inflatable material, plywood or other like
material without a permanent foundation or not otherwise permanently attached
to the ground, a structure, or a building and is not supported by a permanent
frame and which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
   Temporary decoration shall mean an exterior decoration on private property
intended to be used for a limited period of time. Temporary decorations
include, but are not limited, to any streamer, pennant, lighting string,
inflatable, propeller, flag or any similar device of any type or kind whether
bearing lettering or not.
   Tenant sign shall mean an exclusive sign that is attached to the exterior
wall at the entrance of a building used for the purpose of identifying and
displaying the name of occupants engaged in professions or businesses on the
premises.
   Wall sign shall mean any sign attached to the exterior surface of any
building or wall, no portion of which projects more than 12 inches from the
surface. No wall sign shall be painted directly on the exterior surface of any
building, wall, fence or other structure, or on any window or door surface.
   Window cling shall mean a picture, design, message, label or decal made of
cloth, plastic or similar material, designed to adhere to or be transferred to
glass.
   Window sign shall mean any sign, including window clings, mounted or
arranged on the inside or outside of a building in a manner or position
intended primarily for viewing from the outside of the building on or through
windows or doors.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22;
Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1334. Permitting and maintenance of signs.
   (a)   Other codes applicable. In addition to the provisions of this article
all signs and structural reinforcement must also comply with all applicable
construction codes, ordinances, laws and regulations. No external braces, arms
or guys shall be permitted as reinforcement.
   (b)   Sign permits and licensing.
      (1)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
alter, relocate, re-assemble, repair, repaint or post any sign governed by the
provisions of this article within the city without first having obtained a
permit from the department, except as otherwise noted in this article.
      (2)   Sign erector license required. No person shall erect, alter,
relocate, reassemble or post in the city any sign governed by the provisions of
this article without first having obtained a license. It shall be unlawful to
obtain a permit without first obtaining an annual sign erector license from the
city clerk, in conformity with section
5-269. A sign erector license is not required for temporary signs, temporary
decorations or sandwich board signs.
   (c)   Sign maintenance.
      (1)   No sign shall be installed or maintained in a condition which is
structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to public health, safety and
welfare.
      (2)   All signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times and kept
free from bird harborage. Deterioration of paint or other surface treatment
that detracts from the appearance of a sign shall be considered a violation of
this article.
      (3)   All signs pertaining to the business or activity conducted on the
property shall be immediately removed from the premises by the owners when the
business or activity is discontinued. Cabinet or similar signs with changeable
faces may have a blank face installed to meet this requirement.
      (4)   Interval inspections. The condition and status of signs shall be
examined as part of the city-wide periodic inspection of all commercial and
industrial buildings and facilities, all multiple dwellings greater than two
units, all places of public assembly and all establishments open to the public,
as required per section
5-29, as amended. Signs shall be inspected for compliance with this article.
   (d)   Removal and abatement.
      (1)   Removal of unauthorized signs on public property. In addition to
any other remedies set forth herein pertaining to the enforcement of this
article, the department is hereby authorized and empowered to immediately
remove any unauthorized and/or unpermitted signs located on public property.
Any expense incurred by the city in the removal of such signs from public
property may be charged against the person(s) or entities which own or caused
the placement of the sign on public property. If the amount of such expense has
not been paid to the city within 30 days after a notice and invoice has been
served by ordinary mail, the city may invoke any and all collection remedies
allowed by law.
      (2)   Removal or abatement of signs on private property. All signs
located on private property which are unauthorized, unpermitted, blighted,
hazardous or in violation of any code, ordinance, law or regulation may be
ordered by the department to be removed and/or the violations corrected. Such
signs are also subject to the nuisance abatement procedure set forth in section
13-5, as amended.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18)
Sec. 5-1335. General requirements for all signs.
   (a)   Sign lighting.
      (1)   Glare/distractions. Sign lighting shall not create glare or
excessively illuminate the surrounding area. Sign illumination that distracts
motorists or creates a traffic hazard for either vehicles or pedestrians is
prohibited.
      (2)   Light sources. Sign lighting shall only be by steady, non-flashing,
stationary, shielded light sources using approved electrical devices. Exposed
bulbs are prohibited except when used in electronic signs as defined and
regulated in this article.
      (3)   Direction and shielding.
         a.   Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded
so that light is directed only onto the sign or building façade.
         b.   To the extent possible, fixtures shall be mounted and directed
downward (below the horizontal). Lighting fixtures shall not be directly
visible from or aimed at adjacent streets, roads or properties.
         c.   Raceways, conduits and piping for electrical sources shall not be
exposed to view and shall not exceed seven inches.
         d.   Back-lit, electronic, and internally- illuminated signs shall not
cause excessive glare or allow light to encroach onto surrounding properties.
         e.   Sign lighting shall be designed and installed so that the light
produced does not exceed 0.5 foot-candles at the nearest residential property
line.
      (4)   Timer control for non-residential uses in residential districts.
         a.   When an illuminated sign is permitted in a residential zoning
district for a permitted, non-residential use the illuminated sign shall be
equipped with an actively functioning timer control.
         b.   The control shall be set so that the sign is not illuminated
after 11:00 p.m. or one half hour following the close of the business,
whichever is earlier and further provided that no sign shall be illuminated
before 6:00 a.m. or one half hour prior to the opening of the business,
whichever is later.
         c.   Details of the design and operation of the timer control shall be
submitted with the sign permit application.
      (5)   Photometric study. The building official or the zoning
administrator may require a photometric study as part of site plan or permit
review to ensure compliance with applicable ordinances.
   (b)   Prohibited sign and decoration locations.
      (1)   Not to obstruct egress/openings. No sign or decoration may be
attached to a door, window casing or tree, nor placed in any other location
which may obstruct any fire escape, door, window, passageway or other opening
or means of egress from a building.
      (2)   Not to obstruct access for public safety personnel or otherwise
create a public hazard. No sign or decoration may be erected on any pole or
column on public property or located at a distance the horizontal projection of
which is less than ten feet from any fire hydrant, traffic light, fire or
police box or erected in any location where, in the discretion of the city, it
would imperil public safety or interfere with the duties of the police or fire
department.
      (3)   Not to obstruct sight lines along public roads. No sign or
decoration shall be permitted to be located within the unobstructed sight
triangles at intersections of roads and drives as required in the Zoning
Ordinance.
      (4)   Not to obstruct walks or parking. No sign or decoration may be
located such that it obstructs any parking spaces and maneuver aisles in
parking lots and public or private walkways.
   (c)   Prohibited signs.
      (1)   Off-premises signs. Any permanent sign approved under this article
shall pertain only to the use of the premises on which it is located or to the
business activity normally conducted therein.
      (2)   Billboards.
         a.   Billboards are hereby prohibited except as provided by the
Highway Advertising Act (Act 106 of 1972).
         b.   Exception for advertising on certain city-owned property.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, or any other section or
ordinance, the director of the Recreation Department may offer, subject to
certain conditions, sell, and contract to sell space for advertising signs,
painted logos, and banners at Dearborn Ice Skating Center, King Boring Field,
Dearborn Hills Golf Course, Mystic Creek Golf Course at Camp Dearborn, and the
Dearborn Dog Park. Such advertising shall comply with the following standards:
            1.   The subject matter of the advertisement, logo, and/or banner
must be limited to a proposed commercial transaction or corporate sponsorship.
For the purposes of this subsection, a proposed commercial transaction solicits
an exchange of property, goods, or services with intended customers that will
necessarily result in something of economic value to the advertiser.
            2.   The advertisement, logo, banner, or corporate sponsorship may
not:
               a.   Be false, misleading, or deceptive.
               b.   Relate to an activity or product that is prohibited under
applicable federal, state, or local laws and regulations. Advertise or depict,
by language or graphics, violence.
               c.   Advertise or depict language, gestures, conduct, or
graphical representations that are obscene, pornographic, sexually explicit,
vulgar, lewd, or profane.
               d.   Advertise or depict the use of tobacco, marijuana, smoking
or vaping products, firearms, adult entertainment products or services, or
adult entertainment establishments.
               e.   Advertise or depict material that violates a copyright or
trademark.
            3.   The primary purpose of allowing advertising, painted logos,
and banners under this subsection is to generate revenue.
      (3)   Bill posting (snipe signs).
         a.   No placard, poster, circular, show bill, handbill, card leaflet
or other signs shall be posted, pasted, nailed, placed, printed, painted,
stamped or in any way attached to any fence, wall, post, tree, sidewalk,
pavement, platform, pole tower, curbstone, or surface in or upon any public
property in the city; provided, however, nothing herein set forth shall prevent
official notices of the city from being posted on any public property deemed
appropriate by the city.
         b.   In any proceeding for violation of this section, the phone
number, e-mail address, or location of event displayed on the placard, poster,
circular, show bill, handbill, card leaflet or other advertising matter
whatsoever shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
person or business to whom the phone number, e-mail address or event address
was assigned was the person or business who unlawfully displayed the
advertising matter.
      (4)   Roof signs. Roof signs shall not be permitted in the city. No sign,
including but not limited to temporary signs, shall be permitted to be mounted
above or extended over the roof of any building or structure whether supported
by such building or structure or mounted completely independent thereof.
      (5)   Signs with more than two faces. No sign shall have more than two
faces.
      (6)   Obscene matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon
any sign or advertising structure any matter that the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, would find appeals to prurient interests,
depicts sexually explicit conduct, specifically defined by law, in a patently
offensive manner, and which matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
      (7)   Message-casting (or projected) signs. The use of message-casting
signs or displays shall be prohibited, except for use as temporary decorations
subject to the terms and conditions of this article, including, but not limited
to, sections
5-1336(d) and
5-1337(i).
   (d)   Nonconforming signs (including billboards).
      (1)   Applicability. Every permanently affixed sign which was legally
erected, constructed, installed, placed or located, and which lawfully existed
on the effective date of this article, but which does not conform to the type,
height, size, area, or location requirements of this article shall be deemed a
nonconforming sign. This status shall not be granted to any temporary sign,
banner, or placard, including those affixed to the interior or exterior of
windows.
      (2)   Expansion or extension prohibited. Nonconforming signs shall not be
expanded, enlarged, extended or structurally altered to create an additional
nonconformity or to increase the extent of the existing nonconformity. A
nonconforming sign may be lessened in size or dimension without jeopardizing
its nonconforming status.
      (3)   Maintenance. Nonconforming signs may be maintained and repaired to
continue the useful life of the sign.
         a.   Maintenance and repair includes re-facing, painting of chipped or
faded signs, replacement of faded or damaged surface panels, or repair or
replacement of electrical wiring or electrical devices. A sign permit shall be
required for sign re-facing, but is not required for normal repairs and
maintenance.
         b.   Excluding maintenance and repair, changes to nonconforming signs
shall be prohibited unless the signs are brought into conformance with this
article.
      (4)   Damage or destruction. If a nonconforming sign is damaged or
destroyed to an extent that its repair cost exceeds 50% of its replacement
cost, exclusive of the foundation, the sign shall not be restored or replaced
to its prior nonconforming status but shall conform to the requirements of this
article.
      (5)   Site redevelopment. Nonconforming signs shall be eliminated as part
of a zoning approval required by the zoning administrator, city planner,
planning commission or zoning board of appeals involving the redevelopment of a
site.
      (6)   Signs for nonconforming uses. A sign on a lot with a nonconforming
use may be erected in accordance with the sign regulations for the district in
which the property is located.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 17-1574, 3-21-17; Ord. No. 18-1612, 5-15-18;
Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1336. Permitted signs in residential zoning districts.
   (a)   Applicability. The regulations in this section shall apply to signs
for multi-family residential and nonresidential uses in all residential zoning
districts unless otherwise specified.
   (b)   Permanent signs.
      (1)   Wall signs.
         a.   Flush mounted wall signs.
            1.   Maximum number of signs: one per building. An additional sign
may be permitted for a corner building on the side of the building facing the
other street or on the back of a building where the rear faces a parking lot.
            2.   Maximum sign area: 10% of the building face the sign is
mounted on, maximum 100 square feet each.
            3.   Maximum height on the building: no wall sign or any portion
thereof may extend above the top of the wall upon which it is supported.
         b.   Projecting wall signs.
            1.   Maximum number of signs: one per building, an additional sign
may be permitted on the back of a building where the rear faces a parking lot.
            2.   Maximum sign depth: shall extend no more than 12 inches into
or over any public property or right-of-way.
            3.   Minimum sign height: shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet above
sidewalk grade, but not less than 14 feet above alley grade where they extend
over an alley.
            4.   Maximum height on the building: no wall sign or any portion
thereof shall extend above the top of the wall upon which it is supported.
      (2)   Ground signs.
         a.   Pole mounted signs. Pole mounted signs are prohibited in
residential zoning districts.
         b.   Monument signs.
            1.   Maximum number of signs: No lot or abutting parcels under
common ownership shall be permitted more than one monument sign.
            2.   Maximum sign area: 40 square feet.
            3.   Maximum sign height: Five feet.
      (3)   Electronic signs:
         a.   Non-residential uses in residential zoning districts are
permitted to have up to one double sided electronic sign. All electronic signs
shall comply with the rules and regulations set forth for electronic signs in
section
5-1337 of this article.
         b.   All electronic signs located in residential zoning districts
shall discontinue the display between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   Temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs for residential uses (other than temporary window
signs).
         a.   All residential dwellings, including but not limited to a single-
family house, two-family dwelling or a ground-level multiple family unit, shall
be permitted on-premise temporary ground signs.
         b.   Maximum sign size. Each sign shall not exceed nine square feet
per side.
         c.   Placement. Permitted signs shall not be located in public rights-
of-way and shall be set back at least three feet from the property line.
         d.   Illumination. Residential temporary signs shall not be
illuminated.
         e.   Duration. A temporary sign shall be permitted for no more than 60
consecutive days and be taken down no later than five days after the event it
pertains to is completed.
         f.   Permit. A sign permit is not required.
      (2)   Temporary signs for non-residential uses (religious institutions,
schools, day-care centers, etc.) in residential zoning districts (other than
temporary window signs).
         a.   Permitted number of signs:
            1.   Each property shall be limited to a total of six signs not to
exceed a total sign area of 48 square feet (e.g., 1 double sided 6'x4' sign, 2
double sided 3'x4' signs, etc.)
            2.   Exception: for properties with road frontage in excess of 400
linear feet, an additional 48 square feet of signage is permitted not to exceed
96 square feet in total sign area. This provision does not allow for an
increase in the total number of permitted signs.
         b.   Maximum size of individual signs:
            1.   Total sign area per face: 24 square feet.
            2.   Maximum height for ground mounted signs: 6 feet.
         c.   Location and setback: Temporary signs shall not be located in
public rights of way and shall be set back at least three feet from the
property line.
         d.   Installation: Temporary signs shall be securely attached to the
structure or securely anchored/ weighted to the ground.
         e.   Illumination: Signs shall not be illuminated.
         f.   Duration: a temporary sign shall be permitted for no more than 60
consecutive days and shall be taken down no later than five days after the
event to which it pertains to is completed.
         g.   A sign permit is not required.
   (d)   Temporary decorations.
      (1)   Temporary decorations, including message-casting (or projected)
signs, shall be permitted for a period of 60 consecutive days.
      (2)   Temporary decorations shall be securely attached and shall not
create a safety hazard of any kind.
      (3)   Temporary decorations shall not exceed the maximum allowable height
within the zoning district in which it is located.
      (4)   Temporary signs attached to temporary decorations shall be
permitted separately and in accordance with this section.
      (5)   City-sponsored temporary decorations on public property are exempt
from the requirements of the sign ordinance provided they are displayed for no
more than 60 days.
      (6)   Luminous tube, rope, neon, or fluorescent lighting shall be
prohibited in the front yard of lots located in residential zoning districts
unless it is a temporary display. A temporary display is permitted for 60
consecutive days and must be disassembled and removed from the structure within
that timeframe.
      (7)   Message-casting (or projected) signs as temporary decorations;
regulations.
         a.   Shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded so that light is
directed only onto the sign, building/structure façade, or ground.
         b.   Shall not create glare or excessively illuminate the surrounding
area, and shall not distract motorists or create a traffic hazard for either
vehicles or pedestrians.
         c.   Fixtures that produce message-casting or projected signs shall
not be aimed at adjacent streets, roads, or properties.
         d.   Shall not cause excessive glare or allow light to encroach into
surrounding properties.
         e.   Time limitation.
            1.   Message-casting signs shall discontinue display, and shall not
be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
            2.   When a message-casting sign is being used as a temporary
decoration in a residential district for a permitted, non-residential use, the
message-casting sign shall be equipped with actively functioning timer control.
The control shall be set so that the sign is not illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
or one-half hour following the close of the business, whichever is earlier. No
message-casting sign used as a temporary decoration shall be illuminated or
projected before 6:00 a.m. or one-half hour prior to the opening of the
business, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1337. Permitted signs in commercial and industrial zoning districts.
   (a)   Applicability. The regulations in this section apply to signs in the
O-S, B-A, B-B, B-C, I-A, I-B, I-C, I-D, T-R and PUD zoning districts.
   (b)   Permanent signs.
      (1)   Wall signs.
         a.   Flush mounted wall signs.
            1.   Maximum total sign area: the total area of all signs shall not
exceed 15% of the building face the sign is mounted on.
            2.   Building signs:
               (i)   Maximum number of signs: one per building. An additional
sign may be permitted for a corner building on the side of the building facing
the other street or on the back of a building where the rear faces a parking
lot.
               (ii)   Maximum area per sign: 100 square feet each.
            3.   Tenant signs:
               (i)   Maximum number of signs: in addition to the building signs
noted above, one sign per elevation is permitted per commercial tenant if there
is more than one commercial tenant occupying the building, as long as the total
area of signs shall not exceed 15% of the total area of the building side the
sign is mounted on.
               (ii)   Maximum area per sign: 50 square feet each.
               (iii)   Maximum height on the building: no wall sign or any
portion thereof may extend above the top of the wall upon which it is
supported.
      (2)   Projecting wall signs.
         a.   Maximum number of signs: one per building. An additional sign may
be permitted on the back of a building where the rear faces a parking lot.
         b.   Maximum sign depth: may extend no more than 18 inches into or
over any public property or right-of-way.
         c.   Minimum sign height: shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet above
sidewalk grade, but not less than 14 feet above alley grade where they extend
over an alley.
         d.   Maximum height on the building: no wall sign or any portion
thereof may extend above the top of the wall upon which it is supported.
      (3)   Ground signs.
         a.   Pole mounted signs.
            1.   Maximum number of signs: No lot or abutting parcels under
common ownership shall be permitted more than one pole mounted sign.
            2.   Maximum sign area: 100 square feet.
            3.   Maximum sign height: 30 feet.
            4.   Minimum sign clearance (height to bottom of sign): 8.5 feet.
            5.   Minimum spacing between signs: 20 feet.
         b.   Monument signs.
            1.   Maximum number of signs: No lot or abutting parcels under
common ownership shall be permitted more than one monument sign.
            2.   Maximum sign area: 100 square feet.
            3.   Maximum sign height: 12 feet.
            4.   Minimum spacing between signs: 20 feet.
         c.   No lot or abutting parcels under common ownership shall have both
a pole and monument sign.
   (c)   Electronic signs.
      (1)   General requirements.
         a.   Electronic signs up to 24 square feet in area and electronic open
signs up to two square feet in area shall be permitted in nonresidential
districts subject to the regulations of this article, except in those districts
where prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   In zoning districts in which the Zoning Ordinance allows for
electronic signs, electronic signs shall comply with both the provisions of
this article and the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
         c.   The permit requirements of this article shall not apply to
electronic open signs.
      (2)   Display requirements.
         a.   Scrolling or traveling of a message onto and/or off the
electronic sign display shall be allowed provided the message is coming from
one direction only and that no message shall take more than five seconds to be
displayed in its entirety. After a message has been displayed in its entirety,
the screen shall not change for 30 seconds, except for time/temperature signs,
which shall not change for five seconds.
         b.   The electronic sign display shall not, or shall not appear to,
flash, undulate, pulse or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or
blinking or chasing lights; the display shall not appear to move toward or away
from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist or make other
similar movements.
         c.   Electronic signs shall not be used to display animations, motion
pictures, television programming, movies, sporting events, or any similar live
or recorded broadcast.
         d.   Electronic signs shall only relate to the use of the premises on
which they are located or to the business activity normally conducted therein.
         e.   All electronic signs with the electronic display facing a
residential zoning district that is within 150 feet of that district shall
discontinue the display between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
      (3)   Light levels.
         a.   In order to prevent glare, electronic signs shall not operate at
a brightness level greater than the manufacturer's recommended levels. Light
levels emitted by electronic signs shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles at the
property line of any adjacent residentially used or zoned parcel.
         b.   All electronic signs shall have installed ambient light monitors
and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the
brightness level of the electronic sign based on ambient light conditions.
      (4)   Additional requirements.
         a.   No lots or abutting parcels under common ownership shall be
permitted more than one electronic sign. An electronic open sign shall not
count as the one electronic sign.
         b.   No individual unit of a building shall be permitted more than one
electronic open sign per public entrance, up to maximum of two.
         c.   Electronic sign permit applications shall include a copy of the
manufacturer's specifications for luminosity.
         d.   Electronic sign permit applications shall include certification
from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall be operated
in accordance with city codes and that the owner or operator shall provide
proof of such conformance upon request of the city.
         e.   Whether the electronic sign is programmed from the site or from a
remote location, the computer interface that programs the electronic sign shall
be available to city staff for inspection upon request at the site.
         f.   The surface area of electronic signs shall be included in
calculations of maximum allowable signage provided for in this article.
         g.   Any electronic sign found to not be in compliance with the
provisions of this article shall cease operation until the electronic sign is
brought into compliance with this article.
      (5)   Existing signs to conform. Any nonconforming electronic sign
lawfully existing under a variance previously granted by the building board of
appeals shall be made to comply with the requirements of this section within 30
days from the date this article takes effect. However, any existing electronic
sign that exceeds 24 square feet in area or any existing electronic open sign
that exceeds two square feet in area may continue as a nonconforming existing
sign until such time that the sign is removed, moved, or replaced.
   (d)   Awnings.
      (1)   Facades may be supplemented by awnings, which shall be straight
sheds with or without side flaps, not cubed or curved, or backlit. Awnings
shall be between 8.5 and 12 feet above sidewalk grade at the lower drip edge.
Awnings must avoid street trees and be set back at least two feet from the road
curb.
      (2)   The vertical drip edge of an awning may be stenciled with signage a
maximum of eight inches in height.
   (e)   Sandwich boards and similar signs.
      (1)   Each side of the sandwich board sign shall not exceed three feet in
height or two feet in width. A stanchion or support up to 12 inches in height
is permitted for the sandwich board sign.
      (2)   The bottom shall be weighted or anchored so that the sign is
stable, wind-proof, and not easily knocked down.
      (3)   Permits for sandwich board signs shall only be issued for the
period of April 1 through October 31. Sandwich board signs shall be prohibited
between November 1 and March 31. A new permit shall be applied for each year.
      (4)   All sandwich board signs must be stored indoors at the close of the
business each day.
      (5)   Sandwich board signs shall be placed on private property whenever
possible. In the event that placement on public property is necessary, the
applicant must obtain permission from the Director of the Department of
Economic Development, or their designee, to occupy the easement, right-of-way,
or other public area, which permission may be rescinded in the discretion of
the director.
      (6)   Sign owners, lessees, and manufacturers shall be liable for any and
all claims, injuries, or damages that arise from placement of a sandwich board
sign on public property.
      (7)   A permit for a sandwich board sign shall be revoked whenever the
sign becomes an eyesore, a nuisance, or is neglected.
      (8)   A temporary sign that meets the same height and width restrictions
as sandwich board signs under this subsection may also be used. Such temporary
signs shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as sandwich board signs
under this subsection, including, but not limited to, the requirement for a
permit, indoor storage during non-business hours, seasonal restrictions, and
permission from the Director of Economic Development, or their designee, to
place such sign on public property.
         a.   Temporary signs must be weighted or anchored so that the sign is
stable, wind-proof, and not easily knocked down.
   (f)   Light or utility pole mounted vertical banners on private property.
      (1)   Maximum size: vertical banners shall be no greater than of 30
inches wide by 94 inches tall with a two-inch hemmed sleeve at the top and
bottom.
      (2)   Minimum mounting height: vertical banners shall be mounted at least
12 feet above the sidewalk or parking lot surface.
      (3)   Minimum banner fabrication standards: A brass grommet shall be
installed at the top and bottom to secure the banner with nylon tie-wraps.
Banners shall be professionally constructed of suitable outdoor material
(vinyl, sunbrella, canvas, nylon, polyester) so as to guarantee durability for
the period of installation. Suitable wind slits must be provided.
      (4)   Minimum mounting hardware standards: Pole-mounted banners shall
only be installed on hardware sufficient to meet the requirements of the
applicable construction codes.
      (5)   Prohibited location: "Over-the-street banners" shall not be
permitted except as approved for special events by city council.   
   (g)   Window signs.
      (1)   Temporary window signs.
         a.   Maximum sign area per window: a maximum opaque coverage area of
30% shall be permitted per window.
         b.   Maximum number of signs per building: three.
         c.   Maximum time permitted per sign: 30 days or less.
         d.   Doors: such signs shall not be permitted on doors.
         e.   Sign permit: not required.
      (2)   Permanent/semi-permanent window signs.
         a.   Maximum sign area per window: a maximum opaque coverage area of
30% shall be permitted per window.
            1.   Permanent window or door signs/graphics (stenciled, etched,
silk screened, hand painted, vinyl letters/images, window clings, or similar)
are permitted with maximum coverage area of 100% provided the following
standards are met:
               (i)   Any coverage beyond 30% shall have a minimum of 70% visual
light transmission (VLT).
               (ii)   Approval by the Director of the Economic Development
Department or their designee.
         b.   Maximum number of signs per window: one.
         c.   Doors: such signs shall not be permitted on doors.
         d.   Sign permit: required.
         e.   Exception: the above regulations do not apply to street numbers,
hours of operation, menus and other small accessory signs less than one square
foot in area.
      (3)   Temporary and permanent/semi- permanent window signs shall not be
permitted to be displayed in the same window.
      (4)   Window signs that are blighted, deteriorated or obsolete shall be
removed immediately.
   (h)   Temporary signs (other than temporary window signs).
      (1)   Permitted number of signs:
         a.   Each property shall be limited to a total of six signs not to
exceed a total sign area of 48 square feet (e.g., 1 double sided 6'x4' sign, 2
double sided 3'x4' signs, etc.)
         b.   Exception: for properties with road frontage in excess of 400
linear feet, an additional 48 square feet of signage is permitted not to exceed
96 square feet in total sign area. This provision does not allow for an
increase in the total number of permitted signs.
      (2)   Maximum size of individual signs:
         a.   Total sign area per face: 24 square feet.
         b.   Maximum height for ground mounted signs: six feet.
      (3)   Location and setback: Temporary signs shall not be located in
public rights-of-way and shall be set back at least three feet from the
property line.
      (4)   Installation: Temporary signs shall be securely attached to the
structure or securely anchored/weighted to the ground.
      (5)   Illumination: Sign shall not be illuminated.
      (6)   Duration: A commercial temporary sign shall be permitted for 60
consecutive days and shall be taken down no later than five days after the
event it pertains to is completed.
      (7)   Permit: A sign permit is not required.
   (i)   Temporary decorations.
      (1)   Temporary decorations, including message-casting (or projected)
signs, shall be permitted for a period of 60 consecutive days.
      (2)   Temporary decorations shall be securely attached and shall not
create a safety hazard of any kind.
      (3)   Temporary decorations shall not exceed the maximum allowable height
within the zoning district in which it is located. This regulation shall not
apply to message-casting signs.
      (4)   Only one type of temporary inflatable shall be permitted at any
location at any time.
      (5)   Temporary signs attached to temporary decorations shall be
permitted separately and in accordance with this section.
      (6)   City-sponsored temporary decorations on public property are exempt
from the requirements of the sign ordinance provided they are displayed for no
more than 60 days.
      (7)   Message-casting (or projected) signs as temporary decorations;
regulations.
         a.   Shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded so that light is
directed only onto the sign, building/structure façade, or ground.
         b.   Shall not create glare or excessively illuminate the surrounding
area, and shall not distract motorists or create a traffic hazard for either
vehicles or pedestrians.
         c.   Fixtures that produce message-casting or projected signs shall
not be aimed at adjacent streets, roads, or properties.
         d.   Shall not cause excessive glare or allow light to encroach into
surrounding properties.
         e.   Time limitation.
            1.   All message-casting signs with the projected display facing a
residential zoning district, that is within 150 feet of that district, shall
discontinue the display and shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
            2.   Message-casting or projected signs being used as temporary
decorations shall be equipped with actively functioning timer control.
      (8)   Penalty for failure to remove. Failure to timely remove any
temporary sign or temporary decoration, or failure to obtain a permit, shall be
a civil infraction subject to a fine of $200.00. Second and subsequent
violations committed within two years of a previous conviction or finding of
responsibility shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.00, a term of imprisonment not to exceed 93 days, or both, in the
discretion of the court. Nothing set forth herein shall be construed as
limiting the ability of the city to abate as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1338. Other signs.
   (a)   Flags.
      (1)   Flags may either be attached to a ground-mounted flagpole or
affixed to a building. Flagpoles may not exceed the height of buildings
permitted in the zoning district.
      (2)   Flags, whether ground mounted or wall mounted, shall be grouped in
a single area of the site or building.
   (b)   Historic markers. Historical signs and markers shall be aesthetically
attractive and recognizable by the citizenry as associated with historical
subject matter. Signs and markers shall be at least 18 inches wide and 24
inches high and rectangular in shape. Larger sizes shall be permitted depending
on the text and location. All signs and markers shall be made of metal to
ensure a long life and shall be metal post mounted or wall mounted. All signs
and markers, with the exception of approved bronze plaques, shall be enameled
or vinyl coated a deep brown color. Lettering shall be in a cream or black
color. Uniformity of size, material and color are desirable characteristics to
be considered by the Historical Commission in reviewing applications hereunder.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18)
Sec. 5-1339. Banners on rights-of-way.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow the city and city
authorities permitted by law, including but not limited to the Downtown
Development Authority (DDA) and Warren and Dix-Vernor Corridor Authority, to
promote city and authority sponsored events or activities.
   (b)   Eligibility. Banners may display corporate logos or similar
endorsements as long as they do not occupy a total of more than ten percent of
the banner size.
   (c)   Regulations. The Director of Public Works, or his designee, may
regulate the installation and maintenance the banners, and impose any other
conditions in the interest of the appearance of the street, as well as traffic
and pedestrian safety, that are consistent with this article and the city’s
Code of Ordinances and Zoning Ordinance.
   (d)   Banner requirements. Vertical (utility pole) mounted banners shall
conform to the city's existing brackets and shall have a dimension of 30 inches
wide by 94 inches tall with a two inch hemmed sleeve at the top and bottom. A
brass grommet shall be installed at the top and bottom to secure the banner
with nylon tie-wraps. Banners shall be professionally constructed of suitable
outdoor material (vinyl, sunbrella, canvas, nylon, polyester) so as to
guarantee durability for the period installation. Suitable wind slits must be
provided. Banners must not interfere with any traffic control devices,
streetlights or streetlight controls and shall be mounted at least 12 feet
above the sidewalk surface. Banners proposed for installation on bridge/
overpass railings will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
   (e)   Installation requirements. The permittee shall be solely responsible
for the installation, maintenance and removal of the banners. To guarantee
safety and minimize interference with traffic flow, all installation work shall
be performed between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays, or during daylight
hours on weekends. Pole-mounted banners may only be installed on fiberglass
banner rods attached to poles by metal brackets. Only a contractor that is
licensed and bonded to work in the city right-of-way may perform installations.
Proper safety procedures and temporary traffic control devices must be used
during the installation. A detailed schedule of banner installation must be
submitted to the Director of Public Works at least seven days in advance of the
proposed installation date. The director may require revisions to the schedule
for purposes of safety, traffic flow or other reasons. After approval of the
schedule by the director, any changes proposed by the permittee must be
communicated immediately to the director and shall not be implemented until
further approvals are obtained.
   The city will not install, maintain or remove banners except that if the
permittee fails to comply with the requirements of this section, the city may
abate any non-compliant banners and impose costs and fees as provided in
subsection (n). In addition, the permittee will not be allowed to apply for
banner permits in the future.
   The city will not provide any facilities for the storage of banners awaiting
installation, or for equipment used in the installation process.
   (f)   Utility pole/streetlight damage liability. The permittee shall be
responsible for all costs to repair damage to utility poles, streetlights or
other facilities, caused during installation, occupancy or removal of banners.
   (g)   Duration of banner installations. Permits will not be issued for
installation of banners for periods in excess of 90 days. Banners promoting
events or activities must be removed within seven days of the conclusion of the
event or activity.
   (h)   Insurance. The permittee shall furnish insurance as specified. An
insurance carrier must be licensed to do business in the State of Michigan.
Insurance must be provided on a comprehensive form to include the following:
      (1)   General liability insurance: Occurrence policy with a limit of not
less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. The
following endorsements must be included:
         a.   Products/completed operations.
         b.   Contractual liability.
         c.   Personal injury.
      (2)   Workers compensation insurance as required by State of Michigan
law.
         a.   Michigan Statutory coverage.
         b.   Employers Liability: $500,000.00.
      (3)   Auto liability coverage of $1,000,000.00 for all owned, scheduled,
hired or non-owned vehicles.
   (i)   Application deadlines. All permit applications must be submitted at
least 60 days prior to the desired date of installation of the banners. This
period is necessary to complete coordination efforts between the city and other
affected organizations, such as the Michigan Department of Transportation
(MDOT), Wayne County and utility companies.
   (j)   Application procedures. The applicant must complete the city's banner
application and submit it to the Director of Public Works. The application
requires certain information, including:
      (1)   The purpose of the organization, as well as the event or activity;
      (2)   Dates and times during which the banners will be installed,
displayed and removed;
      (3)   Dates and times of the event or activity (if applicable);
      (4)   Location and number of banners with specific utility pole/street
light pole locations;
      (5)   Color sample of the banner's design and content, as well as details
of construction and materials;
      (6)   Deposit in the form of a check payable to the City of Dearborn (see
subsection (l)).
   (k)   Application processing. Applications will be accepted on a "first-
come, first-served" basis. In the event of dual and competing requests, the
application with the earliest postmark shall be given priority, unless one of
the applicants has received prior approval from the city, in which case that
applicant will retain the first right of refusal. The city reserves the right
to deny applications that are incomplete, do not meet the requirements of this
policy, or represent an unreasonable burden on the city's resources.
   (l)   Deposit. Upon submission of the permit application, the permittee
shall provide a refundable deposit of $300 to cover costs to the city in the
event of the permittee's non-compliance with this policy. The deposit will be
refunded if the permit request is denied, the permittee has complied with all
requirements of this policy, including removal of the banners by the stated
removal date and after inspection by the city determines that no significant
damages to poles, brackets, rods or other facilities has occurred as a result
of the banner installation, occupancy and removal, or the permittee does not
proceed with installation of the banners.
   (m)   Fees. Within seven days of permit approval, the permittee shall
provide to the city a fee of $100, plus $10 per banner. Such fees shall only
cover the period for which the banner permits is granted and shall not be
applied to any subsequent permits or permit renewals. The program fee is
required to cover the costs of administering the banner permit program, minor
maintenance, and repair to facilities resulting from the installation,
occupancy and removal of the banners. If, after approval of the permit
application, the permittee does not proceed with the banner installation, the
program fee shall be refunded, less $50, to cover the city's administrative
costs.
   (n)   Maintenance. Throughout the display period, the permittee shall
inspect the banners and brackets and make repairs or adjustments as required to
guarantee safety and proper appearance. If the city notifies the permittee of a
maintenance requirement, the permittee shall complete the necessary repairs or
adjustments within 24 hours. Failure to complete such corrective action within
the 24-hour period shall result in the city initiating action to perform the
corrections and billing all costs, plus an administrative fee of $500, to the
permittee.
   (o)   Permits and requirements of other agencies and utilities. The majority
of the utility and streetlight poles located in the city are located within the
rights-of-way of MDOT and Wayne County. In addition, DTE Entergy, MDOT or the
county owns most of these facilities. Each of these organizations requires
specific permits to occupy the rights-of-way and to attach to their facilities.
These organizations will not issue banner permits to individuals or
organizations, only to the local unit of government (city). These requirements
place specific burdens on the city in terms of coordination, application
processes and liability. The city may require that the banner permittee pay for
costs associated with these efforts. Such costs shall be determined by the city
in advance of approval of the permit application. The applicant may withdraw
the application if these costs are not acceptable. In such cases, the
applicant's deposit and the program fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1340. Penalties for violation.
   (a)   Penalties.
      (1)   Violation of any provision of this article by any person, firm,
corporation, partnership, owner, agent or lessee shall be a civil infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, plus any costs imposed by the
court, except where a specific penalty is otherwise provided. Increased fines
shall be imposed for repeat violations of this section by any person, agent,
partnership, corporation, association, company, or business.
         a.   As used in this section, repeat violation means a violation
committed within six (6) months of an admission or determination of
responsibility for a violation of this article committed by the same person,
agent, partnership, corporation, association, company, or business.
         b.   The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil
fine of $1,000.00, plus any costs imposed by the court.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided under this section, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article shall be deemed to be a new and separate offense for each day that
the condition continues to exist.
      (3)   In addition to any penalty provided under this section, the city
may seek injunctive relief, abate the condition as a nuisance, revoke any
permit or license, and/or seek any other available remedy provided by law.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22;
Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1341.   Appeals.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, interpretation or order
regarding this Article may appeal to the Building Board of Appeals, which board
is hereby empowered and authorized to hear and consider such an appeal. Such
appeal shall be taken within ten days after the decision, ruling interpretation
or order complained of by filing with the Director of the Department of
Economic Development, or their designee, a written notice of appeal directed to
the board, specifying the grounds thereof and the relief prayed for. The
director shall transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon
which the decision, ruling, interpretation or order appealed from has been
taken.
   (b)   The appeal procedure in this article is intended to provide limited
relief from the requirements of this article in cases where a strict
application of a particular requirement shall create an unnecessary hardship
affecting a substantial property right. This procedure is intended to address
extraordinary, exceptional or unique situations that were not caused by an act
or omission of the applicant or the applicant's predecessor in title, employee,
or agent. Relief is not to be granted merely on the basis of inconvenience or
financial burden.
   (c)   Variances. A variance from the requirements of this article may be
allowed only in cases where there is evidence of practical difficulty. In this
case all of the following criteria shall be met. Increased costs in complying
with the requirements of this article shall not be considered a basis for
granting a variance.
      (1)   Exceptional circumstances or conditions: There are exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district or neighboring
area, such as lot shape, abutting property issues, motorist safety or scale of
building or lot frontage;
      (2)   Substantial property right: A variance is necessary to preserve a
substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the
same zoning district;
      (3)   Not self-created: The immediate practical difficulty causing the
need for the variance was not created by the applicant or any other person
having an interest in the sign, sign structure, or property;
      (4)   No substantial detriment: Granting the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare, be injurious to other properties or
improvements, endanger public safety or substantially impair property values in
the area;
      (5)   Master Plan, zoning ordinance or this article: A variance will be
consistent with, and will not materially impair, the spirit and intent of the
City Master Plan, zoning ordinance, or this article.
   (d)   The Building Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is an error in any interpretation, requirement, decision or
determination in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(Ord. No. 17-1569, - -17; Ord. No. 18-1621, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 22-1733, 1-25-22;
Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Sec. 5-1342.   Severability.
   Should any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph, or section of this article be
held invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of the article shall
remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 23-1804, 1-9-24)
Secs. 5-1343—5-1355. Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-1356. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Appeal means a request for review of the director of building and safety's
interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance
from the provisions.
   Applicant means the owner, agent or legal representatives of property for
which and by whom an application for a development permit is made.
   Area of shallow flooding means a designed AO zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). In this area, the base flood depths range from one to three
feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain subject to a
one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as determined by
the flood insurance study, or as may be determined in flood hazard studies
conducted subsequent to the flood insurance study.
   Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year as determined by the flood insurance study, or as
may be determined in flood hazard studies conducted subsequent to the flood
insurance study. For the purposes of this article, this shall be considered the
"100 year flood."
   Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate
within an area of special flood hazard, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home
park for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads, and the construction of streets) are completed before the effective date
of floodplain management regulations adopted May 6, 1996.
   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete
pads, or the construction of streets).
   Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
   Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map on which the federal
insurance administration has delineated the areas of special flood hazards.
   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the federal
insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
   Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that contains flood profiles, as well as the flood
hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood
applicable to the city.
   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation to more than one-tenth
foot.
   Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A
floor used only for storage purposes shall be excluded from this definition.
   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term manufactured home does
not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
   Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
or land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   New construction means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of this article.
   Openings in enclosures below a structure's lowest floor for all new
construction and substantial improvement, fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
   Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages, or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not par of the main structure.
   Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
   Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of
the structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure, either before the improvement or repair is started, or,
if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either any project or improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; nor any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state or
local inventory of historic places.
   Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which
permits construction in a manner which would otherwise be prohibited by this
article.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1357. - Rules of construction.
   The following rules of construction apply to the provisions of this article:
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
      (3)   The phrase "used for" may include "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for."
      (4)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the
conjunction "and," "or," "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as
follows:
         a.   "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
         b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         c.   "Either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply single but not in combination.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1358. - Statutory authorization.
   This article is adopted to secure the public health, welfare and safety
under the combined authority of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1909 (Home Rule Cities; MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended; Act
No. 167 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (Flood Plain Control Act), an
amendment to Act No. 245 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1929 (Water Resource
Commission Act; MCL 323.1 et seq., MSA 3.521 et seq.); The National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended; and the Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1358.5. - Code appendix enforced.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix
G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced within the City of Dearborn
by the city engineer.
(Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12)
Sec. 5-1359. - Findings of fact.
   (a)   The flood hazard areas of the city may be subject to periodic
inundation which results in the potential loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (b)   These potential flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains and floodways causing increases in flood heights
and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damages land uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1360. - Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions
in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of specific flood hazard;
      (6)   Ensure that the public has access to information indicating the
location of land areas which may be subject to periodic flooding;
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;
      (8)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future blight
areas;
      (9)   Preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base
flood; and
      (10)   Preserve and protect the natural resources and wildlife of the
floodplain, and to enhance the recreational, educational and aesthetic values
of the floodplain.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1361. - Methods of reducing flood losses.
   In order to accomplish its purpose, this article encourages methods of
providing for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water and erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1362. - Lands to which this article applies.
   This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1363. - Designation of regulated flood prone areas.
   (a)   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) Entitled "Wayne County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated October
21, 2021, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of
26163C0233E, 26163C0234E, 26163C0241E, 26163C0242E, 26163C0253E, 26163C0255E,
26163C0261E, 26163C0262E, 26163C0263E, 26163C0264E, effective February 2, 2012,
and 26163CIND1C, and 26163C0270G, effective October 21, 2021, are adopted by
reference for administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to
be a part of this article, of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and
to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the
Michigan Residential Code. The flood insurance study is on file at the city
clerk's office, and is available for inspection by the public at all times
during normal business hours.
   (b)   Flood hazard areas additional to those areas described in the flood
insurance study may exist in the city. The location of these areas shall be
designated by the city engineer using the best available floodplain data.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 21-1717, 9-14-21)
Sec. 5-1364. - Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1365. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another Code provision conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1366. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 5-1367. - Administrator designated.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the City
of Dearborn, by its city engineer, is hereby designated as the enforcing agency
to discharge the responsibility of the City of Dearborn under Act 230, of the
Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Dearborn
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
through out the corporate limits of the community adopting this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12)
Sec. 5-1368. - Duties and responsibilities.
   Duties of the city engineer shall include but not be limited to those given
in this section. The city engineer shall:
      (1)   Review all permits to assure that the permit requirements of this
article have been satisfied.
      (2)   Advise permittees that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that
copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development
permit.
      (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the state flood control coordinator
at the state development office prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
      (4)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
      (5)   Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
new or substantially improved structures.
      (6)   Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) to which the new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      (7)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect to
verify such floodproofing design.
      (8)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this article.
      (9)   Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article,
which shall be maintained in his office, and shall be open for public
inspection.
      (10)   Promulgate other such administrative procedures as is required to
fully implement the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12)
Sec. 5-1369. - Establishment of development permit.
   (a)   A flood hazard area development permit shall be required in
conformance with the provisions of this article. Application of such permit
shall be on forms furnished by the city engineer. The application shall supply
all information required on the form. In addition to the aforestated, the
following information shall be provided on a site plan for the subject
property. Such site plan shall accompany the application form.
      (1)   The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures.
      (2)   The elevation in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) to which the structure has been floodproofed.
      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria established in this article.
      (4)   The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
   (b)   In addition, application for a permit to occupy or alter the
floodplain or channel of a watercourse must be submitted to and approved by the
department of natural resources as required by Act No. 245 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1929 (MCL 323.1 et seq., MSA 3.521 et seq.), as amended. Any
proposed stream modifications require approval from the department of natural
resources as well as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under a joint permit
required by Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 281.951 et
seq., MSA 11.475(1) et seq.), as amended, and Section 404 or Public Law 92-500.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12)
Sec. 5-1370. - Fees.
   All necessary permit application required by this article shall be
accompanied by an application fee. Such fees shall be established or modified
by the city engineer.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12)
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS
Sec. 5-1371. - General standards.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (4)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      (5)   New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (6)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (7)   Any substantial improvement to a structure on which the start of
construction was begun after the effective date of this article shall meet the
requirements of the flood damage prevention program.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1372. - Residential construction.
   New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure in
all areas of special flood hazard shall either have the lowest floor, including
the basement, elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation or be
floodproofed so that the structure is watertight and capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied may be required.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1373. - Nonresidential construction.
   New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure in all areas of special flood hazard shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the director of building and safety.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1374. - Manufactured homes.
   (a)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved with R-
A and R-B districts shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section.
   (b)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors.
Specific requirements shall be that:
      (1)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations.
Mobile homes less than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side;
      (2)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
      (3)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds; and
      (4)   Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
   (c)   New manufactured home parks and subdivisions; expansions to existing
manufactured home parks and subdivisions; existing manufactured home parks and
subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has
commenced; and manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home park or
subdivision require:
      (1)   All manufactured homes placed on stands or lots elevated on
compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
will be above the base flood level;
      (2)   Provision of adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler; and
      (3)   In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots large enough to
permit steps, piling foundations placed in stable soil no more than ten feet
apart, and reinforcement provided for pilings more than six feet above the
ground level.
      (4)   This paragraph applies to manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision. This paragraph does not apply to manufactured homes to be placed
or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park of subdivision
except where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair, construction or improvement has
commenced.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1375. - Floodways.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be prohibited unless certification by
a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If subsection (1) above is satisfied, then all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
      (3)   The placement of any manufactured homes, except in an existing
manufactured home park, shall be prohibited.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1376. - Subdivision proposals.
   (a)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (b)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (c)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1377. - Accessory structures and uses.
   (a)   Within the flood hazard area, no accessory structure shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses and only in a manner consistent
with the requirements of permitted uses and accessory structures in the
underlying district, and with those that follow.
   (b)   Within the special flood hazard area, the following accessory
structures may be constructed below the base flood elevation:
      (1)   Garages, sheds, swimming pools, outdoor play equipment and
aboveground patios, providing each of the following are met:
         a.   The structure would not cause an increase in water surface
elevation, obstruct flow or reduce the impoundment capacity of floodplain.
         b.   No structure shall be constructed within the floodway.
         c.   All equipment and structures shall be anchored to prevent
flotation and lateral movement.
         d.   All equipment and structures shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage.
         e.   All structures shall be constructed to minimize flood damage.
         f.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designated and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURE
Sec. 5-1378. - Appeal board and jurisdiction.
   (a)   The building board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals and
request for variances from the requirements of this article.
   (b)   The building board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made
by the director of building and safety in the enforcement or administration of
this article.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1379. - Relevant factors and standards.
   The building board of appeals, when considering an appeal or request for
variance, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in this article, state and federal requirements, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental service during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96)
Sec. 5-1380. - Record of appeal actions.
   The city engineer shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report
any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
(Ord. No. 96-680, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 12-1347, 1-24-12)
ARTICLE XIV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 5-1381. - Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code.
   A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Dearborn, being marked and designated as the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted in its entirety
along with any subsequent amendments as the property maintenance code for the
city for the control of nonresidential buildings and structures, and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
above are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this article.
(Ord. No. 10-1289, 9-7-10)
Sec. 5-1382. - Additions, insertions, and changes.
   The International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in section
5-1381 is hereby changed and amended as follows:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Dearborn, hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
      (2)   Section 103.1. General. The director of economic and community
development, or his or her designee, is designated as the enforcing agent
(hereinafter "code official") to discharge the responsibilities and enforce the
provisions of this code.
      (3)   Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services provided
by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be
established by resolution of the city council.
      (4)   Section 106.4. Violation penalties. 
   Section 106.4.1. Civil infraction. Each of the first three (3) violations of
any provision of Section
5-1381 is a civil infraction that shall result in the assessment of fines as
follows:
   (a)   The fine for any first violation shall be not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per violation, plus costs and sanctions.
   (b)   The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two
years, been found in violation of once before, shall be not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation, plus costs and sanctions.
   (c)   The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two
years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation, plus costs and sanctions.
   Section 106.4.2. Misdemeanor. For any violation which the violator has,
within the past two years, been found in violation of at least three or more
times before, the violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days per violation, or to both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
   Section 106.4.2. Separate violation for each day. A separate violation shall
be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or
continues.
      (5)   Sections 110.1 through 110.4 , inclusive, are hereby deleted in
their entirety and the following new section 110.1 is added:
      (6)   Section 110.1. Demolition. It is unlawful for any owner or agent
thereof to keep or maintain any non-residential or residential dwelling,
building, structure, or part thereof that is a "dangerous building" as defined
in section
5-27(21) of this code of ordinances. Proceedings regarding "dangerous
buildings" and demolition shall follow the procedures set forth in section
5-27(21) through
5-27(27), inclusive, of this code of ordinances.
      (7)   Section 111.1. Application for appeal. Any person directly affected
by a decision of the code official, or a notice or order issued under this
code, shall have the right to appeal to the City of Dearborn Building Board of
Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day of the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim of one or more of the following: 1) that the
true intent of this code, or the rules legally adopted thereunder, have been
incorrectly interpreted; 2) that the provisions of this code do not fully
apply; 3) that the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other
means; 4) that the strict application of any requirement of this code would
cause an undue hardship; or 5) that the applicant is aged and indigent, without
the resources to comply, and that failure to correct the ordered corrections or
repairs immediately does not pose an imminent danger to the health or safety of
the occupant(s).
      (8)   Section 111.2 through 111.2.5, inclusive, are hereby deleted in
their entirety and a new section 111.2 is added to read as follows:
   Section 111.2. Membership of board. The City of Dearborn Building Board of
Appeals shall act as the appeal body under this code and shall hear all appeals
under this code, with the exception of appeals relating to dangerous buildings
and demolition, which shall be appealed to the City of Dearborn Demolition
Board of Appeals. Membership of the City of Dearborn Building Board of Appeals
shall be controlled by sections 5-27(9) and 5-27(10) of this code of
ordinances. Membership of the City of Dearborn Demolition Board of Appeals
shall be controlled by section
5-27(26) of this Code of Ordinances.
      (9)   Section 111.5. Postponed hearing. When there are not at least three
(3) members present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
      (10)   Section 111.6. Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse
the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of not less than
three members.
      (11)   Section 111.7. Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of
the board may apply to the appropriate court for a review of such decision.
Application for review shall be made to the circuit court within 20 days after
the filing of the board's decision in the office of the code official.
      (12)   Section 302.4 is hereby amended by inserting "six (6) inches" in
the first sentence.
      (13)   Section 304.14 is hereby deleted in its entirety. (See section
11-103 of this Code of Ordinances.)
      (14)   Section 602.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety. (See section
11-101 of this Code of Ordinances.)
      (15)   Section 602.4 is hereby amended by inserting the dates "October 1
to May 1."
(Ord. No. 10-1289, 9-7-10)
Sec. 5-1383. - Construction.
   The provisions of this article shall be construed, if possible, in such
manner as to make such provisions consistent with all other ordinances of the
city, including all future ordinances of the city, and all amendments thereto;
provided, however, that where any inconsistency or conflict cannot be avoided,
then the most restrictive of such inconsistent or conflicting provision shall
control and prevail.
(Ord. No. 10-1289, 9-7-10)
ARTICLE XV. MEDICAL AND RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION AND POSSESSION
Sec. 5-1384. Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to exercise the police, regulatory, and
land use powers of the city by regulating standards for the growth,
cultivation, extraction, manufacture, processing, and storage of marijuana to
the extent permissible under state and federal laws and regulations, and to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. As
such this article constitutes a public purpose.
   (b)   The city finds that the activities associated with the growing,
cultivation, extraction, manufacture, processing, and storage of marijuana are
significantly connected to the public health, safety, security, and welfare of
its citizens and it is therefore necessary to regulate and enforce building,
safety, security, fire, police, health, environmental, and sanitation practices
related to such activities and also to provide a method to defray
administrative costs incurred by such regulation and enforcement.
   (c)   It is determined necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the
city and its residents to establish standards and regulations for the growth,
cultivation, extraction, manufacture, processing, and storage of marijuana in
the city.
   (d)   Except as may be required or permitted by law or regulation, it is not
the intent of this article to diminish, abrogate, or restrict the protections
for the use of marijuana found in either the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act,
MCL 333.26421 et seq. (MMMA) or the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951et seq. (MRTMA)
   (e)   Nothing in this article, or in any companion regulatory provision
adopted in the city's Code of Ordinances or zoning regulations, is intended to
grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal
prosecution for the growth, cultivation, sale, consumption, use, distribution,
or possession of marijuana that is not in strict compliance with the MMMA or
MRTMA, applicable state and federal laws, this article, the zoning regulations,
or the City Code.
   (f)   By adopting this article and the companion regulatory provisions found
in the city's Code of Ordinance and zoning regulations, the city is not opting
into either the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL
333.2701 et seq., (MMMFLA), or the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et seq. (MRTMA).
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1385. Definitions, interpretation, and conflicts.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Any term defined by MMMA or MRTMA
(collectively referred to as “the Acts”) shall have the definition given in
that particular statute. If the definition of a word or phrase set forth in
this article conflicts with the definition for the same word or phrase in the
Acts, or if a term is not defined in this article but is defined in the Acts,
then the definition in the Acts shall apply.
   Acts. Unless otherwise stated, collectively means the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et seq., and Michigan Administrative Rules, R
333.101, et seq.
   Adult-use participant. Means an individual 21 years of age or older that
possesses, stores, and/or processes marijuana pursuant and subject to the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951et seq.
   Collective growing operations. Means medical marijuana operations where a
caregiver has possession over marijuana plants that are not connected to the
caregiver or the qualifying patients that are registered to that particular
caregiver through the Department's registration process. Collective growing is
not allowed under the Act pursuant to People v. Bylsma, 493 Mich 17; 825 NW2d
543 (2012).
   Department. Means the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs.
   Distribution. Means the physical transfer of any amount of marijuana in any
form by one person to any other person or persons, whether or not any
consideration is paid or received. At no time shall distribution include
marijuana that has been altered or combined with another controlled substance.
   Distributor. Means any person, including but not limited to a caregiver,
patient or any other person, who engages in any one or more acts of
distribution.
   Enclosed, locked facility. Means a closet, room, or other comparable,
stationary, and fully enclosed area equipped with secured locks or other
functioning security devices that permit access only by a registered caregiver
or registered qualifying patient. Enclosed, locked facility includes a motor
vehicle if both of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle is being used temporarily to transport living marijuana
plants from one location to another with the intent to permanently retain those
plants at the second location.
      (2)   An individual is not inside the vehicle unless he or she is either
the registered qualifying patient to whom the living marijuana plants belong or
the individual designated through the departmental registration process as the
primary caregiver for the registered qualifying patient.
   Marijuana. Means all the parts of the plant genus cannabis, growing or not;
the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant or its seeds or resin, including marijuana concentrate and marijuana-
infused products. For the purposes of this article, marijuana does not include:
      (1)   The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the
resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed
of the plant that is incapable of germination;
      (2)   Industrial hemp; or
       (3)   Any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or
oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
   Marijuana concentrate. Means the resin extracted from any part of the plant
of the genus cannabis.
   Medical Marijuana Caregiver Facility (“Caregiver Facility”). Means a non-
residential caregiver facility as authorized by Ord. No. 20-1682, where
registered caregivers grow, cultivate, manufacture, extract, process, store,
distribute, assist an associated qualifying patient with his or her medical use
of marijuana, and otherwise engage in the activities allowed under this
article, the city's zoning regulations, and the Act.
   Medical use of marijuana. Means the acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, extraction, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or
transportation of marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or paraphernalia
relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered
qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with
the debilitating medical condition, as defined in the Act, MCL 333.26423(h).
   Primary caregiver or caregiver. Means a person who is at least 21 years old
and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marijuana defined
under MCL 333.26423(k) of the Act, and who has been issued and possesses a
valid registry identification card under the Act.
   Principal residence. Means the one place where an owner of the property has
his or her true, fixed, and permanent home to which, whenever absent, he or she
intends to return and that shall continue as a principal residence until
another principal residence is established, pursuant to MCL 211.7dd(c).
   Qualifying patient or patient. Means a person who has been diagnosed by a
physician as having a debilitating medical condition, as defined under MCL
333.26423(l) of the Act.
   Registry identification card. Means the document issued by the Department
that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or registered
primary caregiver, as defined by the Act, MCL 333.26423(m).
   Transfer.  Means to convey, sell, give, deliver, or allow the possession by
another person or entity.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1386. General requirements for qualifying patients, primary caregivers,
and adult-use participants; general requirements for caregiver facilities;
common regulations.
   (a)   Qualifying patients. A person who has been issued and possesses a
lawful registry identification card as a qualifying patient as set forth in the
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. (hereinafter “MMMA”),
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Registry identification card for qualifying patients; personal
possession limits for qualifying patients. A qualifying patient who has been
issued and possesses a registry identification card, shall not be subject to
arrest, prosecution, or penalty for the use of marijuana in accordance with
state law, subject to the following:
         a.   Qualifying patients. The qualifying patient who has been issued
and possess a registry identification card may possess an amount of marijuana
that does not exceed 2.5 ounces of usable marijuana and marijuana equivalents,
and, if the qualifying patient has not specified that a primary caregiver be
allowed under state law to cultivate marijuana for the qualifying patient, 12
marijuana plants kept in an enclosed, locked facility pursuant to this article.
Any incidental amount of seeds, stalks, and unusable roots shall also be
allowed and shall not be included in this amount.
      (2)   Storage, growing, and processing of medical marijuana. Storage,
growing, and processing of medical marijuana by a qualifying patient shall only
occur within one enclosed, locked facility at the primary residence of the
qualifying patient or in another location specifically permitted by law or
ordinance so that storage, growing, and/or processing does not occur in
multiple locations. If the primary residence is being rented or leased by the
qualifying patient, the owner of the property may prohibit the smoking or
cultivation of marijuana if such prohibition is in the written lease.
         a.   The location of the enclosed, locked facility shall not be in an
area of the dwelling/premises where utilities are located that may be accessed
by someone other than the qualified patient.
       (3)   Access to medical marijuana limited. No person other than the
qualifying patient shall be engaged or involved in the growing, processing, or
handling of medical marijuana, except as permitted by law or ordinance for
primary caregivers.
   (b)   Primary caregivers. A person who has been issued and possesses a
lawful registry identification card as a primary caregiver as set forth in the
MMMA shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Registry identification card for primary caregivers; possession
limits. A primary caregiver who has been issued and possesses a registry
identification card shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, or penalty for
assisting a qualifying patient to whom he or she is connected through the
state's registration process with the medical use of marijuana in accordance
with state law. The privilege from arrest under this subsection applies only if
the primary caregiver presents both their registry identification card and a
valid operator's license or government-issued identification card that bears a
photographic image of the primary caregiver. This subsection applies only if
the primary caregiver possesses an amount of marijuana that does not exceed:
         a.   2.5 ounces of usable marijuana for each qualifying patient to
whom they are connected through the state's registration process; and
         b.   For each registered qualifying patient who has specified that the
primary caregiver will be allowed under state law to cultivate marijuana for
the qualifying patient, 12 marijuana plants kept in an enclosed, locked
facility; and
         c.   A primary caregiver may assist a maximum of five qualified
patients, plus the caregiver themselves, and may cultivate no more than 72
total marijuana plants; and
         d.   Any incidental amount of seeds, stalks, and unusable roots.
      (2)   Storage, growing, and processing of medical marijuana. A primary
caregiver may grow, process, and otherwise assist in the medical use of medical
marijuana in compliance with the MMMA in one enclosed, locked facility within
or upon an owner-occupied, detached single-family residential dwelling/premises
where the primary caregiver lives and which is the primary caregiver’s
principal residence pursuant to Michigan law, or in another location
specifically permitted by law or ordinance, so that storage, growing, and
processing does not occur in multiple locations.
         a.   The location of the enclosed, locked facility shall not be in an
area of the dwelling/premises where a utility or access to a utility is located
that may be accessed by someone other than the registered primary caregiver.
      (3)   Access to medical marijuana limited. No person other than the
primary caregiver shall be engaged or involved in the growing, processing,
dispensing, delivery, or handling of marijuana, except to the extent that the
primary caregiver lawfully transfers medical marijuana to a qualifying patient
to whom the primary caregiver is linked through the state registration system.
      (4)   Limits on primary caregivers and qualifying patients. No qualifying
patient shall visit, come to, or be present at the primary caregiver’s
residence to purchase, smoke, consume, obtain, or receive possession of any
marijuana. Rather, the primary caregiver must personally deliver the marijuana
to their qualifying patient. No person may deliver medical marijuana to a
qualifying patient other than the primary caregiver linked through the state
registry system to that qualifying patient.
      (5)   Other commodities, products, or services prohibited; joint
operations prohibited. The residential premises upon which a primary caregiver
cultivates medical marijuana shall not be a location at which any other
commodity, product, or service is also sold, distributed, or otherwise
available. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to
participate as a primary caregiver in a jointly operated facility where primary
caregivers jointly share building space which is used in common to dispense
medical marijuana to qualifying patients or assist qualifying patients with the
medical use of marijuana.
      (6)   Dispensaries and cooperatives prohibited. Medical marijuana
dispensaries and cooperatives are prohibited.
      (7)   Location. The proposed location for a primary caregiver must comply
with the locational requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (c)   Adult-use participants. A person 21 years or older that possesses,
stores, and/or processes marijuana in accordance with the Michigan Regulation
and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951et seq. (hereinafter “MRTMA”),
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Storage, growing, and processing of marijuana. An adult-use
participant may store, grow, and process not more than ten ounces of marijuana
and any marijuana produced by marijuana plants cultivated on their residential
premises. They may also cultivate not more than 12 marijuana plants for
personal use, provided that no more than 12 marijuana plants are possessed,
cultivated, or processed on the premises at once.
      (2)   Access to marijuana limited. Any marijuana in excess of 2.5 ounces
within the person's place of residence must be stored in a container or area
equipped with locks or other functioning security devices that restrict access
to the contents of the container or area. In addition, marijuana plants must be
cultivated in an enclosed area equipped with locks or other functioning devices
that restrict access to the area.
   (d)   Caregiver facilities; new facilities prohibited; permit and
certificate of occupancy required.
      (1)   New facilities prohibited. On the effective date of this article,
no new facilities will be allowed to operate pursuant to this subsection, and
no facilities may move their location within the city or expand their
operations. Only those facilities that have been issued a permit pursuant to
this subsection or its precursor ordinance (Ord. No. 20-1682) on the effective
date of this article will be allowed to operate pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this article, and shall be considered legal non- conformities
that must adhere to the applicable regulations for non- conforming structures
found in the City's Zoning Ordinance.
      This subsection does not prohibit registered primary caregivers from
cultivating medical marijuana in accordance with the MMMA and the provisions of
this article and Zoning Ordinance Sec.
7.03.
      (2)   Permit and certificate of occupancy required. Only primary
caregivers with a valid state-issued registry identification card may assist
with a qualifying patient's medical use of marijuana in the city, and no
registered caregivers shall be allowed to assist with a qualified patient's
medical use of marijuana pursuant to this subsection without first obtaining
the necessary inspections, paying the required fees, and obtaining the needed
permit(s), and certificate(s) of occupancy as provided in this subsection, the
Code of Ordinances, and the Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   Inspections. Each caregiver facility is required to submit to an
annual inspection by the building official or their designee, fire department,
and any other applicable local and/or state officials. In addition,
intermediate inspections may occur if deemed necessary by the building
official, fire department, or their designees, and fees for annual or
intermediate inspections shall be assessed as provided in the city's Code of
Ordinances.
      (4)   A primary caregiver may only grow, cultivate, extract, manufacture,
process, store, distribute, and/or otherwise assist a connected qualifying
patient with his or her medical use of marijuana in an industrial district for
not more than five qualifying patients and the primary caregiver only, subject
to the following general conditions:
         a.   A primary caregiver under this subsection may only grow,
cultivate, extract, manufacture, process, store, distribute, and/or otherwise
assist an associated qualifying patient with their medical use of marijuana
pursuant to this subsection and the applicable zoning regulations;
         b.   No marijuana may be sold or offered for sale on the premises,
except as is produced on the premises by the primary caregiver for the
qualifying patient or patients only;
         c.   The activity shall not generate noise or odors offensive to the
surrounding area;
      (5)   Change of information and duty to inform. The owner of a caregiver
facility is responsible for notifying the director of the department of
economic development, or their designee, [or the building official or their
designee] if there is a change of information regarding any of the following:
         a.   The number of registered caregivers at a particular facility
changes from the information provided in the application for a caregiver
certificate or application for renewal.
         b.   There is a change in the configuration of the facility that would
require a commercial renovation or re-occupancy permit.
         c.   Notice of a change of information must be provided in writing, by
either first-class mail or hand-delivery, to the Director of the Department of
Economic Development within ten (10) business days of becoming known.
      (6)   Leases. All lease or rental agreements between the owner of a
building, structure, facility, or premises being used for the activities
authorized under this article and a lessee, and/or between the owner or lessor
and the registered caregivers engaged in the activities authorized under this
article within that building, structure, facility, or premises, shall include a
provision in the lease or rental agreement that prohibits “collective growing
operations” as that term is defined in this article.
         a.   Copies of these lease agreements shall be provided to the
director of the department of economic development, the city's zoning
administrator, and the city's corporation counsel within ten days of the lease
or agreement being signed by all parties to the agreement.
         b.   No assistance with the medical use of marijuana may take place in
any building, facility, or premises in the city where a lease or rental
agreement is in effect unless and until a copy of the agreement is provided to
the city under the terms of this article.
         c.   If any changes are made to the terms of an existing lease or
agreement, a copy of the amended lease or agreement must be provided to the
city's corporation counsel within ten days of the amended lease or agreement
being signed by all parties to the agreement.
         d.   Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection is a
violation of this article, and may result in the suspension or revocation of
all applicable permits and certificates of occupancy, in addition to all other
penalties permitted under this article.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1387. Common regulations for qualifying patients, primary caregivers,
adult-use participants, and caregiver facilities.
   In addition to these common regulations, site development standards for
marijuana and medical marijuana home occupations can be found in Section
7.03 of the City's Zoning Ordinance.
   (a)   Modification of residential dwelling for marijuana related purposes.
Any modifications to the dwelling made for the purpose of cultivating medical
marijuana shall comply with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical,
and fire safety code requirements, including all requisite permit applications
and related inspections.
   (b)   Enclosed, locked facility. All medical marijuana cultivation, growing,
and manufacturing, must occur within an enclosed, locked facility permitted
under this article, the Code of Ordinances, and the City's zoning regulations,
and such activities, with the exception of transportation as allowed in this
article the Act, can occur only in locations not visible to the public and
adjoining uses.
   (c)   Collective growing prohibited. A primary caregiver may only grow,
cultivate, manufacture, extract, deliver, transfer, store, distribute, and/or
otherwise assist an associated qualifying patient with his or her medical use
of marijuana within an “enclosed, locked facility,” as that term is defined in
this article and the MMMA. If more than one caregiver will be growing, storing,
manufacturing, cultivating, distributing, or otherwise assisting an associated
qualifying patient with their medical use of marijuana in a single building,
collective growing operations are strictly prohibited. To avoid collective
growing operations each primary caregiver may only engage in the medical use of
marijuana described in the MMMA and this article in a separate enclosed and
locked sub-facility within the overall building or facility that is equipped
with security features that make it accessible only by a single, particular
primary caregiver or the qualifying patients connected to that particular
caregiver.
   (d)   Signs not allowed. No sign in the form of a device, structure,
fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed
specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying a particular
dwelling or property as being associated with the use or cultivation of medical
marijuana.
   (e)   Noise, vibration, glare, light, fumes, odor, and electrical
interference. No equipment or process shall be used in growing, processing, or
handling marijuana which creates noise, vibration, glare, light, fumes, or
electrical interference detectable to the normal senses at or beyond the
property line of the qualifying patient's or adult-use participant's
residential property. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or
process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference with any
radio, television, or similar receiver off the premises or causes fluctuation
of line voltage off the premises.
   (f)   Odor control measures. If it is determined by the city upon inspection
or complaint that odors related to the growth, cultivation, storage,
processing, extraction, or manufacture of marijuana are escaping unabated
beyond the property line of the premises, the owner or occupant of the
residential dwelling or structure shall install a ventilation system or unit(s)
designed to prevent such emission of odors beyond the property line. Such
system must comply with all relevant code regulations and shall be subject to
review, inspection and approval by the relevant city department(s) as
determined by the building official or their designee.
      (1)   Ventilation controls required for caregiver facilities. All
caregiver facilities within the city must have a ventilation system or unit(s)
to prevent the emission of odors from escaping beyond the property line of the
facility or premises. Such system must comply with all relevant code
regulations and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the relevant
city department as determined by the building official or their designee.
   (g)   Compliance for medical use of marijuana. The medical use of marijuana
shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., the Administrative Rules, R 333.101 et
seq., and this article.
   (h)   Inspections and permits. All necessary inspections and permits must be
obtained for any alterations of any portion of the building in support of or in
association with the cultivation of marijuana.
      (1)   A primary caregiver assisting with the medical use of marijuana
under the provision of this article and the MMMA must present their valid
state-issued registry identification card during any inspection upon request.
   (i)   Storage of chemicals. The storage of any chemicals such as herbicides,
pesticides, and fertilizers, are subject to inspection and approval by the fire
department, the building official, their designees, and/or other applicable
local and/or state officials.
   (j)   Modifications. Any modifications to the dwelling unit made for the
purpose of cultivating marijuana must comply with all applicable building,
electrical, mechanical, and fire safety code requirements, including all
requisite permit applications and related inspections.
   (k)   Butane extraction prohibited. The separation of plant resin from a
marijuana plant by butane extraction or any other method that utilizes a
substance with a flashpoint below 100 degrees Fahrenheit in any public place, a
motor vehicle, inside a residential dwelling, or the curtilage of a residential
dwelling is prohibited.
   (l)   Compliance for existing growers. Residential properties within the
city that are being utilized for growing, cultivating, harvesting, and/or
storing of marijuana on the effective date of this section must come into
compliance with the provisions of this article, the City's Zoning Ordinance,
and all applicable code requirements within 180 days of the effective date of
this article.
   (m)   Medical marijuana presumption. There shall be a presumption that a
qualifying patient or primary caregiver is engaged in the medical use of
marijuana in accordance with the MMMA and this article if the qualifying
patient or primary caregiver:
      (1)   Is in possession of a registry identification card; and
      (2)   Is in possession of an amount of marijuana that does not exceed the
amount allowed under the MMMA or this section. The presumption may be rebutted
by evidence that conduct related to marijuana was not for the purpose of
alleviating the qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the debilitating medical condition, in accordance with this
article.
   (n)   Presumed responsible party. The owner of the property, as identified
by the city's property tax rolls, shall be presumed to be the party responsible
for compliance with the registration and regulatory requirements of this
article.
   (o)   Compliance with state law. All individuals engaged in the lawful
possession of marijuana pursuant to the provisions of this article shall also
comply with all applicable provisions of state law, including the MMMA and
MRTMA.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1388. Location registration; certificate of occupancy required;
application; de factor status for existing caregiver facilities; inspection;
other requirements; disqualification, suspension, or revocation; reservation of
authority.
   (a)   Registration required; certificate of occupancy. No cultivation,
manufacture, extraction, growing, or cultivation of medical marijuana shall be
lawful at a location within the city until the location has been registered
under this article and issued a certificate of occupancy. Once a certificate of
occupancy has been issued the property shall be added to a registry list.
      (1)   Exception. Registration is not required for the principal residence
or homestead of a qualifying patient or adult-use participant where marijuana
is cultivated for such patient's or participant's personal use.
   (b)   De facto registration for caregiver facilities; responsibility of
facility owner. Facilities that have been issued a permit pursuant to this
article or its precursor ordinance (Ord. No. 20-1682) on the effective date of
this article, and otherwise meet the requirements to operate under this
article, will be considered registered pursuant to this article. The
registration fee required under this subsection shall be waived.
      (1)   As a condition of their de facto registration status, and in
addition to the responsibilities of previously noted in this article, a
facility owner shall have a continuing responsibility under this article to
ensure that any primary caregiver assisting with the medical use of marijuana
within the owner's facility has a valid state-issued registry identification
card.
   (c)   Effect of registration.
      (1)   Registration does not prohibit prosecution by the city, state, or
federal government for violations of applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes.
      (2)   Compliance with city ordinances and state statutes, including the
MMMA and MRTMA, if applicable, is a condition of acceptance and maintenance of
registration status, and a registration may be suspended for cause pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
       (3)   Suspension of a certificate of compliance is not an exclusive
remedy and nothing contained herein is intended to limit the city's ability to
prosecute code violations that may have been the cause of the suspension or any
other code violations not protected by the Act.
   (d)   Application for registration for caregivers in residential dwellings.
Subject to the exceptions in this section, the owner of a residential dwelling
being used for the medical use of marijuana shall submit a registration form to
the director of the department of economic development or their designee. The
registration form shall be on a form approved by the director, and shall
require the emergency and non-emergency contact information for the owner of
the property and a proxy in the event of the owner's lack of availability
during an emergency. The completed registration form must be accompanied by the
following:
      (1)   A photocopy of the front of the current and valid caregiver
registry card issued by the state to the person who is permitted to grow,
cultivate, harvest, and store medical marijuana and who will be doing so at the
registered location. Upon expiration of the card, the registration form shall
be updated and a new copy of the renewed card shall be provided to the director
of the department of economic development, or their designee.
      (2)   A floor plan, with dimensions, illustrating the enclosed and locked
location in the building where marijuana will be grown, cultivated, harvested,
processed, and stored, and detailing the security measures related to that
location and the building.
      (3)   Specification of the number of qualifying patients for whom
marijuana will or may be grown, cultivated, harvested, and stored.
      (4)   Details regarding electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and any other
code- related improvements and installations or facilities that will be used
for growing, cultivating, harvesting, and storing the marijuana.
      (5)   Any additional information that the fire marshal, building
official, or their designees deem necessary for evaluating code compliance and
public safety associated with the proposed growing, cultivating, harvesting,
and storing of marijuana at the registered location in the manner proposed in
the registration materials.
      (6)   Payment of a non-refundable registration fee of $250.
   (e)   Review. Upon receipt of all required documents, information, and
payment, the director of the department of economic development, or their
designee, shall circulate the documents and information to the building
official, fire marshal, or their designees, for review. If, after review, the
building official and/or fire marshal, or their designees, require any
additional information relating to security measures, fire safety, code
compliance, or compliance with this article, the property owners shall be
advised in writing of the additional information required and the owner shall
provide such information before any growing, cultivation, harvesting, or
storage of marijuana may occur at the proposed location.
   (f)   List of registered properties; notice of approval. The director of the
department of economic development, or their designee, shall maintain a list of
approved registered caregiver properties, and will provide a copy of this list,
along with any updated lists, to the chief of police and any other department
that is deemed appropriate by the director.
   (g)   Annual inspection; certificate of compliance renewal; qualified
patient list; entry for inspection; duty to update information.
      (1)   Annual inspection. Each caregiver and caregiver facility is
required to submit to an annual inspection of their property and caregiving
location by the building official, fire marshal, and/or their designees, or
more frequently if determined to be necessary. Upon successful completion of
all inspections and the issuance of all required Permits, the director of the
department of economic development, or their designee, shall issue a
registration certificate for the property, which shall be prominently and
conspicuously displayed on or within the enclosed, locked facility approved
during the review process and where medical marijuana will be grown,
cultivated, harvested, and/or stored.
      (2)   Annual renewal and re-inspection. Annual inspections are required
for a renewal of a certificate of compliance.
      (3)   Qualified patient list. A primary caregiver must maintain a list of
their qualifying patients by registration number with the state. This list is
subject to inspection during inspections conducted pursuant to this article. At
no time shall the city copy or retain a copy of this list.
      (4)   Entry for inspection. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the
owner of a residential dwelling or structure, or a caregiver facility, from
denying entry. However, nothing shall prevent the fire marshal, building
official, or their designees from asking permission from an owner for
permission to inspect.
         a.   In the event an owner denies entry for an inspection, nothing in
this article shall prohibit the fire marshal, building official, or their
designees from seeking an administrative search warrant based on probable cause
to conduct an inspection pursuant to this article or the Acts.
         b.   Refusal to allow an inspection under this subsection is
considered a violation of this article if an inspection is refused after an
administrative search warrant is obtained.
   (h)   Change of information and duty to inform. A registered caregiver is
responsible for notifying the director of the department of economic
development, or their designee, [or the building official or their designee] if
there is a change of information regarding any of the following:
      (1)   Validity of registry identification card as a primary caregiver.
      (2)   The number of qualifying patients for whom marijuana will or may be
grown, cultivated, harvested, and stored.
      (3)   Change in the configuration of the enclosed, locked facility on the
premises where marijuana is being grown, cultivated, harvested, and stored.
      (4)   Any information contained in the registration application.
      (5)   Notice of a change of information must be provided in writing, by
either first-class mail or hand-delivery, to the director of the department of
economic development within ten business days of becoming known.
   (i)   Grounds for suspension or revocation of registry status. The director
of the department of economic development may issue a written notice of
suspension or revocation of registry status if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The applicant has knowingly or recklessly allowed two or more
violations of the regulations of this article or the applicable regulations in
Chapter 13 of this Code in the preceding 12-month period and the violations
have been adjudicated;
      (2)   The applicant has knowingly or recklessly allowed a nuisance, as
defined under the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, MCL 600.3801, to be
maintained upon the premises;
      (3)   The subject premises has existing violations of building, zoning,
plumbing, mechanical, electrical, health, nuisance, or fire prevention codes;
      (4)   The applicant has knowingly or recklessly operated the facility
during a period of time when the certificate was suspended; and/or
      (5)   The applicant has knowingly or recklessly engaged in illegal
activity or allowed any illegal activity to occur in or on the certified
premises that violate the regulations of this article, the Zoning Ordinance,
state or local law, or applicable code requirement.
   (j)   Effect of appeal of conviction. The fact that any relevant conviction
in violation of this article is being appealed shall have no effect on the
revocation or suspension.
   (k)   Reservation of authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
this article, no applicant has a right to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or a certificate of compliance. The city hereby reserves the right to
determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to such a certificate, based on the
objective criteria listed in this article and the Zoning Ordinance which
relates to concerns for public health, safety, and welfare as identified
herein.
   (l)   Confidentiality. Information treated as confidential under the MMMA
that is received by the city, including all information provided to the city
pursuant to this section, shall be deemed confidential due to the
confidentiality requirements of the MMMA. It shall not be distributed or
otherwise made available to the public unless required by law or court order.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1389. Enforcement.
   (a)   Notice of violation. If a violation or condition(s) causing or
contributing to a violation of this article is discovered, a notice of
violation shall be issued. Such notice shall inform the owner or occupant of
the nature of the violation, and require the owner or operator of the facility
to eliminate and correct the violation or condition(s) causing or contributing
to the violation within 14 days of notification.
   (b)   Violation and penalty. Failure to correct a violation within the time
permitted after receiving notice under subsection (a) of this section shall
constitute a violation of this article. Unless another penalty found in local,
state, or federal law applies to the particular violation, a person who
violates this article is responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a
fine of $1,000.00, plus any additional conditions imposed by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (c)   Repeat violation. An increased fine schedule shall be imposed for
repeat violations of this article. As used in this section, “repeat violation”
means a violation committed within 90 days of an admission or determination of
responsibility for a violation of this article occurring upon the same
property. The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine of
$2,500.00, plus any additional costs and/or conditions imposed by the court.
   (d)   Other penalties. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit
the city from imposing other penalties authorized by the City's Code of
Ordinances, including nuisance violations and any other legal action in a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1390. Appeals.
   (a)   Appeals of administrative interpretations and decisions from
regulations within the Code of Ordinances or this article shall be made to the
building board of appeals.
      (1)   Exceptions. The following are exempt from the appeal provisions
outlined in this section:
         a.   Any provision or regulation found in this article that is also
contained in the MMMA and/or MRTMA cannot be appealed.
         b.   Any appeal from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,
including any regulations found in this article that are also found in the
Zoning Ordinance, shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
Section
32.05 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   Application for appeal. An application for appeal shall be made within
20 days after the decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order complained
of by filing with the Building Official and the board a written notice of
appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal and the relief sought, and paying a
filing fee. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim of one or more
of the following:
      (1)   That the true intent of the regulations within the Code of
Ordinances or this article have been incorrectly interpreted;
      (2)   That the provisions of the regulations within the Code of
Ordinances or this article do not fully apply;
      (3)   That the requirements of the Code of Ordinances or this article are
adequately satisfied by other means;
      (4)   That the strict application of any requirements of the Code of
Ordinances or this article would cause an undue hardship; or
      (5)   That the applicant is aged and indigent, without the resources to
comply, and that failure to correct the ordered corrections or repairs
immediately does not pose an imminent danger to the health or safety of the
occupant(s).
   (c)   Scope and procedure of appeal; variances. The appeal procedure is
intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this article in
cases where a strict application of a particular requirement shall create an
unnecessary hardship affecting a substantial property right. This procedure is
intended to address extraordinary, exceptional, or unique situations that were
not caused by an act or omission of the applicant or the applicant's
predecessor in title, employee, or agent. Relief is not to be granted merely on
the basis of inconvenience or financial burden.
   Subject to the exceptions found in this section, a variance from the
requirements of this article may be allowed only in cases where there is
evidence of practical difficulty. Increased costs in complying with the
requirements of this article shall not be considered a basis for granting a
variance. In this case, all of the following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Exceptional circumstances or conditions. There are exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district or neighboring
area, such as lot shape, abutting property issues, motorist safety, or scale of
building or lot frontage.
      (2)   Substantial property right. A variance is necessary to preserve a
substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the
same zoning district.
      (3)   Not self-created. The immediate practical difficulty causing the
need for the variance was not created by the applicant or any other person
having an interest in the sign, sign structure, or property.
      (4)   No substantial detriment. Granting the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare, be injurious to other properties or
improvements, endanger public safety or substantially impair property values in
the area.
      (5)   Master Plan, zoning ordinance, or this article. A variance will be
consistent with, and will not materially impair, the spirit and intent of the
City Master Plan, zoning ordinance, or this article.
   (d)   Hearing before the Building Board of Appeals. At the hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order should be modified or
withdrawn.
   (e)   Action by Building Board of Appeals. After hearing, the building board
of appeals shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the decision, ruling,
interpretation, notice, or order, depending upon its findings to whether the
provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the board sustains or modifies such
decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order, it shall be deemed to be an
order.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-1391. No vested rights.
   A property owner shall not be deemed to have any vested rights or
nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with
the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 22-1782, 12-14-22)
Chapter 6 - CABLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Federal law reference— Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
Cross reference— CATV Franchise, Appendix.
State Law reference— Consent for construction in rights-of-way by cable
television companies required from municipalities, MCL 247.183, MSA 9.263.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Cable television or cable communications shall mean any communications
system which distributes cablecast or broadcast programs, pay programs or other
services by means of coaxial cable or other state-of-the-art equipment
installed on, over or under the public right-of-way.
   Commission shall mean the Dearborn Telecommunications Commission.
   Premium television shall mean a show, channel or service for which a
separate fee is charged such as pay television, or security service.
   Upstream shall mean signals travelling from subscribers to the headend or
electronic control center.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.2, 4-7-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 6-2. - Exception.
   This chapter shall not apply to any cable communications system in operation
in the city on April 7, 1981.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 5.1, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-3. - Franchise required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a cable television or
cable communications system within the city, unless authorized by a valid grant
of franchise.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.3, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-4. - Manner of issuance of franchise.
   No grant of franchise shall be valid unless authorized by ordinance adopted
by the city council and until a franchise agreement has been executed by the
mayor and filed with the city clerk. The council may, by resolutions, authorize
the mayor to execute agreements to extend a franchise for periods of less than
one year.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.4, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-5. - Suspension, revocation of franchise.
   (a)   The city council may suspend or revoke the franchise of any cable
television or cable communications system for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, upon the recommendation of the commission.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any cable television
or cable communication system in the city to collect subscriber fees for any
period of time when the franchise has been suspended or revoked by the city
council. The city may bring action on behalf of itself or subscribers to
recover any such fees collected.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 4, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-6. - Local representative, telephone required.
   All persons owning or operating a cable television or cable communications
system within the city shall designate a local representative, operate a local
business office within the corporate limits of the city and shall have a
publicly listed telephone.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.5, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-7. - Emergency override system.
   All cable television or cable communications systems operated within the
city shall include emergency override operation which shall permit the mayor or
his designee to override all audio and visual signals simultaneously in the
case of emergencies, as determined by the mayor. The city shall conduct monthly
tests of the emergency override operation.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.6, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-8. - Conflict of interest.
   Any person owning or operating a franchised cable television or cable
communications system in the city is specifically prohibited from recommending
a particular manufacturer, sales or service establishment, or engaging in the
sale, service, rental, leasing of television receivers, radio receivers, or
television or radio receiver related parts and accessories anywhere in Wayne,
Oakland or Macomb counties. Such owner or operator shall prohibit its officers,
agents, and employees from violating the terms of this section, whether in the
performance of cable system duties or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.7, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-9. - Protection of subscriber's privacy.
   All subscriber information shall be deemed private. It shall be unlawful for
any person owning or operating any cable television or cable communication
system in the city to publish, sell, distribute, trade or in any way
disseminate subscriber names, addresses, phone numbers, cable services or any
other subscriber information without the express written consent of the
subscriber. Such consent shall be obtained separately from any other document,
shall be effective no longer than one year, and shall describe the specific
intended use for which the consent is solicited.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.8, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-10. - Monitoring, etc., device restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any cable television or
cable communications systems in the city to install any monitoring device,
polling device or reverse (upstream) transmission device without the written
consent of the subscriber.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.9, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-11. - Map, plats of system to be filed.
   The owner or operator of all franchise cable television or cable
communications systems operating in the city shall file with the city engineer
and the department of communications, annually, during construction years, and
every two years thereafter, a current map and subsidiary plats showing the
exact location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment of
the system.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.10, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-12. - Services to be offered without discrimination.
   Every cable television or cable communications system operated in the city
shall offer service to all subscribers without discrimination as to rates,
policies, facilities or service within subscriber classifications. This section
shall not prohibit promotional campaigns, prepayment discounts, bona fide
system employee discounts, or service without charge to educational and
governmental facilities and buildings. This section shall not prohibit
classification discounts permitted by a franchise ordinance.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.11, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-13. - Disconnection fees prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of cable television or
cable communication systems within the city to charge any fee for the
disconnection of service.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.12, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-14. - Maintenance of facilities, equipment.
   All facilities and equipment of any franchised cable television or cable
communications system operating in the city shall be constructed and maintained
at a state-of-the-art level in accordance with the requirements and
specifications of the National Electrical Code, the rules and regulations of
the Federal Communication Commission, the standards of the National Association
of Broadcasters, the standards of the National Association of Cable Television
Broadcasters and all other pertinent ordinances and codes of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 1.13, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-15. - Discontinuance of nonpremium service restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any cable television or
communications system in the city to discontinue nonpremium service for a
subscriber arrearage of less than two months duration without the consent of
the subscriber, the commission, or without first securing a judgment against
the subscriber.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.1, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-16. - Entry on private property restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any cable television or
communications systems in the city to enter upon private land or buildings
without due process of law, including hearing, or without the consent of the
owner or holder. Consent for entry shall not be elicited as part of any
subscription agreement or application.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.2, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-17. - Defense against suit for collection of subscriber fees.
   Violation by a franchisee of one or more of the provisions of this chapter
shall be a lawful defense to any suit by the franchisee for the collection of
unpaid subscriber fees.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.3, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-18. - Record of complaints, etc.
   All complaints, service requests and subscriber inquiries regarding the
accuracy, fairness or legality of billings shall be recorded in written or
printed form by the operator of all cable television or cable communication
systems operating within the city. Such records shall include the date and time
received and the date and time completed along with all service, corrective
action or other disposition actions.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.4, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-19. - Retention of records.
   All billing, revenue, service and complaint records of all cable television
or cable communication systems operating within the city shall be maintained by
such operators for no less than five years after the year of origin, shall be
made available to the city for inspection at a place within the city and for
such time as the city shall request.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.5, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-20. - Copies of complaints, pleadings.
   All franchised cable television and cable communications owners or operators
shall submit, within 30 days of filing, a copy of all complaints and all
pleadings filed by such owner or operator in every suit or action arising from
operation of any system in the city to the commission.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.6, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-21. - Unauthorized connections to system.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any physical connection to any
franchised cable television or cable communication system operating in the city
that is not authorized by the operator of such system.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.7, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-22. - Interference with system.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully damage, destroy, remove,
obstruct or interfere with any part of any franchise cable television or cable
communication system operating in the city.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.8, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-23. - Prohibited modification of equipment.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any modification to system
equipment or to any system-connected equipment so as to induce any
uncompensated franchised cable television or cable communications system
service or level of service for which the operator has established compensation
rates.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 3.9, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-24. - Cable television rate regulations.
   (a)   The city adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications
Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable
Television Service) of chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations
regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and
associated equipment, as amended.
   (b)   After a cable operator has submitted for review its existing rates for
the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in
these rates, the city clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and
costs giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable
opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of
the city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours.
   (c)   The city adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR § 0.459
regarding confidential business information submitted by a cable operator in a
rate regulations proceeding.
   (d)   A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a
rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall
be subject to a monetary forfeiture not to exceed $25,000.00 for each violation
of each day of a continuing violation not to exceed $250,000.00, as determined
by the city following the procedures set forth in 47 USC §§ 503(2)(D), (3)(A)
and (B), (4)(A), (B) and (C) which the city adopts by reference.
   (e)   A copy of the rules and procedures adopted by reference in this
section shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public
inspection and copying during normal business hours.
   (f)   In the event of a conflict between this section and a cable television
franchise, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 93-573, §§ 1—6, 11-3-93)
Secs. 6-25—6-45. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION
Sec. 6-46. - Established.
   There is hereby established the Dearborn Telecommunications Commission which
shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city
council for a term of three years. The first appointments to the commission
shall be three commissioners each for one-year, two-year and three-year terms,
as designated by the mayor. One person appointed to the commission shall have
technical television or communications experience, and one person appointed to
the commission shall have television programming experience.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.1, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-47. - Quorum.
   A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum. Five votes shall be required for commission action.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.2, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-48. - Staff support, administration.
   The director of the research and information department shall provide staff
support and shall be charged with the day-to-day administration of the business
of the commission.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.3, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-49. - Meetings, rules.
   The commission shall adopt a schedule of meetings, shall adopt rules for the
orderly conduct of business and shall annually elect officers.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.4, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-50. - Powers, duties generally.
   The commission shall administer all cable television and cable
communications franchises on behalf of the city; shall establish operational
standards; shall review and make recommendation after public hearing upon any
application for increase in cable system fees or charges; shall review and make
recommendation upon any proposal for any new franchise, for the renewal of any
franchise, and for any new cable system services. The commission shall also
establish and/or review and approve all rules governing local access, content
and programming, and shall approve franchise system policies.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.5, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-51. - Recommendations.
   Recommendations of the commission shall be addressed to the mayor and city
council and shall be filed with the city clerk. Recommendations for new
franchises, renewals or extensions of existing franchises, and proposals for
new services for which a subscriber fee is charged shall require council
action.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.6, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-52. - Manner of granting, extending franchise.
   The city council shall grant or award franchises and renewals thereof by
ordinance. Extensions of franchises for periods of less than one year may be
authorized by resolution. Proposals for any new cable system services may be
approved by resolution authorizing the mayor to execute an addendum to the
franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.7, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-53. - Rate, fee increases.
   Recommendations for the grant or denial of any cable system rate or fee
increase shall only be made after public hearing by the commission upon the
application for rate increase. Such recommendations will be automatically
adopted 60 days after the filing of the recommendation with the city clerk.
Such recommendations shall be final unless a new public hearing before the city
council upon the rate or fee increase is requested by the franchisee, the mayor
or two members of the city council. If such hearing is requested, the increase
shall not automatically be effective but shall abide council action. At public
hearing before the city council, the council may adopt or reverse the
recommendation of the commission, in whole or in part, or may remand, in whole
or in part, to the commission for rehearing or reconsideration.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.8, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-54. - Appeal from commission action.
   The commission's decisions, rulings or adoptions of operational standards;
rules governing local access, content, and programming; and franchise policies
may be appealed to the city council by any party or person aggrieved thereby.
The council may uphold or reverse the ruling or decision or may remand to the
commission for rehearing or reconsideration.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.9, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-55. - Furtherance of local interests.
   The commission is authorized in the name of the city, with the approval of
the city council, to administer gifts, grants, trusts, scholarships and
donations; to allocate funds for local programming, educational and
governmental cable applications, and for related purposes fostering community
origination, local programming and training.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.10, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-56. - Franchisee participation at meetings.
   At the request of the commission, the designated local representative of any
franchised cable system shall attend and respond at any meeting of the
commission. All franchised cable systems shall also submit a written annual
report to the commission, including such topics as programming finances,
technical matters and future directions of the company.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.11, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-57. - Annual report.
   The commission shall submit an annual, written report to the mayor and to
the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.12, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-58. - Annual budget.
   The commission shall submit an annual, written budget to the mayor and city
council.
(Ord. No. 81-17, § 2.13, 4-7-81)
Sec. 6-59. - Sanctions, penalties.
   (a)   The city council may suspend or revoke the franchise of any cable
television or cable communications system for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter upon the recommendation of the city
telecommunications commission.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any cable television
or cable communication system in the city to collect subscriber fees for any
period of time when the franchise has been suspended or revoked by the city
council. The city may bring action on behalf of itself or subscribers to
recover any such fees collected.
   (c)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as prescribed in section
1-9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-17, §§ 4.1—4.3, 4-7-81)
Secs. 6-60—6-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 6-71. - Short title.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the Dearborn
Telecommunications Systems Regulatory Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.1, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.1, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.1, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-72. - Definitions.
   Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions of terms shall apply
throughout this article:
   Cable service means the one-way transmission to customers of (i) video
programming, or (ii) other programming service, and customer interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or
other programming service. The definition of cable service contained in section
602 of the Cable Act is incorporated by reference. Any service to residential
customers shall be subject to council approval, which shall not be unreasonably
withheld or delayed. Specifically excluded are common carrier or other non-
cable television telecommunications services and any leasing of system capacity
to users who provide telecommunications services directly or indirectly to
customers.
   Cable system shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple customers within a community and
used to provide cable service pursuant to and in accordance with a franchise,
including all network facilities such as cables, conduits, access manholes,
rights-of-way, equipment, devices and appurtenances to be used by grantee to
make the cable system network fully operational. The definition of cable system
contained in section 602 of the Cable Act is incorporated by reference.
Specifically excluded are non-cable television telecommunications systems and
any leasing of system capacity or fibers to users who provide
telecommunications services directly or indirectly to customers.
   City shall mean the City of Dearborn.
   Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Dearborn.
   Customer is any person who contracts with a grantee for, or is in any manner
provided with telecommunications service or cable service.
   Franchise is a non-exclusive, limited authorization awarded by ordinance for
the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system or
cable system on, under, over or across the public ways of the city and/or to
transact local telecommunications or cable television business therein.
   Grantee is any holder of a telecommunications system franchise granted
pursuant to this article. Telecommunications systems franchises for cable
systems and services and/or telecommunications systems and services, as defined
in this article may be granted under this article.
   Person shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership or any other
entity.
   Telecommunications service means the provision or offering of
telecommunications service (either directly or as a carrier for others) to
persons within the city by means of the telecommunications system. Specifically
excluded are telecommunications services or cable services subject to
regulation under the Cable Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. S 521, et seq. as amended
("Cable Act"). Any service to residential customers shall be subject to council
approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
   Telecommunications system means the telecommunications network to be
constructed and installed by grantee and used to provide telecommunications
service pursuant to and in accordance with a franchise, including all network
facilities such as cables, conduits, access manholes, rights-of-way, equipment,
devices and appurtenances to be used by grantee to make the telecommunications
network fully operational. Specifically excluded are telecommunications systems
or cable systems subject to regulation under the Cable Act.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.2, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.2, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.2, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-73. - Franchise required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, service, use, transmit over or
operate a telecommunications system or cable system within the city unless
authorized by a valid grant of franchise.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.3, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.3, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.3, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-74. - Granting of franchises.
   The city may grant one or more franchises for telecommunications systems or
cable systems in the city subject to this article. The city specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a
telecommunications system or cable system as it deems appropriate. Additional
franchises shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate or damage any
rights previously granted to any other grantee.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.4, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.4, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.4, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-75. - Authorization by ordinance.
   No grant of franchise shall be valid unless authorized by ordinance adopted
by the council and until a franchise agreement has been executed by the mayor
and filed with the city clerk. The mayor is authorized to execute agreements to
extend a franchise for a period of one year or less.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.5, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.5, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.5, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-76. - Business office.
   All persons owning or operating a telecommunications system or cable system
within the city shall designate a local representative, operate a local
business office within the greater Detroit Metropolitan area, and shall have a
publicly-listed telephone.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.6, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.6, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.6, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-77. - Filing of current map and subsidiary plats.
   The owner(s) or operator(s) of all franchised telecommunications systems or
cable systems operating in the city shall file with the city engineer and the
department of communications annually during a construction year and every two
years thereafter, a current map and subsidiary plats showing the exact location
of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment of the system in
the public right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.7, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.7, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.7, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-78. - Construction and maintenance of equipment.
   All facilities and equipment of any franchised telecommunications system or
cable system operating in the city shall be constructed and maintained at a
state-of-the-art level in accordance with the applicable requirements and
specifications of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City of
Dearborn, the applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communication
Commission, and all other pertinent ordinances and codes of the city.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.8, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.8, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.8, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-79. - Compensation to city.
   The franchise agreement required by section
6-75 may contain such terms and conditions, including, without limitation,
compensation to the city for use of rights-of-way and provision by the grantee
of telecommunications or cable services and facilities to the city, as public
interest may require, subject to the limitations of any applicable federal,
state or local law.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.9, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.9, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.9, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-80. - Franchise fee.
   In recognition of the unique character of telecommunications franchises, a
franchise fee shall be determined through a negotiated franchise fee procedure
based upon the value of services for similar agreements and other pertinent
factors.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.10, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.10, 8-1-95; Ord. No.
97-696, § 1.10, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-81. - Transfer of franchise.
   Any franchise granted by the city hereunder is to be held in personal trust
by the grantee and may not be sold, transferred, assumed or assigned in any
manner either directly or indirectly, without the prior written consent of the
council.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 1.11, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 1.11, 8-1-95; Ord. No.
97-696, § 1.11, 2-18-97)
Secs. 6-82—6-90. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS
Sec. 6-91. - Administration and review of franchises.
   The Dearborn Department of Communications (the "department of
communications") shall administer all telecommunications and cable television
franchises on behalf of the city; shall review and make recommendations upon
any proposal for any amendment of an existing franchise, any new franchise and
for the renewal of any franchise.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 2.1, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 2.1, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 2.1, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-92. - Recommendations.
   Recommendations of the department of communications shall be addressed to
the mayor and council and shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 2.2, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 2.2, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 2.2, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-93. - Appeal of rulings.
   The department of communications decisions, rulings or adoptions of
operational standards and franchise policies may be appealed to the council by
any party or person aggrieved thereby. The council may uphold or reverse the
ruling or decision or may remand to the department of communications for
rehearing or reconsideration.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 2.3, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 2.3, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 2.3, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-94. - Local representative.
   At the request of the department of communications, the designated local
representative of any franchised telecommunications system or cable system
shall attend and respond at any meeting called by the department of
communications provided, however, that such representative is given reasonable
notice prior to the meeting.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 2.4, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 2.4, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 2.4, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-95. - Advisory commission.
   The mayor shall appoint an advisory commission (Dearborn Telecommunications
Commission) to advise the city and council on matters related to
telecommunications systems franchises. The commission shall be organized as
follows:
      (1)   The commission shall be made up of seven members, appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the council.
      (2)   The term of office for each commissioner shall be two years. For
the first appointments, the term of office for three commissioners shall be one
year and the term of office for the remaining four commissioners shall be two
years.
      (3)   The purpose of the commission will be to advise the mayor and
council and hold public hearings on issues including rate setting proceedings,
revocation proceedings, renewal proceedings and any other purposes as
designated by the mayor.
(Ord. No. 97-696, § 2.5, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-96. - Administer gifts, grants, etc.
   The Dearborn Telecommunications Commission is authorized in the name of the
city, with the approval of the city council, to administer gifts, grants,
trusts, scholarships and donations for local programming, educational and
governmental cable applications and for related purposes fostering community
origination, local programming and training.
(Ord. No. 97-696, § 2.5, 2-18-97)
Secs. 6-97—6-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - SANCTIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 6-101. - Suspension or revocation.
   The council may revoke any franchise of any telecommunications system or
cable system for violation of any of the material provisions of this article
and/or any telecommunications systems franchise ordinance upon the
recommendation of the department of communications, provided, however, that
grantee is given written notice of the violation and a reasonable opportunity
to cure the same. The time for cure shall be for such period as may be
reasonably necessary to correct the violation as determined by the department
of communications.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 3.1, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 3.1, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 1.1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 97-696, § 3.1, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-102. - Collection of fees when franchise suspended or revoked.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any telecommunications
system or cable system in the city to collect customer fees for any period of
time when its franchise has been revoked by the council. The city may bring
action on behalf of itself or customers to recover any such fees collected.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 3.2, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 3.2, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 3.2, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-103. - Entering private land or buildings.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any telecommunications
system or cable system in the city to enter upon private land or buildings
without due process of law including notice and hearing or without the consent
of the owner or possessor except as allowed by applicable state and federal
laws.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 3.3, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 3.3, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 3.3, 2-18-97)
Sec. 6-104. - Violation.
   Violation of any provisions of this article and/or any Telecommunications
Systems Franchise Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day of a continuing violation may be charged and
punished as a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § 3.4, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 95-644, § 3.4, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 97-
696, § 3.4, 2-18-97)
Secs. 6-105—6-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - METROPOLITAN FIBER SYSTEMS OF DETROIT, INC. FRANCHISE
Sec. 6-121. - Granting of franchise.
   (a)   The City of Dearborn grants Metropolitan Fiber Systems of Detroit,
Inc, hereafter called MFS, a nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a telecommunications system within the corporate boundaries of the
City of Dearborn for a term of 15 years from the date of execution of this
franchise agreement.
   (b)   Any franchise and the rights, privileges, authority, and
responsibilities established shall take effect and be in force from the date of
execution of this franchise agreement only if within 30 days after the date of
the granting of the franchise, MFS files with the Mayor of the City of Dearborn
its acceptance of the franchise terms, all required letters of credit,
construction bonds and insurance certificates, and pays to the city clerk all
reasonable costs incurred by the city in preparing, considering and awarding
this franchise, including legal, engineering, technical, publication and other
expenses, said costs not to exceed $2,500.00. If MFS fails to timely comply
with this section, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or authority
whatsoever.
   (c)   This franchise is subject to all of the provisions of the Dearborn
Telecommunications Systems Regulatory Ordinance.
   (d)   Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions of terms shall
apply throughout this article:
   City means the City of Dearborn.
   Council means the City Council of the City of Dearborn.
   Customer means any person who contracts with MFS for, or is in any manner
provided with telecommunications system service.
   Department of communications means the City of Dearborn Department of
Communications.
   Franchise means a nonexclusive, limited authorization awarded by ordinance
for the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system
on, under, over or across the public ways of the city and/or to transact local
telecommunications business therein.
   Gross revenues means all of the revenue, as determined in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, that is derived from the installation
and operation of the telecommunications system within the city.
   Person means any individual, corporation, partnership or any other entity.
   Service means the provision or offering of special access or private line
telecommunications service (either directly or as a carrier for others) to
persons within the city by means of the telecommunications system. Specifically
excluded are telecommunications services subject to regulation under the Cable
Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq. as amended ("Cable Act") as well as home
residential service. Any expansion of service to residential customers shall be
subject to council approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or
delayed.
   Telecommunications system means the telecommunications network to be
constructed and installed by MFS and used to provide service pursuant to and in
accordance with this franchise, including all network facilities such as
cables, conduits, access manholes, rights-of-way, equipment, devices and
appurtenances to be used by MFS to make the telecommunications network fully
operational. Specifically excluded are telecommunications systems subject to
regulation under the Cable Act.
   (e)   No installation of any telecommunications system facility shall be
performed or conducted in the city unless plans therefor shall have been first
submitted to the city engineer and a construction permit issued therefor.
Within nine months after the date MFS accepts the terms of this franchise, MFS
shall complete construction of the backbone route for the telecommunications
system. MFS shall have the ability to perform lateral construction in order to
provide service to additional buildings any time during the term of this
franchise.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § I, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-122. - Franchise fee payments.
   (a)   MFS shall annually pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal
to three percent of the gross revenues received by MFS. Payments due the city
under the terms of this section shall be paid quarterly on or before the last
day of January, April, July and October of each year.
   (b)   The city shall be furnished a certificate with each payment reflecting
the computations for the period covered by the payment. Any payment shall bear
interest at the prime rate plus one percent after the due date. The estimated
initial payment shall be $3,000.00 for the franchise.
   (c)   Franchise fees shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee, or
payment due the city by MFS which are imposed on all businesses operating in
the city.
   (d)   Not less than annually, MFS shall provide the city with an opinion as
to the accuracy of the franchise fee payments paid within the preceding 12
months. Said certifications shall be prepared internally by MFS in accordance
with generally accepted accounting standards as established by the financial
accounting standards board (FASB) and shall be kept confidential by the city.
The city reserves the right, upon reasonable notice to MFS, to audit all books
and records of MFS necessary to determine compliance with the terms of this
franchise at least three times during the term. The city shall pay for all
costs and expenses associated with any such audit.
   (e)   In the event that MFS is granted rights to place fiber optic cable in
and upon public roads, rights-of-way and easements of, and/or to transact local
telecommunications business in, another municipality with less than 500,000
people within the tri-county area of Wayne, Macomb and Oakland Counties,
pursuant to compensation terms which would, if applied to the city, result in
MFS paying a higher percentage of revenue than required under this franchise,
the city shall have the option to replace the percentage of revenue payable
hereunder with the percentage applicable to MFS in that municipality. The city
shall notify MFS in writing of its election to accept such alternative terms.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall retain all rights available to it
under law.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § II, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-123. - New developments.
   (a)   The city may amend this article from time to time, to allow MFS to
innovate and implement new services and expansion of its telecommunications
system backbone network or to impose any terms allowed by law which are applied
uniformly to all telecommunication carriers.
   (b)   The department of communications may require interconnection to the
telecommunications system or services for emergency communications.
   (c)   In addition to those matters required in this franchise, MFS shall
make the following express representations:
      (1)   MFS shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any
loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any of the lawful provisions or
requirements of this article or because of the enforcement thereof by city,
unless caused by the gross negligence or willful or intentional misconduct of
the city or its agents, employees or representatives. MFS expressly
acknowledges that on accepting a franchise it did so relying on its own
investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city.
   By acceptance of a franchise, MFS acknowledges that it has not been induced
to enter into a franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement,
whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of city or by any other third person
concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed in this
article.
      (2)   MFS further acknowledges by the acceptance of this franchise that
it has carefully read the terms and conditions herein, and is willing to and
does accept all of the risks of the meanings of such terms and conditions.
   (d)   MFS shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the
state and federal government or any administrative agency. However, if any such
state or federal law or regulation shall require MFS to perform any service, or
shall permit MFS to perform any service, or shall prohibit MFS from performing
any service, in conflict with the terms of this franchise or of any law or
regulation of the city then as soon as possible, MFS shall notify the city of
the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the
laws and regulations of the city or the franchise.
   (e)   If any provision of this franchise is held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule
or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law, rule or
regulation, said provision may be considered a separate, distinct and
independent part of the franchise, and such holding shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of all other provisions. In the event that such
law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or
otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or
modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules or regulations, said
provision shall return to full force and effect and shall be binding on the
parties.
   (f)   If a material provision of this franchise is affected by action of a
court or of the state or federal government, it may be modified to such
reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose
of this franchise provided the intent and purpose of the franchise is not
contravention of any law, regulation or order of a court.
   (g)   MFS agrees not to unreasonably oppose intervention by the city in any
suit or proceeding related to this article to which MFS is a party. MFS agrees
to abide by all provisions of this article and its franchise and further agrees
that it shall not make any claim against the city that the provisions of this
article or franchise are unreasonable, arbitrary or void, without having a
reasonable basis in the law.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § III, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-124. - Liability.
   (a)   MFS shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless the city, its
officers, agents, employees, departments and boards from any and all claims,
losses, liabilities, causes of action demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings,
and expenses of any nature (including without limitation reasonable attorneys
fees) arising out of, or resulting from the acts or omission of MFS, its
officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors or assignees, unless such
claims are caused by the gross negligence or intentional or willful misconduct
of the city.
   (b)   MFS shall carry worker's compensation insurance with statutory limits
and employer's liability insurance with limits of no less than $100,000.00
which shall cover all operations to be performed for construction, maintenance
and operation of the telecommunications system.
   (c)   MFS shall carry comprehensive general liability, including completed
operations, independent contractors, and contractual liability coverage, and
comprehensive automobile liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not
less than $500,000.00 per person and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence which shall
cover all operations. MFS shall also carry property damage liability insurance
with limits of not less than $500,000.00.
   (d)   MFS shall furnish certificates of such insurance to the city. The
certificates shall be approved by the corporation counsel of the city, shall
list the city as an additional insured, and shall provide that the insurance
shall not be canceled or materially changed unless 30 days prior written notice
shall be given to the city.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § IV, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-125. - General capability.
   (a)   In furtherance of the general policy that the services provided be
innovative and modern, MFS, in the exercise of its reasonable business
judgment, will actively pursue a continuous policy of incorporating new
technical developments into the system to reflect the "state of the art." City
may waive this requirement at its discretion.
   (b)   MFS shall provide four fibers ("city's fibers") for the use of the
city throughout its entire telecommunications system in the city and shall
provide 10,000 feet of four fiber cable to the city. This fiber and cable shall
become the property of the city and remain so throughout the duration of this
franchise. Upon expiration of this franchise, said fiber and cable shall remain
the property of the city. MFS shall connect up to four fibers to the city's
fibers at up to a maximum of six splice locations. The city's use of these
fibers shall be limited to its exclusive, internal telecommunications use and
shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred to or by third parties.
   (c)   In the event that the city wishes to utilize any services of the
telecommunications system, MFS agrees to provide those services to the city at
the lowest rate that it charges any of its commercial customers for comparable
services.
   (d)   During construction of any part of the telecommunications system, if
MFS installs conduit in the public right-of-way within the city, then MFS
shall, at the same time, install one 1¼-inch conduit for the use of the city,
provided, however that such use shall be limited to the city's exclusive,
internal telecommunications use and shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred
to or by third parties.
   (e)   In the event of an emergency or other urgent community need, MFS
shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities to the city for
the duration of the emergency at no charge.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § V, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-126. - Conditions of street occupancy.
   (a)   The poles, wires, and appurtenances of MFS' system shall be located,
erected, and maintained upon existing utility facilities wherever reasonable
and feasible. MFS shall use underground equipment in all cases where all other
utilities are required to use underground equipment and in all cases where city
ordinance requires underground installation.
   (b)   MFS shall be allowed, subject to appropriate regulation, to set its
own poles, anchors, guys, and similar facilities within public rights-of-way
within the city when necessary and upon the securing of permits from the city.
   (c)   All facilities erected by MFS within the city shall be so located as
to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public rights-of-way and
public places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience
of adjoining property owners.
   (d)   In case of disturbance or damage to any street, sidewalk, alley,
public way, street sign or other public property, MFS shall at its own expense
promptly and in a manner acceptable to the city, replace, repair, and otherwise
restore such disturbance or damage.
   (e)   MFS shall act diligently and without delay to repair, regardless of
time of day, any safety hazard that occurs involving MFS' equipment and plant.
   (f)   If, at any time during the term of this franchise, the city shall
properly elect to undertake public building or construction, altering the
grade, alignment, or location of any street, sidewalk, alley, or public way MFS
promptly shall, upon reasonable written notice from the city, remove and
relocate its facilities at MFS' expense in a manner reasonably acceptable to
the city. The city shall use its best efforts to find MFS a suitable relocation
for its facilities. In the event of emergency, the city may sever, disrupt,
dig-up or otherwise destroy facilities of MFS using its best efforts to notify
MFS prior to performing such work whenever practicable. Repairs to MFS'
equipment and facilities shall be done at MFS' expense.
   (g)   MFS shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain industry standards and services for preventing failures and accidents
which would cause damage, injuries, or nuisance to the public.
   (h)   Prior to the installation of any portion of the telecommunications
system, MFS is responsible for obtaining all applicable permits and approvals
from the city, Wayne County, State of Michigan and any other parties with
control of that portion of the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § VI, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-127. - Technical and construction standards.
   (a)   MFS shall construct, install and maintain its telecommunications
system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical
standards established by the Federal Communications Commission or state agency.
Upon request by the city, MFS shall provide to the city written reports of MFS'
performance tests conducted pursuant to such state or federal standards and
requirements.
   (b)   MFS shall at all times comply with the National Electrical Safety Code
(National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National Bureau of
Fire Underwriters); applicable federal, state and local regulations; and other
applicable codes and ordinances of the city.
   (c)   In any event, the telecommunications system shall not endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city or other areas
where MFS may have equipment located.
   (d)   All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring
during construction of the telecommunications system shall comply with the
standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
   (e)   Construction, installation and maintenance of a telecommunications
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close
coordination with public and private utilities serving the city following
accepted industry construction procedures and practices and working through
existing committees and organizations.
   (f)   All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
consideration.
   (g)   MFS shall develop an adequate preventive maintenance policy and shall
file it with the department of communications.
   (h)   MFS shall develop an adequate customer service policy and repair/
maintenance standards and shall file it with the department of communications.
   (i)   MFS shall immediately join the Miss Dig Program.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § VII, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-128. - Maps, records and reports.
   (a)   MFS shall provide to the city, prior to start of construction,
complete plans for the initial build out of the telecommunications system for
approval by the appropriate city departments.
   (b)   MFS annually shall file with the city clerk a copy of its annual
financial reports when such reports are completed by MFS and ready for
distribution.
   (c)   MFS shall submit to the city such other information reports either
electronically or in such other form and at such times as the city may
reasonably request.
   (d)   Subject to federal, state and local laws and regulations, MFS shall
keep open books and records. The city shall have the right to inspect at any
time during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, performance
test results and other like materials of MFS which relate to the operation of
the telecommunications system. All requested books or records, or copies
thereof, shall be provided to the city at the department of communications
within a reasonable time after the initial request.
   (e)   MFS shall allow the city to make inspections of any of MFS' facilities
and equipment at any time upon receiving prior written notice.
   (f)   All records, reports required under this section, except as otherwise
provided, to be provided to the city shall be available for public inspection
in the city clerk's office during normal business hours.
   (g)   The refusal, failure, or neglect of MFS to file any of the records or
reports required to be provided to the city under this section shall be deemed
a material breach of this franchise, and shall subject MFS to all penalties and
remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city.
   (h)   Any material false or misleading statement or representation knowingly
made by MFS in any report shall be deemed a material breach of this franchise,
and shall subject MFS to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which
are available to the city.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § VIII, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-129. - Transfer of rights.
   (a)   Neither the franchise nor any rights or obligations of MFS pursuant to
this franchise or the ordinance nor any of MFS's controlling interest in the
telecommunications system shall be assigned, transferred, sold, leased or
sublet in any manner, to any person, without the prior consent of the council,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or unduly delayed. Nothing
herein shall prevent MFS from assigning its rights and obligations to a parent,
affiliate or subsidiary of MFS upon notice to the city. Further, nothing herein
shall prevent or prohibit MFS, or any of its parents, subsidiaries or
affiliates, from granting a security interest in any of MFS' or any of its
parents', subsidiaries' or affiliates' financing transactions. The grant or
waiver of any one or more of said consents shall not render unnecessary any
subsequent consent or consents, nor shall the grant of any said consent
constitute a waiver of any other rights of the city.
   (b)   No franchise nor any part or portion thereof granted hereunder may be
sold, transferred or assigned until the initial build out of the
telecommunications system which MFS has proposed to provide and install
pursuant to this franchise is 100 percent completed and operational for a
period of one year except as may be mutually agreed to by MFS and the city.
   (c)   MFS shall not transfer, sell or assign any portion of its interest in
this franchise or in its telecommunications system without prior approval of
the council. MFS shall have the responsibility:
      (1)   To show to the reasonable satisfaction of the city whether the
proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferees"),
which, in the case of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors,
employees and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent
or more of its voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee's principals:
         a.   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral
turpitude (including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation to any
federal or state agency, violation of any securities law), or is presently
under an indictment, investigation, or complaint charging such acts.
         b.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
         c.   Has pending any legal claim, law suit or administrative
proceeding arising out of or involving a telecommunications system.
      (2)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the city the
financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current
financial data for the proposed transferee and such other data as the city may
request.
      (3)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the
financial standing of the proposed transferee is such that the proposed
transferee shall be able to maintain and operate the telecommunications system
for the remaining term of the franchise.
   (c)   Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in a form and
containing conditions approved by the council, that it will assume and be bound
by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of this franchise and all
applicable federal, state and local laws and further, that the transferee shall
be primarily liable and obligated under said documents without, however
relieving MFS from its obligations to the city under this franchise.
   (d)   Nothing in any approval by the city of an authorization of any
transfer or assignment of any ownership interest shall be construed to waive or
release any rights of the city in and to the streets, public ways and public
places of the city, or as a release of any of the city's police powers, or as
an exercise of eminent domain.
   (e)   The occurrence of any event which constitutes either in act of
bankruptcy by MFS as defined in the Federal Bankruptcy Act; or placement of MFS
into receivership or the issuance of any order to MFS or any of its
stockholders by a government agency or court of competent jurisdiction to
divest any interest related to the telecommunications system or the entry of
any judgment against MFS which, in the opinion of the city, impairs MFS'
credits or MFS' failure to meet its financial obligations on a continuing
basis, shall be deemed an unauthorized transfer and assignment under the
provisions of this subsection and shall:
      (1)   Be deemed a material breach and default of this franchise; and
      (2)   Subject MFS to all penalties and remedies prescribed in this
franchise and to all other remedies, legal and equitable, which are available
to the city.
   (f)   The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the
option of the city, terminate this franchise and accelerate all of the
obligations and rights thereunder. MFS shall notify the city of any occurrence
which constitutes an unauthorized transfer and of the entry of any judgment
against it within 24 hours of knowledge of such occurrence or of when MFS
should have had knowledge of such occurrence. From and after any notification
of an unauthorized occurrence, MFS shall not make, execute or enter into any
deed, deed of trust, mortgage, conditional sales contract or any loan, pledge,
sale, pole agreement or any other agreement or hypothecation concerning any of
the facilities or property, real or personal, of MFS without the written
approval of the city, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
   (g)   In the event of an express conflict between a provision in this
article and a provision in the telecommunications systems regulatory ordinance,
the provision in this article shall control.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § IX, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-130. - Construction and performance guarantee and letter of credit.
   MFS shall, within 30 days of the execution of this franchise, file with the
city clerk, a cash bond in the amount of $100,000.00, provided, however, that
such bond shall be reduced to $50,000.00 upon completion of construction and
further reduced to $10,000.00 one year after construction. The purpose of the
bond is to guarantee the timely construction and operation of the
telecommunications system. The bond shall be for the purpose of allowing
recovery by the city of any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the city
resulting from the failure of MFS to satisfactorily complete and fully activate
and maintain the telecommunications system throughout the city.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § X, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-131. - Termination.
   (a)   In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to
the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct
remedy the right to terminate this franchise and all rights and privileges of
mfs thereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   MFS fails after 30 days prior written notice to comply with any of
the provisions of this franchise or has, by act or omission, violated any term
of condition provided, however, that such period shall be extended for a period
of time as may be reasonably necessary to correct such noncompliance or
violation; or
      (2)   MFS becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is
adjudged a bankrupt; or
      (3)   MFS attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct
or relations with the city under this franchise; or
      (4)   City condemns substantially all of the property of MFS within the
city by the lawful exercise of eminent domain.
   (b)   No termination, except for reason of condemnation and revocation at
will, shall be effective unless or until the city shall have adopted a
resolution setting forth the cause and reason for the revocation and the
effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted without 30 days prior
notice to MFS and an opportunity for MFS to be heard on the proposed
resolution. If the revocation depends on a finding of fact, such finding of
fact made by the city after the hearing provided for, if requested by MFS,
shall be conclusive.
   (c)   Upon the expiration or termination of this franchise, MFS shall have
the option to, without expense to the city and within such time as the city may
reasonably require, remove its telecommunications system and restore the
premises hereby authorized to be used and occupied to a condition reasonably
satisfactory to the city, or to abandon said telecommunications system. In the
event MFS chooses to abandon said telecommunications system, the city, after 30
days prior written notice, shall be allowed to take over said
telecommunications system located within the public ways of the city, as
property of the city, without compensation, and in no event shall MFS have any
claim for damages against the city or account of the taking over of said
telecommunications system, nor shall MFS have any obligation to the city or any
third party for the abandonment of said telecommunications system.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § XI, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-132. - Acceptance of agreement and incorporation of ordinance by
reference.
   Upon execution of this franchise by MFS, MFS agrees to be bound by all of
its terms and conditions. In addition, MFS specifically agrees that this
ordinance of the city is incorporated by reference and made a part of the
permit of franchise.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § XII, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-133. - Severability.
   (a)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction by action of MFS, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render
invalid or terminate this franchise.
   (b)   The headings incorporated by this article are or organizational
purposes only and shall not be deemed part of the franchise granted to MFS.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § XIII, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-134. - Tampering with telecommunications system.
   (a)   A person who willfully or maliciously damages, or causes to be
damaged, any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of either party, or
who commits any act with intent to cause damage to any fiber, wire, cable,
conduit, apparatus or equipment of either party, or who taps, tampers with, or
connects any fiber or wire or device to a fiber, wire, cable, conduit or
equipment of either party with intent to obtain a signal or impulse therefrom
without authorization, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   This section shall not prevent MFS from removing, disconnecting or
otherwise rendering inoperable any of its apparatus or equipment attached or in
any way connected to such person's facilities, if done for reasonable cause.
   (c)   The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this section are
in addition to any penalties and remedies for theft, fraud or destruction of
property provided by state, local or federal law.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § XIV, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-135. - Notices.
   All notices shall be in writing, and shall be deemed delivered to the
addressee thereof two days after deposit at a main or branch United States Post
Office, and shall be certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
postage prepaid or sent by overnight delivery or telefacsimile, properly
addressed to the parties, respectively, as follows:
   For notices and communications to MFS:
      Metropolitan Fiber Systems of Detroit, Inc.
      c/o MFS Telecom, Inc.
      One Tower Lane, Suite 1600
      Oakbrook Terrace, Illinois 60181
      Attn: General Counsel
   Invoices to MFS shall be sent to "accounts payable" at the above address.
   For notices and communications to the city:
      City of Dearborn
      13615 Michigan Avenue
      Dearborn, Michigan 48126
      Attn: City Clerk
   By notice complying with the foregoing requirements of this section, each
party shall have the right to change the address or addressee or both for all
future notices and communications to such party, but no notice of a change of
address shall be effective until actually received.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § XV, 8-16-94)
Sec. 6-136. - Amendments.
   This franchise may be amended only by written agreement of both parties.
(Ord. No. 94-605, § XVI, 8-16-94)
Chapter 7 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— The building authority authorized by MCL 123.955 and created by
council resolutions 7-473-88, 7-474-88 and 8-560-88 has five members appointed
by the mayor and confirmed by the council for a term of three years.
Cross reference— Any ordinance affecting any urban renewal project saved from
repeal, §
1-6(12); administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference— Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.;
housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation
law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et
seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; economic
development corporations, MCL 126.1601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 7-1—7-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1226, adopted June 1, 2009, amended Art. II in its
entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. II
derived from Ord. No. 81-122, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 4, 1981.
Sec. 7-26. - Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a
department in the city government to be known as the Department of Economic
Development which shall be under the supervision of a director, who shall be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the Charter provisions pertaining to
the directors of departments, and shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed by the council.
   (b)   The city council shall provide the necessary appropriations annually
to provide suitable office space, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry
on the work of the Department of Economic Development.
   (c)   The director shall be the appointing authority for all employees who
may be required to operate the department.
(Ord. No. 09-1226, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 22-1732, 1-25-22)
Sec. 7-27. - Functions and duties.
   The director of the Department of Economic Development shall supervise and
control the department. Functions and duties of the director shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   (1)   To be responsible for helping maintain and expand existing businesses
and industries, attracting new business and industry to the city, as well as
develop new programs beneficial to the general development of the city.
   (2)   Planning and coordinating the activities of the city and private
business in connection with the improvement and beautification of the business
districts within the community.
   (3)   Planning and coordinating the activities of the city and private
industry in connection with the improvement and beautification of the
industrial districts within the community.
   (4)   To serve as the administrative liaison and provide supportive staff
for the East Dearborn Downtown Development Authority, West Dearborn Downtown
Development Authority, East Dearborn Development Area Citizens Council, West
Dearborn Development Area Citizens Council, commercial corridor improvement
authorities, economic development corporation, Brownfield Redevelopment
Authority, and zoning board of appeals.
   (5)   To coordinate the economic and community development department's
activities with related planning activities of other departments or
subdivisions of the government and with those of other state, local and federal
governmental agencies.
   (6)   To serve as the city representative in connection with the state and
federal programs relative to community improvement, education and job training,
and other similar matters.
   (7)   To prepare annual application, administer the day-to-day operation, to
prepare annual reports and to otherwise be the administrative officer in charge
of the city's participation under the community development block grant
program.
   (8)   To administer the functions and duties of the Property Maintenance and
Buildings Division, as explained in Secs.
7-35 to
7-37 of this Code.
   (9)   To coordinate the review of plans for commercial, industrial, and
residential development with appropriate city agencies.
(Ord. No. 09-1226, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 14-1443, 11-12-14; Ord. No. 16-1522, 2-9-
16; Ord. No. 22-1732, 1-25-22)
Sec. 7-28. - Assignment of duties and responsibilities.
   Any reference in the building, zoning, nuisance and other applicable codes
to the department of building and safety, as previously constituted and/or the
director of building and safety or property maintenance and development
services, insofar as they relate to the construction, authorization,
inspection, or repair of commercial and industrial buildings or other
appurtenant structures, shall be applicable instead to the Department of
Economic Development and its director, or their designee, respectively.
(Ord. No. 09-1226, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 22-1732, 1-25-22)
Sec. 7-29. Planning director - Appointment and vacancy.
   The director of the Department of Economic Development shall be the
appointing authority of the planning director, who may be a part-time,
contractual employee, and who shall assume all the duties and responsibilities
of the planning director and exercise all the powers granted to the planning
director, as requested by the director.
(Ord. No. 22-1732, 1-25-22)
Sec. 7-30. Same - Authority Generally.
   The director of the Department of Economic Development shall be the
appointing authority of all members of the planning staff and shall assist the
city planning commission in carrying out its powers and duties, as prescribed
by the charter.
(Ord. No. 22-1732, 1-25-22)
Sec. 7-31. Urban renewal.
   In addition to any and all duties of the planning director, they may be
charged with planning and coordinating the activities of the city in connection
with residential and commercial renewal and establishing a program which will
qualify for federal assistance. In connection with such duties, the planning
director may also be responsible for formulating a program for the continued
prevention of blighted areas within the city and for removal of existing
blight.
(Ord. No. 22-1732, 1-25-22)
Secs. 7-32—7-34. Reserved.
ARTICLE IIA. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND BUILDINGS DIVISION[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-1523, adopted February 9, 2016, amended article IIA
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IIA, §§
7-35—7-37, pertained to the department of residential services, and derived
from Ord. No. 09-1227, adopted June 1, 2009.
Sec. 7-35. Established.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a division
in the Department of Economic Development to be known as the “Property
Maintenance and Buildings Division” which shall be under the supervision of the
director of the Department of Economic Development, who shall be appointed by
the mayor in accordance with the charter provisions pertaining to directors of
departments, and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the
council.
   (b)   The city council shall provide the necessary appropriations annually
to provide suitableoffice space, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry
on the work of the “Property Maintenance and Buildings Division”.
   (c)   The director of the Department of Economic Development shall be the
appointing authority of all employees who may be required to operate
the”Property Maintenance and Buildings Division.”
(Ord. No. 16-1523, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 22-1731, 1-25-22)
Sec. 7-36. - Functions and duties.
   (a)   The director of the "property maintenance and development services
department" shall supervise and control the department. Functions and duties of
the director and employees of the "property maintenance and development
services department" shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1)   To enforce commercial, industrial and residential building, zoning,
nuisance and other applicable codes as required by law;
      2)   To serve as the administrative liaison and provide supportive staff
for the building board of appeals, board of safety engineers and demolition
board of appeals;
      3)   To protect property values and quality of life by preventing and
eliminating blight in the city's commercial, industrial and residential
neighborhoods;
      (4)   To provide courteous and efficient services to residents and
customers through inspections, permitting and plan processing and to serve as a
resource to assist them in understanding and applying the adopted codes and
ordinances;
      (5)   Property maintenance enforcement and vector control.
(Ord. No. 16-1523, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 22-1731, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1769, 9-13-
22)
Sec. 7-37. - Assignment of duties and responsibilities.
   Any reference in the building, zoning, nuisance and other applicable codes
to the department of building and safety, as previously constituted and/or the
director of building and safety, the director of residential services, and the
director of economic and community development (insofar as they relate to the
construction, authorization, inspection, or repair of commercial, industrial
buildings or other appurtenant structures) and the director of the property
maintenance and development services department, shall be applicable instead to
the director of the Department of Economic Development, or their designee.
(Ord. No. 16-1523, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 22-1731, 1-25-22)
Secs. 7-38—7-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 
Footnotes:
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq., as
amended.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 7-51—7-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - WEST DEARBORN
Subdivision I. - In General
Sec. 7-61. - Established.
   In recognition of the fact that it is in the best interest of the public to
halt property value deterioration in the downtown business district of West
Dearborn, to eliminate the causes of such deterioration and to promote economic
growth in the downtown business district, a downtown development authority is
hereby established pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), to be known as the Downtown Development Authority
- West Dearborn within the City of Dearborn.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-62. - Organization.
   The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board
consisting of the mayor and ten members appointed by the mayor, subject to
approval by the city council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be
persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Not
less than one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district, if
the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within it. Of the
members first appointed, an equal number of the members, as near as is
practicable, shall be appointed for one year, two years, three years and four
years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed.
Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to
fill a vacancy shall be made by the mayor for the unexpired term only. Members
of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for
actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board shall be elected by
the board.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 85-340, 10-15-85)
Sec. 7-63. - Duties.
   The Downtown Development Authority - West Dearborn shall be charged with the
following duties:
      (1)   Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the
downtown district.
      (2)   Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the
downtown district.
      (3)   Plan and propose the construction, the renovation, repair,
remodeling, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation or reconstruction of a
public facility, an existing building or a multiple-family dwelling unit which
may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the
opinion of the board, aids in the economic growth of the downtown district.
      (4)   Develop long-range plans, in cooperation with the city plan
commission, designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the
downtown district and to promote the economic growth of the downtown district,
and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property owners to
implement the plans to the fullest extent possible.
      (5)   Implement any plan of development in the downtown district
necessary to achieve the purposes of this division, in accordance with the
powers of the authority, as granted by this division.
      (6)   Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties.
      (7)   Acquire by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a
manner the authority deems proper or own, convey or otherwise dispose of, or
lease as lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or personal or rights
or interest therein, which the authority determines is reasonably necessary to
achieve the purposes of this division, and to grant or acquire licenses,
easements and options with respect thereto.
      (8)   Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and
preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair and operate any building, including
multiple-family dwellings, and any necessary or desirable appurtenances
thereto, within the downtown district for the use, in whole or in part, of any
public or private person or corporation, or a combination thereof.
      (9)   Fix, charge and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any
building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility
therein, and pledge the fees, rents and charges for the payment of revenue
bonds issued by the authority.
      (10)   Lease any building or property under its control, or any part
thereof.
      (11)   Accept grants and donations of property, labor or other things of
value from a public or private source.
      (12)   Acquire and construct public facilities.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-64. - Financing.
   The activities of the Downtown Development Authority - West Dearborn shall
be financed from one or more of the following sources:
      (1)   Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions.
      (2)   Proceeds of a tax imposed pursuant to section 12 of Act No. 197 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010 et seq.).
      (3)   Monies borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by section 13 of Act
No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA
5.3010 et seq.).
      (4)   Revenues from any property, building or facility owned, leased,
licensed or operated by the authority or under its control, subject to the
limitations imposed upon the authority by trusts or other agreements.
      (5)   Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established under
sections 14 through 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975
(MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.).
      (6)   Monies obtained from other sources approved by the city council.
      (7)   Monies received by the authority shall be immediately deposited to
the credit of the authority, subject to disbursement pursuant to Act No. 197 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et
seq.). Except as provided in such act, the city shall not obligate itself, nor
shall it ever be obligated to pay any sums from public monies, other than
monies received by the city pursuant to this section, for or on account of the
activities of the authority.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-65. - Development plans.
   When the board decides to finance a project in the downtown district by the
use of revenue bonds, as authorized in section 13, or tax increment financing,
as authorized in sections 14, 15 and 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), it shall
prepare a development plan. The development plan shall contain:
      (1)   The designation of boundaries of the development area in relation
to highways, streets, streams or otherwise.
      (2)   The location and extent of existing streets and other public
facilities within the development area and shall designate the location,
character and extent of the categories of public and private land uses then
existing and proposed for the development area, including residential,
recreational, commercial, industrial, educational and other uses and shall
include a legal description of the development area.
      (3)   A description of existing improvements in the development area to
be demolished, repaired or altered, a description of any repairs and
alterations, and an estimate of the time required for completion.
      (4)   The location, extent, character and estimated cost of the
improvements including rehabilitation contemplated for the development area and
an estimate of the time required for completion.
      (5)   A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned,
and the estimated time of completion of each stage.
      (6)   A description of any parts of the development area to be left as
open space and the use contemplated for the space.
      (7)   A description of any portions of the development area which the
authority desires to sell, donate, exchange or lease to or from the city and
the proposed terms.
      (8)   A description of desired zoning changes and changes in streets,
street levels, intersections and utilities.
      (9)   An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the
proposed method of financing the development and the ability of the authority
to arrange the financing.
      (10)   Designation of the person to whom all or a portion of the
development is to be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner and for whose
benefit the project is being undertaken, if that information is available to
the authority.
      (11)   The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing or
conveying in any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its
completion, if there is no express or implied agreement between the authority
and persons, natural or corporate, that all or a portion of the development
will be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner to those persons.
      (12)   Estimates of the number of persons residing in the development
area and the number of families and individuals to be displaced. If occupied
residences are designated for acquisition and clearance by the authority, a
development plan shall include a survey of the families and individuals to be
displaced, including their income and racial composition, a statistical
description of the housing supply in the community, including the number of
private and public units in existence or under construction, the condition of
those in existence, the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units, the
annual rate of turnover of the various types of housing and the range of rents
and sale prices, an estimate of the total demand for housing in the community,
and the estimated capacity of private and public housing available to displaced
families and individuals.
      (13)   A plan for establishing priority for the relocation of persons
displaced by the development in any new housing in the development area.
      (14)   Provision for the costs of relocating persons displaced by the
development and financial assistance and reimbursement of expenses, including
litigation expenses and expenses incident to the transfer of title, in
accordance with the standards and provisions of the federal uniform relocation
assistance and real property acquisition policies act of 1970, being Public Law
91-646, 42 USC, sections 4601, et seq.
      (15)   A plan for compliance with Act No. 227 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1972 (MCL 213.321 et seq.).
      (16)   Other material which the authority, local public agency, or
governing body deems pertinent.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-66. - Development area citizens' council.
   If a proposed development area has residing within it 100 or more residents,
a development area citizens' council shall be established at least 90 days
before the public hearing on the development or tax increment financing plan.
The members of the development area citizens' council shall be residents of the
development area, shall be at least 18 years of age, and shall be
representative of the development area.
   There is hereby created and established a downtown development
authority—West Dearborn Development Area Citizens' Council. The West Dearborn
Development Area Citizens' Council shall consist of nine members appointed by
the mayor and approved by the city council. Each term of appointment shall be
for three years, except at the creation of the council whereby there shall be
three members appointed for one, two, and three year terms. The West Dearborn
Development Area Citizens' Council shall be governed by Robert's Rule of Order
and shall meet as necessary, in conformity with the Open Meetings Act.
   The West Dearborn Development Area Citizens' Council shall act as an
advisory board to the downtown development authority and to the city council in
the adoption of the development or tax increment financing plans. The West
Dearborn Development Area Citizen's Council shall make findings and
recommendations in conformity with MCL 125.1667, et seq.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 02-872, 1-15-02)
Sec. 7-67. - Governing procedures.
   The Downtown Development Authority - West Dearborn shall have all the powers
and duties prescribed by Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975
(MCL 125.1651 et seq.). Any questions of interpretation of the powers and
duties and responsibilities of the authority shall be resolved by reference to
such act. The authority shall provide the city council and plan commission with
all reports and studies regulating the formation and implementation of project
development plans. The authority shall submit the proposed development plan to
the city plan commission for review and recommendation to the city council
prior to the hearing specified in section 18 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). It shall also consult with and
advise any development area citizens' council formed pursuant to the state
legislation regarding all preparation and implementation of development plans,
whenever such plans are conceived.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-68. - Boundaries.
   The authority shall exercise its powers within the following described area:
   Beginning at the intersection of the northerly line of the Consolidated Rail
Corporation Railroad Right-of-Way, variable width, and the easterly line of
Military Avenue, variable width; thence northerly along the said easterly line
of Military Avenue extended to the northerly line of Garrison, variable width;
thence easterly along said northerly line of Garrison extended to the easterly
line of Howard, 50 feet wide; thence northerly along said easterly line of
Howard to the line common to Lot 63 and Lot 104, Detroit Arsenal Ground; thence
easterly along said common line extended to the easterly line of Mason, 60 feet
wide; thence northerly along said easterly line of Mason extended to the
southerly line of Morley, 80 feet wide, thence easterly along said southerly
line of Morley to the westerly line of Monroe, 80 feet wide, thence southerly
along said westerly line of Monroe to the line common to Lot 95 and Lot 71 of
Detroit Arsenal Ground; thence along the easterly extension of said common line
to the westerly line of Oakwood; variable width; thence southerly along said
westerly line of Oakwood extended to the said northerly line of the
Consolidated Rail Corporation Railroad Right-of-Way; thence westerly along said
northerly line of the Consolidated Rail Corporation Railroad Right-of-Way to
the said easterly line of Military Avenue and the Point of Beginning.
   Additionally, the area beginning at the intersection of the north line of
Consolidated Rail Corporation Railroad Right-of-Way, 60 feet wide, and west
line extended of Monroe Boulevard, 80 feet wide; thence southerly along the
said west line extended of Monroe Boulevard, 260 feet; thence westerly along
the north line of Park Street 30 feet wide, 100 feet; thence northerly 160
feet; thence westerly along a line 40 feet south of and parallel to the south
line of said Consolidated Rail Corporation Railroad Right-of-Way, 200 feet;
thence southerly 60 feet; thence westerly 200 feet; thence northerly along the
east line of Mason Street, 60 feet wide, 160 feet; thence easterly along the
said north line of Consolidated Rail Corporation Railroad Right-of-Way, 500
feet to the Point of Beginning.
(Ord. No. 81-116, § 8, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 82-264, 12-21-82; Ord. No. 98-727, 8-
18-98)
Secs. 7-69—7-80. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Tax Increment Finance Plan
Sec. 7-81. - Public purpose determined.
   The city council has been presented with the Development and Tax Increment
Financing Plan amendment 2003, of the Downtown Development Authority - West
Dearborn (the "authority"), which was amended and adopted by that body of
February 6, 2003 (as amended and adopted, the "plan"), pursuant to the
provision of Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the
"act"). The city council hereby determines that the plan constitutes a public
purpose.
(Ord. No. 82-265, § 1, 4-4-82; Ord. No. 89-446, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 98-728, 7-7-
98; Ord. No. 99-764, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 03-966, 6-17-03)
Sec. 7-82. - Modifications.
   The city council hereby modifies the plan as follows:
      (1)   Commencing with the taxes due and payable on July 1, 1989, the
authority shall retain none of the tax levied by the Dearborn Public Schools,
the "school district," on real and personal property in the development area on
the captured assessed value. The city treasurer shall pay over to the school
district all of the tax levied by the school district on the real and personal
property in the development area on the captured assessed value in the ordinary
course.
      (2)   The authority shall return to the school district moneys collected
through June 30, 1989, pursuant to the plan which are attributable to the
application of tax millage levied by the school district in the development
area on the captured assessed value. Such moneys shall be returned from tax
increment revenues received by the authority remaining after the authority has
paid over to the city the amounts required to pay debt service on the municipal
parking structure bonds authorized by the plan, together with interest thereon,
as set forth more specifically in Exhibit K to the plan.
(Ord. No. 82-265, § 2, 4-4-82; Ord. No. 89-446, 4-4-89)
Sec. 7-83. - Approval.
   The plan, as submitted by the authority is hereby approved.
(Ord. No. 82-265, § 3, 4-4-82; Ord. No. 89-446, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 98-728, 7-7-
98; Ord. No. 99-764, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 03-966, 6-17-03)
Sec. 7-84. - Considerations for approval.
   As required by the act, the city council has in reviewing and approving the
plan herein taken into account the following considerations:
   (a)   The development plan meets the requirements set forth in section 17(2)
of the act, and the tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set
forth in section 14(2) of the act.
   (b)   The proposed method of financing the development is feasible, and the
authority has the ability to arrange the financing.
   (c)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes
of the act.
   (d)   The land included within the development area to be acquired (to the
extent required by the plan) is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes
of the plan and the purposes of the act in an efficient and economically
satisfactory manner.
   (e)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of
the city.
   (f)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are
or will be adequate to service the development area.
   (g)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities (to the extent required by the plan) are reasonably necessary for the
project and for the city.
   (h)   The findings and recommendations of the West Dearborn Development area
citizens' council.
(Ord. No. 82-265, § 4, 4-4-82; Ord. No. 89-446, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 98-728, 7-7-
98; Ord. No. 99-764, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 03-966, 6-17-03)
Sec. 7-85. - Public copy on file.
   A copy of the plan, in the form approved hereby, which is approximately 61
pages in length, shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk
for inspection at all times during regular business hours.
(Ord. No. 82-265, § 5, 4-4-82; Ord. No. 85-339, 10-15-85; Ord. No. 88-428, 9-6-
88; Ord. No. 89-446, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 98-728, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 99-764, 4-20-99;
Ord. No. 03-966, 6-17-03)
Secs. 7-86—7-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - EAST DEARBORN
Subdivision I. - In General
Sec. 7-96. - Established.
   In recognition of the fact that it is in the best interest of the public to
halt property value deterioration in the downtown business district of East
Dearborn, to eliminate the causes of such deterioration and to promote economic
growth in the downtown business district, a downtown development authority is
hereby established pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), to be known as the Downtown Development Authority
- East Dearborn within the City of Dearborn.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 1, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-97. - Organization.
   The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board
consisting of the mayor and ten members appointed by the mayor, subject to
approval by the city council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be
persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Not
less than one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district, if
the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within it. Of the
members first appointed, an equal number of the members, as near as is
practicable, shall be appointed for one year, two years, three years and four
years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed.
Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to
fill a vacancy shall be made by the mayor for the unexpired term only. Members
of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for
actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board shall be elected by
the board.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 2, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 85-
342, 11-6-85)
Sec. 7-98. - Duties.
   The Downtown Development Authority - East Dearborn as herein created shall
be charged with the following duties:
      (1)   Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the
downtown district.
      (2)   Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the
downtown district.
      (3)   Plan and propose the construction, the renovation, repair,
remodeling, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation or reconstruction of a
public facility, an existing building or a multiple-family dwelling unit which
may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the
opinion of the board, aids in the economic growth of the downtown district.
      (4)   Develop long range plans, in cooperation with the city plan
commission, designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the
downtown district and to promote the economic growth of the downtown district,
and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property owners to
implement the plans to the fullest extent possible.
      (5)   Implement any plan of development in the downtown district
necessary to achieve the purposes of this division, in accordance with the
powers of the authority as granted by this division.
      (6)   Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties.
      (7)   Acquire by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a
manner the authority deems proper; or own, convey or otherwise dispose of, or
lease as lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or personal, or rights
or interests therein, which the authority determines is reasonably necessary to
achieve the purposes of this division; and to grant or acquire licenses,
easements and options with respect thereto.
      (8)   Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and
preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair and operate any building, including
multiple-family dwellings, and any necessary or desirable appurtenances
thereto, within the downtown district for the use, in whole or in part, of any
public or private person or corporation, or a combination thereof.
      (9)   Fix, charge and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any
building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility
therein, and pledge the fees, rents and charges for the payment of revenue
bonds issued by the authority.
      (10)   Lease any building or property under its control, or any part
thereof.
      (11)   Accept grants and donations of property, labor or other things of
value from a public or private source.
      (12)   Acquire and construct public facilities.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 3, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-99. - Financing.
   The activities of the Downtown Development Authority - East Dearborn shall
be financed from one or more of the following sources:
      (1)   Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions.
      (2)   Proceeds of a tax imposed pursuant to section 12 of Act No. 197 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.).
      (3)   Monies borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by section 13 of Act
No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.).
      (4)   Revenues from any property, building or facility owned, leased,
licensed or operated by the authority or under its control, subject to the
limitations imposed upon the authority by trusts or other agreements.
      (5)   Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established under
sections 14 through 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975
(MCL 125.1651 et seq.).
      (6)   Monies obtained from other sources approved by the city council.
      (7)   Monies received by the authority shall be immediately deposited to
the credit of the authority, subject to disbursement pursuant to Act No. 197 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). Except as provided
in such act, the city shall not obligate itself, nor shall it ever be obligated
to pay any sums from public monies, other than monies received by the city
pursuant to this section, for or on account of the activities of the authority.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 4, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-100. - Development plans.
   When the board decides to finance a project in the downtown district by the
use of revenue bonds, as authorized in section 13, or tax increment financing,
as authorized in sections 14, 15 and 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), it shall prepare a development plan.
The development plan shall contain:
      (1)   The designation of boundaries of the development area in relation
to highways, streets, streams or otherwise.
      (2)   The location and extent of existing streets and other public
facilities within the development area and shall designate the location,
character and extent of the categories of public and private land uses then
existing and proposed for the development area, including residential,
recreational, commercial, industrial, educational and other uses and shall
include a legal description of the development area.
      (3)   A description of existing improvements in the development area to
be demolished, repaired or altered, a description of any repairs and
alterations, and an estimate of the time required for completion.
      (4)   The location, extent, character and estimated cost of the
improvements including rehabilitation contemplated for the development area and
an estimate of the time required for completion.
      (5)   A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned,
and the estimated time of completion of each stage.
      (6)   A description of any parts of the development area to be left as
open space and the use contemplated for the space.
      (7)   A description of any portions of the development area which the
authority desires to sell, donate, exchange or lease to or from the city and
the proposed terms.
      (8)   A description of desired zoning changes and changes in streets,
street levels, intersections and utilities.
      (9)   An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the
proposed method of financing the development and the ability of the authority
to arrange the financing.
      (10)   Designation of the person to whom all or a portion of the
development is to be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner and for whose
benefit the project is being undertaken if that information is available to the
authority.
      (11)   The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing or
conveying in any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its
completion, if there is no express or implied agreement between the authority
and persons, natural or corporate, that all or a portion of the development
will be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner to those persons.
      (12)   Estimates of the number of persons residing in the development
area and the number of families and individuals to be displaced. If occupied
residences are designated for acquisition and clearance by the authority, a
development plan shall include a survey of the families and individuals to be
displaced, including their income and racial composition; a statistical
description of the housing supply in the community, including the number of
private and public units in existence or under construction; the condition of
those in existence, the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units, the
annual rate of turnover of the various types of housing and the range of rents
and sale prices; an estimate of the total demand for housing in the community;
and the estimated capacity of private and public housing available to displaced
families and individuals.
      (13)   A plan for establishing priority for the relocation of persons
displaced by the development in any new housing in the development area.
      (14)   Provision for the costs of relocating persons displaced by the
development and financial assistance and reimbursement of expenses, including
litigation expenses and expenses incident to the transfer of title, in
accordance with the standards and provisions of the federal uniform relocation
assistance and real property acquisition policies act of 1970, being Public Law
91-646, 42 USC sections 4601, et seq.
      (15)   A plan for compliance with Act No. 227 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1972 (MCL 213.321 et seq.).
      (16)   Other material which the authority, local public agency, or
governing body deems pertinent.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 5, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-101. - Development area citizens' council.
   If a proposed development area has residing within it 100 or more residents,
a development area citizens' council shall be established at least 90 days
before the public hearing on the development or tax increment financing plan.
The members of the development area citizens' council shall be residents of the
development area, shall be at least 18 years of age, and shall be
representative of the development area.
   There is hereby created and established a downtown development
authority—East Dearborn Development Area Citizens' Council. The East Dearborn
Downtown Development Area Citizens' Council shall consist of nine members
appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Each term of
appointment shall be for three years, except at the creation of the council
whereby there shall be three members appointed for one, two, and three year
terms. The East Dearborn Development Area Citizens' Council shall be governed
by Robert's Rule of Order and shall meet as necessary, in conformity with the
Open Meetings Act.
   The East Dearborn Development Area Citizens' Council shall act as an
advisory board to the downtown development authority and to the city council in
the adoption of the development or tax increment financing plans. The East
Dearborn Development Area Citizens' Council shall make findings and
recommendations in conformity with MCL 125.1667, et seq.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 6, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 02-
871, 1-15-02)
Sec. 7-102. - Governing procedures.
   The Downtown Development Authority - East Dearborn shall have all the powers
and duties prescribed by Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975
(MCL 125.1651 et seq.). Any questions of interpretation of the powers and
duties and responsibilities of the authority shall be resolved by reference to
such Act. The authority shall provide the city council and plan commission with
all reports and studies regulating the formation and implementation of project
development plans. The authority shall submit the proposed development plan to
the city plan commission for review and recommendation to the city council
prior to the hearing specified in section 18 of such act. It shall also consult
with and advise any development area citizens' council formed pursuant to the
state legislation regarding all preparation and implementation of development
plans whenever such plans are conceived.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 7, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-103. - Boundaries.
   The authority shall exercise its powers within the following described area:
   Beginning at the intersection of the west line of Oakman Boulevard, 120 feet
wide, and the northerly line of Michigan Avenue, variable width; thence
westerly along the said northerly line of Michigan Ave. to the northerly
extension of the west line of Lois, 58 feet wide; thence southerly along with
said northerly extension of the west line of Lois to the southerly line of Lot
111 of Miller Home Subdivision; thence westerly along said southerly line of
Lot 111, extended to the west line of Bingham, 50 feet wide; thence southerly
along said west line of Bingham to the north line of Osborn, 50 feet wide;
thence westerly along said north line of Osborn to the northerly extension of
the west line of the 20 foot wide public alley, lying North of Bryan, between
Schaefer and Calhoun; thence southerly along the said northerly extension of
the west line of said 20 foot wide public alley to the north line of Bryan, 50
feet wide; thence westerly along said north line of Bryan extended to the west
line of Schaefer Road, 86 feet wide; thence southerly along said west line of
Schaefer Road to the south line of Fractional Section 18, T. 2 S, R. 11 E.;
thence westerly along said south line of Fractional Section 18 to the easterly
line of Maple, 66 feet wide; thence northerly along said easterly line of Maple
to the easterly extension of the north line of the vacated 18 foot wide public
alley lying east of Schlaff between Lithgow and Robertson; thence westerly
along said easterly extension of the north line of the vacated 18 foot wide
public alley and extending said north line of alley westerly to the east line
of Schlaff, variable width; thence northerly along said east line of Schlaff
extended to the north line of Wellesley, 60 feet wide; thence westerly along
said north line of Wellesley to the east line of Roemer, 66 feet wide south of
Michigan Ave.; thence northerly along said east line of Roemer, to the south
line of Michigan Ave., 100 feet wide; thence northerly to the intersection of
the northerly line of Michigan Ave. and the east line of Roemer, 60 feet wide
north of Michigan Ave.; thence northerly along said east line of Roemer, north
of Michigan Ave., to the north line of Lot 95 of Chase Subdivision; thence
easterly along said north line of Lot 95 extended to the east line of the 18
foot wide public alley lying north of Michigan between Roemer and Schlaff;
thence southerly along the said east line of said 18 foot wide public alley to
the north line of Lot 38, Chase Subdivision; thence easterly along said north
line of Lot 38 of Chase Subdivision to the westerly line of Schlaff, variable
width; thence easterly to the intersection of the easterly line of Schlaff and
the southeasterly line of Argyle, variable width; thence northeasterly along
said southeasterly line of Argyle to the north line of Lot 245 of Ardross
Subdivision; thence easterly along said north line of Lot 245, extended to the
east line of Middlesex, 50 feet wide; thence northerly along said east line of
Middlesex to the north line of Lot 55 of Ardross Subdivision; thence easterly
along said north line of Lot 55, extended to the east line of Horger, 55 feet
wide; thence northerly along said east line of Horger to the north line of Lot
381 of Maplewood Park Subdivision; thence easterly along said north line of Lot
381, extended to the east line of the 18 foot wide public alley lying north of
Michigan Ave. between Maple and Neckel; thence northerly along the said east
line of the said 18 foot wide public alley to the southerly line of Colson,
variable width; thence easterly along said southerly line of Colson to the
westerly line of Neckel, 55 feet wide; thence easterly to the intersection of
the southerly line of Colson and the easterly line of Neckel; thence northerly
along said easterly line of Neckel to the south line of Ruby, 50 feet wide west
of Schaefer; thence easterly along said south line of Ruby, extended to the
east line of Schaefer, 86 feet wide; thence northerly along said east line of
Schaefer to the south line of Ruby, 50 feet wide east of Schaefer; thence
easterly along said south line of Ruby, to the west line of Calhoun, 50 feet
wide; thence southerly along said west line of Calhoun extended to the south
line of Colson, 60 feet wide; thence easterly along said south line of Colson
to the West line of Bingham, 50 feet wide; thence southerly along said west
line of Bingham to the westerly extension of the north line of Lot 297 in the
Addition to Maplewood Park Subdivision; thence easterly along said westerly
extension to the north line of Lot 297 extended to the centerline of the
vacated 18 foot wide public alley, lying north of Michigan between Bingham and
Jonathon; thence northerly along said centerline of the vacated 18 foot wide
public alley to the westerly extension of the north line of Lot 397 in the
Addition to Maplewood Park Subdivision; thence easterly along said westerly
extension of the north line of Lot 397 extended to the east line of Jonathon,
50 feet wide; thence northerly along said east line of Jonathon to the north
line of Lot 408 in the Addition to Maplewood Park Subdivision; thence easterly
along said north line of Lot 408 extended to the centerline of the vacated 18
foot wide public alley lying north of Michigan Ave. between Jonathon and
Reuter; thence northerly along said centerline of said vacated 18 foot wide
public alley to the westerly extension of the north line of Lot 504 in the
Addition to Maplewood Park Subdivision; thence easterly along said north line
of Lot 504 extended to the east line of Reuter, 60 feet wide; thence northerly
along said east line of Reuter to the north line of Lot 137, of Woodbridge Park
Subdivision; thence easterly along said north line of Lot 137 extended to the
east line of the 18 foot wide public alley lying north of Michigan Ave. between
Reuter and Hartwell; thence northerly along the said east line of said 18 foot
wide public alley to the north line of Lot 116 of Woodbridge Park Subdivision;
thence easterly along said north line of Lot 116, extended to the east line of
Hartwell, 50 feet wide; thence northerly along said east line of Hartwell to
the south line of Colson, 60 feet wide; thence easterly along said south line
of Colson to the west line of Oakman Blvd., 120 feet wide; thence southerly
along said west line of Oakman Blvd. to the Point of Beginning.
(Ord. No. 77-1877, § 8, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 81-117, § 8, 11-4-81)
Secs. 7-104—7-115. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Tax Increment Finance Plan
Sec. 7-116. - Adoption.
   The Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan Amendment 2008 of the
Downtown Development Authority—East Dearborn, which was amended and approved by
that body on July 31, 2008, is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of Act
197 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the "Act", MCL 125.1651
et seq.).
   As required by the Act, the city council has taken into account the
following considerations, and, in reviewing and approving the plan, has
specifically determined that the plan constitutes a public purpose.
   (a)   The development plan meets the requirements set forth in section 17(2)
of the Act and the tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set
forth in section 14(2) of the Act.
   (b)   The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the
authority has the ability to arrange the financing.
   (c)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes
of the Act.
   (d)   The land included within the development area to be acquired (to the
extent required by the plan) is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes
of the plan and the purposes of the Act in an efficient and economically
satisfactory manner.
   (e)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of
the city.
   (f)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are
or will be adequate to service the development area.
   (g)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities (to the extent required by the plan) are reasonably necessary for the
project and for the city.
   (h)   The findings and recommendations of the East Dearborn Development Area
Citizens' Council.
(Ord. No. 83-272, § 1, 5-3-83; Ord. No. 08-1179, 9-15-08)
Sec. 7-117. - Public copy on file.
   A copy of the Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan Amendment 2008,
of the Downtown Development Authority—East Dearborn, which is approximately 19
pages in length plus exhibits, shall be maintained on file in the office of the
city clerk for inspection by the public during regular business hours.
(Ord. No. 83-272, § 2, 5-3-83; Ord. No. 91-528, § 5, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 08-
1179, 9-15-08)
Secs. 7-118—7-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION[5] 
Footnotes:
--- (5) ---
State Law reference— Economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 7-141. - Established.
   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a corporation to
be known as "The Economic Development Corporation of the City of Dearborn." The
board of directors of the corporation shall consist of not less than nine
persons, not more than three of whom shall be an officer or employee of the
city. The mayor and any member of the city council may serve on the board of
directors. The directors shall be appointed for terms of six years, except of
the directors first appointed, four shall be appointed for six years, one for
five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one
for one year. The corporation shall notify the mayor in writing of the
corporation's intention to commence preparation of a project plan, and there
shall be appointed promptly after such notice two additional directors of the
corporation who shall be representatives of neighborhood residents likely to be
affected by each such project proposed by the corporation and who shall cease
to serve when the project for which they are appointed is either abandoned or,
if undertaken, is completed in accordance with the project plan. The directors
shall serve without salary, but may be reimbursed their actual expenses
incurred in the performance of their official duties, and may receive a per
diem of not more than $50.00. Appointments to the board of directors shall be
made by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The
meetings of the board of directors shall be public.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-142. - Duties.
   The economic development corporation of the city shall have all of the
powers, duties and responsibilities of economic development corporations as set
forth in Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et
seq.), as amended through June 30, 1976. The corporation shall act in strict
accord with the provisions of the state law, including detailed reporting to
the city council, as required under the Act.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 3, 11-4-81)
Secs. 7-143—7-155. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
Sec. 7-156. - Preamble.
   These articles of incorporation are signed and acknowledged by the
incorporators for the purpose of forming a public corporation of the City of
Dearborn, Michigan, the "City," under the provisions of Act No. 338 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), as amended, as follows.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-157. - Name.
   The name of the corporation is The Economic Development Corporation of the
City of Dearborn.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. I), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-158. - Purposes.
   The corporation is organized pursuant to Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), as amended, "Act 338," to perform
essential public purposes and functions of the city. Its purposes will be to
alleviate and prevent conditions of unemployment, to assist and retain local
industries and commercial enterprises in order to strengthen and revitalize the
economy of the city and the state, to provide means and methods for the
encouragement and assistance of industrial and commercial enterprises in
locating and expanding in the city, to encourage the location and expansion of
commercial enterprises to provide needed services and facilities to the city
and the residents thereof and to accomplish the foregoing to do the following:
      (1)   To construct, acquire by gift or purchase, reconstruct, improve,
maintain, repair, acquire the necessary lands for the site for projects, which
term shall hereinafter mean the following: land and existing or planned
improvements suitable for use by any industrial or commercial enterprise or a
replacement housing project incidental thereto, including all necessary
buildings or structures suitable for and intended for or incidental to use as
an industrial or commercial enterprise, including a replacement housing project
incidental thereto, and all necessary machinery, furnishings and equipment
necessary, suitable, intended for or incidental to a commercial, industrial or
residential use in connection with the buildings or structures.
      (2)   To acquire by gift or purchase the necessary machinery, furnishings
and equipment for projects.
      (3)   To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds or revenue notes to
finance part or all of the cost of the acquisition, purchase, construction,
reconstruction or improvement of projects or any part thereof, the cost of the
acquisition and improvement of the necessary sites therefor, the acquisition of
machinery, furnishings and equipment therefor, and the costs necessary or
incidental to the borrowing of money and issuing of bonds or notes for such
purpose.
      (4)   To enter into leases, lease purchase agreements, or installment
sales contracts with any person for the use or sale of projects.
      (5)   To mortgage projects in favor of any lender of money to the
corporation.
      (6)   To sell and convey projects or any part thereof for a price and at
a time as the corporation determines.
      (7)   To lend, grant, transfer or convey funds, described in section 27
of Act No. 388 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.,
MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended, as permitted by law, but subject to
applicable restrictions affecting the use of these funds.
      (8)   In general, and subject to such limitations and conditions as are
or may be prescribed by law, to exercise such other powers which now are or
hereafter may be conferred by law upon a corporation organized by the city
under the above statutes and for the above purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. II), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-159. - Registered office.
   (a)   The location of the first registered office of the corporation is:
13615 Michigan Avenue, Dearborn, Michigan, 48126.
   (b)   The post office address of the first registered office is the same as
above.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. III), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-160. - Resident agent.
   The name of the first resident agent of the corporation is William C.
Hultgren, Corporation Counsel.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. IV), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-161. - Nonstock basis; assets.
   The corporation is organized upon a nonstock basis. The amount of assets
which said corporation possesses is:
      (1)   Real property ..... None
      (2)   Personal property ..... None
   The corporation will be financed from donations, gifts, grants and devices,
either solicited or unsolicited, obtained from public authorities, individuals,
corporations and other organizations, by earnings from its activities,
borrowings and issuance of revenue bonds.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. V), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-162. - Incorporators.
   The names and places of business of each of the incorporators of the
corporation are as follows:
      (1)   Meyer M. Pensler, M.D., 10151 Michigan Ave., Dearborn, Mi.
      (2)   H. Fred Campbell, 9301 Michigan Ave., Dearborn, Mi.
      (3)   Cameron C. Oglesby, 9301 Michigan Ave., Dearborn, Mi.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. VI), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-163. - Board of directors.
   (a)   The board of directors of the corporation shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The board of directors
shall consist of nine persons, not more than three of whom shall be an officer
or employee of the city. The term of office for directors shall be in
accordance with section 4(2) of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended, provided, the
secretary of the board of directors of the corporation shall notify in writing
the mayor of the corporation's intention to commence preparation of a project
plan, and there shall be promptly appointed, in the same manner, to the
corporation's board of directors two additional directors representative of
neighborhood residents likely to be affected by each such project proposed by
the corporation and whose term of office shall be consistent with the
provisions of section 4(2) of Act 338.
   (b)   The organization and the officers and their functions of the board of
directors shall be as follows:
      (1)   The board of directors shall designate one of its members as
chairman, one of its members as secretary, and a treasurer who need not be a
member of the board of directors, each to be designated for such term for a
period of one year. Such officers may succeed themselves in office.
      (2)   The chairman shall preside at meetings of the board of directors
and may sign and execute all authorized bonds, contracts, checks and other
obligations and execute interest coupons with his facsimile signature in the
name of the corporation, when so authorized by the board of directors. He shall
do and perform such other duties as may be fixed by the bylaws and from time to
time assigned to him by the board of directors.
      (3)   The secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings of the board
of directors, and of all committees thereof, in books provided for that
purpose. He shall attend to the giving, serving and receiving of all notices or
process of or against the corporation. He may sign with the chairman in the
name of the corporation all bonds, contracts and other obligations authorized
by the board of directors, and when so ordered, he shall affix the seal of the
corporation thereto. He shall have charge of all books and records which shall
at all reasonable times be open to inspection and examination of the board of
directors or any member thereof, and city council, and in general, perform all
the duties incident to his office. The secretary shall preside at meetings of
the board of directors in the absence of the chairman.
      (4)   The treasurer shall have custody of all the funds and securities of
the corporation which may come into his hands or possession. When necessary or
proper, he shall endorse in behalf of the corporation for collection, checks,
notes and other obligations, and shall deposit them to the credit of the
corporation in a designated bank or depository. He shall sign all receipts and
vouchers for payment made to the corporation. He shall jointly, with such other
officer as may be designated by the board of directors, sign all checks,
promissory notes and other obligations of the corporation when so ordered by
the board of directors. He shall render a statement of his cash accounts when
required by the board of directors. He shall enter regularly in the books of
the corporation to be kept by him for the purpose full and accurate accounts of
all monies received and paid by him on account of the corporation, and shall,
at all reasonable times, exhibit his books and accounts to the board of
directors or any member thereof when so required. He shall perform all acts
incidental to the position of treasurer fixed by the bylaws and as assigned to
him from time to time by the board of directors. He shall be bonded for the
faithful discharge of his duties as treasurer, the bond to be of such
character, form and in such amount as the board of directors may require.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. VII), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-164. - Term.
   The term of the corporate existence is perpetual.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. VIII), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-165. - Internal affairs.
   The regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation, including the
distribution of assets on dissolution or final liquidation, is placed entirely
with the board of directors or their successors, as provided in the bylaws of
this corporation, subject, however, to the provisions of Act No. 338 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.),
as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. IX), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-166. - Activities of directors; dissolution.
   (a)   No part of the net earnings of the corporation shall inure to the
benefit of any member, trustee, officer or director of the corporation, or any
private individual, except that in case of private individuals reasonable
compensation may be paid for services rendered to or for the corporation
affecting one or more of its purposes. No member, trustee, officer or director
of the corporation or any private individual shall be entitled to share in the
distribution of any of the corporate assets on dissolution of the corporation.
Directors of the corporation shall serve without salary, but may be reimbursed
their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, and
may receive a per diem in an amount set by the city council. No substantial
part of the activities of the corporation shall be the carrying on of
propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence legislation, and the
corporation shall not participate in or intervene in, including the publication
or distribution of statements, any political campaign on behalf of any
candidate for public office.
   (b)   Upon the dissolution of the corporation or the winding up of its
affairs, all property and assets of the corporation shall be distributed
exclusively to the city of its successor.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. X), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-167. - Seal.
   The board of directors shall adopt a corporate seal.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. XI), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-168. - Meetings of board.
   All meetings of the board of directors shall be public and notice of such
meetings shall be in accordance with applicable state statute.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. XII), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-169. - Corporate status.
   The corporation shall at all times be deemed to be an agency or political
subdivision of the city. The books and records of the corporation and of the
board of directors, officers and agents thereof shall be open to inspection and
audit by the city at all reasonable times. The corporation shall submit an
annual report of its activities to the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. XIII), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-170. - Effective date, existence.
   These articles shall become effective and the corporation shall exist upon
and after the approval of these articles by appropriate action of the city
council and the publication of such articles.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. XIV), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-171. - Organization, adoption of by-laws.
   Upon their appointment the board of directors shall convene, organize and by
resolution adopt bylaws which may set forth the corporation's rules of
procedure and regulation of projects. Such by-laws shall be subject to the
approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. XV), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-172. - Publication of articles.
   The city clerk shall in conformity with section 31, of Act No. 338 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.),
as amended, cause the appropriate filing of these articles and shall cause the
articles to be published in the Dearborn Press-Guide, 15340 Michigan Avenue,
Dearborn, Michigan, a newspaper of general circulation within the city, which
publication shall be accompanied by a statement that the right exists to
question the incorporation in court, as provided in section 31 of such act.
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2(Art. XVI), 11-4-81)
Sec. 7-173. - Execution.
   We, the incorporators, sign our names this 9th day of November, 1977.
 
(Signed)            (Signed)
Rose Mary Nehra     Meyer M. Pensler, M.D.
(Signed)            (Signed)
Sharon Gardzinski   H. Fred Campbell
(Signed)            (Signed)
Robert M. Daugherty Cameron C. Oglesbe
 
STATE OF MICHIGAN )
COUNTY OF WAYNE   ) ss.
 
   On this 9th day of November, 1977, before me personally appeared Meyer M.
Pensler, M.D., H. Fred Campbell and Cameron C. Oglesbe to me known to be the
persons described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and
acknowledged that they executed the same as their free act and deed.
 
 (Signed)
 Karen Marie Jakubik
 Notary Public, Wayne County, Mich.
 My Commission Expires: 2/10/80
 
(Ord. No. 81-115, § 2, 11-4-81)
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-640, adopted July 5, 1995, did not specifically
repeal former ch. 8, §§
8-1, 8-26—8-133, which pertained to similar subject matter; hence, said
ordinance has been treated as superseding the provisions former ch. 8.
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2.
State Law reference— Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. - Date of primary election; term of elected officials.
   In compliance with state law, all city primary elections shall be held on
the Tuesday following the first Monday in August of every fourth odd-numbered
year beginning with the year 2005. The terms of office of all elected officials
shall be four years, and all persons elected at the odd year general election
shall take office at 12:00 noon on January 1 following their election.
(Ord. No. 95-640, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 09-1231, 7-13-09)
Secs. 8-2—8-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PRECINCTS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1035, adopted Apr. 18, 2005, amended Art. II in its
entirety. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. No. 95-640, adopted July 5, 1995; Ord. No. 97-718, adopted Dec. 2, 1997;
and Ord. No. 02-874, adopted Jan. 15, 2002.
Sec. 8-26. - Established.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the charter of the city and the laws of the
state, convenient election precincts are hereby established, being numbered and
described as follows this article. All qualified electors in the city shall be
required to vote in the precinct in which they respectively reside at all
elections. The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to do and perform
all such acts as may be required by law to effect the change in election
precincts set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-27. - Number 1.
   Precinct No. 1 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; and east by the city limits and by the C&O Railroad, thence
northerly by the centerline of Wyoming; on the south by the centerline of
Blesser; on the west northerly by the centerline of Normile, thence westerly by
the centerline of Warren, thence northerly by the centerline of Emanon, thence
westerly to the center line of Littlefield, thence northerly by the center line
of Morrow Circle East; with the polling place at McDonald School, Freda and
Diversey Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-28. - Number 2.
   Precinct No. 2 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of Morrow Circle East, thence
easterly to the centerline of Littlefield, thence southerly by the centerline
of Emanon, thence easterly by the centerline of Warren, thence southerly by the
centerline of Normile; on the south by the centerline of Blesser; and on the
west by the centerline of Miller; with the polling place at the McDonald
School, Freda and Diversey Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-29. - Number 3.
   Precinct No. 3 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of Miller; on the south by the
centerline of Blesser; on the west by the centerline of Schaefer; the polling
place at the St. Alphonsus Father Yagley Hall, 7500 Schaefer Road.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-30. - Number 4.
   Precinct No. 4 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of Schaefer; on the south by the
centerline of Warren; on the west by the centerline of Chase; the polling place
at the Oakman School, Chase and Gould Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-31. - Number 5.
   Precinct No. 5 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of Chase; thence southerly to
the centerline of Warren, thence easterly to the centerline of Anthony, thence
southerly to the C&O Railroad; on the south by the C&O Railroad, thence
westerly by the centerline of Gould; and on the west by the city limits; with
the polling place at the Oakman School, Chase and Gould Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-32. - Number 6.
   Precinct No. 6 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Blesser; on the east by the centerline of Wyoming; on the
south by the centerline of Ford Rd., thence southerly by the centerline of
Miller to the C&O Railroad; and on the west by the by the C&O Railroad, thence
northerly by the centerline of Hartwell, thence easterly along the centerline
of Hemlock to the centerline of Oakman Blvd. thence northerly to Blesser; with
the polling place at the Becker School, Henson and Miller Streets.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-33. - Number 7.
   Precinct No. 7 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Warren, thence southerly along the centerline of Schaefer
Rd., thence easterly along the centerline of Blesser; on the east by the
centerline of Oakman Blvd., thence easterly along the centerline of Hemlock
thence southerly along the centerline of Hartwell; on the south by the C&O
Railroad; and on the west by the centerline of Anthony; with the polling place
at the Lowrey School, Jonathon and Henson Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-34. - Number 8.
   Precinct No. 8 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Warren; on the east by the centerline of the C&O Railroad,
thence westerly by the centerline of Paul, thence southerly by the centerline
of Middlesex; on the south by the centerline of Hemlock; and on the west by the
centerline of Steadman, thence westerly along the centerline of Paul, thence
northerly along the centerline of Payne, thence easterly along the centerline
of Henn, thence northerly along the centerline of Steadman; with the polling
place at the Maples School, Payne and Arthur Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-35. - Number 9.
   Precinct No. 9 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Gould; on the east by the centerline of the C&O Railroad,
thence westerly along the centerline of Warren, thence southerly along the
centerline of Steadman thence westerly along the centerline of Henn, thence
southerly along the centerline of Payne; on the south by the centerline of
Paul; and on the west by Greenfield; with the polling place at the Maples
School, Payne and Arthur Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-36. - Number 10.
   Precinct No. 10 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north and
east by the centerline of the C&O Railroad; on the south by the centerline of
Ruby, and on the west by the centerline of Middlesex, thence easterly along the
centerline of Paul; with the polling place at Hubbard Manor East, 5500 Calhoun.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-37. - Number 11.
   Precinct No. 11 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Hemlock; on the east by the centerline of Middlesex; on the
south by the centerline of Ruby; and on the west by the centerline of Ternes,
thence easterly along centerline of Ford Road, thence northerly along the
centerline of Kendal; with the polling place at the William Ford School, Alber
and Ternes.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-38. - Number 12.
   Precinct No. 12 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Paul, thence southerly along the centerline of Steadman,
thence easterly along the centerline of Hemlock; on the east by the centerline
of Kendal, thence westerly along the centerline Ford Road, thence southerly
along the centerline of Ternes; on the south by the centerline of Ruby thence
northerly along the property line of the Henry Ford Retirement Village, thence
westerly along the centerline of Ford Road; and on the west by the centerline
of Greenfield; with the polling place at the William Ford School, Alber and
Ternes.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-39. - Number 13.
   Precinct No. 13 shall be all that part of the city known as The Henry Ford
Retirement Village permanent multiple-unit housing property; with the polling
place at the Henry Ford Retirement Village, Ford Road and Greenfield Road.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-40. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1512, adopted December 8, 2015, repealed §
8-40, which pertained to Precinct No. 14 and derived from Ord. No. 05-1035,
adopted April 18, 2005.
Sec. 8-41. - Number 15.
   Precinct No. 15 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Ruby; on the east by the centerline of Horger; on the south
by the centerline of Michigan; and on the west by the centerline of Schlaff,
thence westerly along the centerline of Hubbard Drive, thence northerly along
the centerline of Ternes, thence westerly along the centerline of Colson,
thence northerly along the centerline of Steadman; with the polling place at
the Woodworth School, Ternes and Hubbard Drive Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-42. - Number 16.
   Precinct No. 16 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the property line of the Henry Ford Retirement Village and by the centerline of
Ruby; on the east by the centerline of Steadman, thence easterly along the
centerline of Colson, thence southerly along the centerline of Ternes, thence
easterly along the centerline of Hubbard Dr., thence southerly along the
centerline of Schlaff; on the south by the centerline of Michigan Ave.; and on
the west by the centerline of Greenfield; with the polling place at the
Woodworth School, Ternes and Hubbard Drive Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-43. - Number 17.
   Precinct No. 17 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of Greenfield; on the south by
the Con-Rail Railroad; and on the west by the centerline of Southfield; with
the polling place at the Henry Ford School, Driscoll and Korte Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-44. - Number 18.
   Precinct No. 18 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Ruby, thence southerly along the C & O Railroad, thence
northerly along the centerline of Miller, thence easterly along the Centerline
of Ford, thence southerly along the centerline of Wyoming, thence easterly
along centerline of Michigan; on the east by the city limits; on the south by
the centerline of the Con-Rail Railroad; and on the west by the centerline of
Schaefer, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Maple, thence west along
the centerline of Michigan Avenue, thence north along the centerline of Horger;
with the polling place at the Miller School, Lois and Michigan Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05; Ord. No. 15-1512, 12-8-15)
Sec. 8-45. - Number 19.
   Precinct No. 19 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Michigan; on the east by the centerline of Maple, thence
southerly along the centerline of Schaefer; on the south by the centerline of
the Con-Rail Railroad; and on the west by the centerline of Greenfield; with
the polling place at the City Hall Annex, Maple and John Nagy Dr.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-46. - Number 20.
   Precinct No. 20 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north and
west by Dix Avenue; and on the east and south by the city limits; with the
polling place at the Salina School, Salina and Lowrey Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-47. - Number 21.
   Precinct No. 21 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by the city limits; on the south by the
centerline of Dix, and by the city limits; and on the west by the centerline of
Schaefer; with the polling place at the Salina School, Salina and Lowrey
Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-48. - Number 22.
   Precinct No. 22 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Rotunda Drive, thence northerly along the centerline of
Eastham, thence easterly along the centerline of Woodland, thence easterly
along the centerline of Middlebury North, thence southerly along the centerline
of Greenfield, thence easterly along the centerline of Rotunda Drive; on the
east by the centerline of Schaefer; and on the south and west by the city
limits; with the polling place at the St. Joseph Parish Hall, 16101 Rotunda
Drive.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-49. - Number 23.
   Precinct No. 23 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by the centerline of Schaefer on the south
by the centerline of Rotunda Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of
Greenfield Road, thence westerly along the centerline of Middlebury North,
thence westerly along the centerline of Woodland, thence southerly along the
centerline of Eastham, thence westerly along the centerline of Rotunda Drive,
thence southwesterly along the city limits; and on the west by the centerline
of Southfield; with the polling place at the St. Joseph Parish Hall, 16101
Rotunda Drive.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-50. - Number 24.
   Precinct No. 24 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by the centerline of Southfield; on the
south by the centerline of Rotunda Drive, thence northwesterly along the
centerline of Donaldson; and on the west by the centerline of Elmdale, thence
northwesterly along the centerline of Military, thence easterly along the
centerline of Beech, thence northerly along the centerline of Tenny, thence
easterly along the centerline of Nona, thence northerly along the centerline of
Mason; with the polling place at the Sisson Manor, 1515 Mason.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-51. - Number 25.
   Precinct No. 25 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the northeast
by the centerline of Rotunda Drive; on the east by the city limits; on the
south by the centerline of Ash; and on the west along the centerline of
Carlysle, thence westerly along the centerline of Snow with the polling place
at the Snow School, Culver and Ash Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-52. - Number 26.
   Precinct No. 26 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the northeast
by the centerline of Rotunda, and the centerline of Snow; on the east by the
centerline of Carlysle; on the south by the centerline of Carlysle; and on the
west by the centerline of Pelham; with the polling place at the Snow School,
Culver and Ash Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-53. - Number 27.
   Precinct No. 27 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Audette, thence southerly along the centerline of Pelham,
thence easterly along the centerline of Carlysle thence easterly along the
centerline of Ash; on the east by the centerline of Southfield; on the south by
the city limits; and on the west by centerline of Hipp; with the polling place
at the Administrative Service Center, Edgewood and Carlysle Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-54. - Number 28.
   Precinct No. 28 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
Outer Drive, thence northerly along Village Rd., thence easterly along Rotunda
Dr.; on the east by the centerline of Pelham and by the centerline of Audette,
thence southerly along the centerline of Hipp; on the south by the city limits;
and on the west by the centerline of Campbell; with the polling place at the
Edsel Ford High School, Rotunda Drive near Pelham.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-55. - Number 29.
   Precinct No. 29 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Outer Drive, thence northeasterly along the centerline of
Elmdale, thence easterly along the centerline of Donaldson; on the east by the
centerline of Village Road, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Outer
Drive, thence southerly along the centerline of Campbell; on the south by the
city limits; and on the west by the centerline of Dudley, thence westerly along
the centerline of Notre Dame, thence northerly along the centerline of Monroe;
with the polling place at the Whitmore Bolles School, Whitmore and Alice
Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-56. - Number 30.
   Precinct No. 30 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Madison; on the east by the centerline of Monroe, thence
easterly along the centerline of Notre Dame and thence southerly along the
centerline of Dudley; on the south by the city limits; and on the west by the
centerline of Pardee, thence easterly along the centerline of Carlysle, thence
northerly along the centerline of Lincoln, thence easterly along the centerline
of to Penn, thence southerly along the centerline of McKinley, thence easterly
along the centerline of Carlysle, thence northerly along the centerline of
Roosevelt, thence westerly along the centerline of Notre Dame, thence northerly
along the centerline of Pardee, thence easterly along the centerline of
Whitmore, thence northerly along the centerline of McKinley; with the polling
place at the Whitmore Bolles School, Whitmore and Alice Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-57. - Number 31.
   Precinct No. 31 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of Southfield, on the south by
the Con-Rail Railroad; and on the west by the centerline of Monroe, thence
easterly along the centerline of the lower branch of the Rouge River, thence
westerly along the centerline of Cherry Hill, thence northeasterly along the
centerline of Brentwood, thence northerly along the centerline of North Brady,
thence northerly along the centerline of the Rouge River; with the polling
place at the Bryant Branch Library, Michigan and Mason Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-58. - Number 32.
   Precinct No. 32 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of the Rouge River, and by the
centerline of North Brady, thence southwesterly along the centerline of
Brentwood, thence easterly along the centerline of Cherry Hill, thence
southerly along the lower branch of the Rouge River, thence southerly along the
centerline of Monroe; on the south by the Con-Rail Railroad; and on the west by
the centerline of Outer Drive, easterly along the lower branch of the Rouge
river, thence northerly along Sylvan, thence easterly along Cherry Hill, thence
northerly along North Milirary, thence northeasterly along Golfview Drive; with
the polling place at the Bryant Branch Library, Michigan and Mason Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-59. - Number 33.
   Precinct No. 33 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by Golfview; on the south along the centerline of
Outer Drive, thence westerly along the centerline of Buckingham; and on the
west by the centerline of North Martha, thence westerly along the centerline of
Oak, thence northerly along the centerline of N. York; with the polling place
at the Howard School, York and Edward Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05; Ord. No. 09-1199, 1-5-09)
Sec. 8-60. - Number 34.
   Precinct No. 34 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by the centerline of North York, thence easterly
along the centerline of Oak, thence southerly along the centerline of Martha;
on the south by the centerline of Buckingham; and on the west by the centerline
of North Telegraph; with the polling place at the Howard School, York and
Edward Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05; Ord. No. 09-1199, 1-5-09)
Sec. 8-61. - Number 35.
   Precinct No. 35 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Buckingham; on the east by the centerline of Outer Drive, on
the south by the centerline of Cherry Hill; and on the west by the centerline
of York; with the polling place at the Lindbergh School, N. Waverly and Myrtle
Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-62. - Number 36.
   Precinct No. 36 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Buckingham; on the east by the centerline of N. York; on the
south by the centerline of Cherry Hill; and on the west by the centerline of
North Telegraph Road; with the polling place at the Lindbergh School, N.
Waverly and Myrtle Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-63. - Number 37.
   Precinct No. 37 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the city limits; on the east by N. Telegraph; on the south by the centerline of
Sheridan, thence northerly along the centerline of Drexel, thence westerly
along the centerline of Wilson; and on the west by the centerline of North
Lafayette. Also, all that part of the city bounded on the north by the city
limits; on the east by the centerline of North Silvery Lane; on the south by
the centerline of Herbert Weir Drive; and on the west by the city limits with
the polling place at the Clara Bryant School, N. Vernon and Coburn Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05; Ord. No. 15-1512, 12-8-15)
Sec. 8-64. - Number 38.
   Precinct No. 38 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Wilson, thence southerly along the centerline of Drexel,
thence easterly along the centerline of Sheridan; on the east by the centerline
of Telegraph; and on the south by the centerline of Claremont, thence northerly
along the centerline of Mohawk, thence westerly along the centerline of Cherry
Hill; and on the west by the centerline of Kingsbury, thence easterly along the
southerly line of Levagood Park, thence northerly along the centerline of N.
Denwood. Also, all that part of the city bounded on the north by the city
limits; on the east by the centerline of North Lafayette; on the south by the
centerline of Wilson, and on the west by the centerline of North Silvery Lane
with the polling place at the Clara Bryant School, North Vernon and Coburn
Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05; Ord. No. 15-1512, 12-8-15)
Sec. 8-65. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1512, adopted December 8, 2015, repealed §
8-40, which pertained to Precinct No. 39 and derived from Ord. No. 05-1035,
adopted April 18, 2005.
Sec. 8-66. - Number 40.
   Precinct No. 40 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Herbert Weir Drive, thence southerly along the centerline of
N. Silvery Lane, thence easterly along centerline of Wilson; on the east by the
centerline of North Denwood, thence westerly along the southerly line of
Levagood Park, thence southerly along the centerline of Kingsbury, thence
westerly along the centerline of Cherry Hill, thence southerly along the
centerline of S. Silvery Lane and such centerline extended; on the south by the
lower branch of the Rouge River; and on the west by the city limits; with the
polling place at the Haigh School, Coburn and Silvery Lane Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-67. - Number 41.
   Precinct No. 41 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Cherry Hill; on the east by the centerline of Mohawk, thence
easterly along the centerline of Claremont, thence southerly along the
centerline of Telegraph Road; on the south by the lower branch of the Rouge
River, and on the west along the centerline of S. Silvery Lane and such
centerline extended; with the polling place at the Haigh School, Coburn and
Silvery Lane Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-68. - Number 42.
   Precinct No. 42 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the lower branch of the Rouge River, thence northerly along the centerline of
S. Telegraph, thence easterly along the centerline of Cherry Hill, thence
southerly along the centerline of S. Highland, thence easterly along the
centerline of Marshall, thence southerly along the centerline Elmwood, thence
northeasterly along the centerline of Fordson; on the east along the centerline
of Outer Drive; on the south by the Con-Rail Railroad; and on the west by the
city limits; with the polling place at the Dearborn High School, Outer Drive
and S. York Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-69. - Number 43.
   Precinct No. 43 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Cherry Hill, thence northeasterly along the centerline of
Outer Drive; on the east by the centerline of N. Military; on the south by the
centerline of Cherry Hill, thence southerly along the centerline of Sylvan and
such centerline extended, thence westerly along the lower branch of the Rouge
River; and on the west by the centerline of Outer Drive, thence southwesterly
along the centerline of Fordson, thence northerly along Elmwood, thence
easterly along Marshall, thence northerly along S. Highland; with the polling
place at the Dearborn High School, Outer Drive and S. York Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-70. - Number 44.
   Precinct No. 44 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by the center line of Mason, thence westerly
along the centerline of Nona, thence southerly along the centerline of Tenny,
thence westerly along the centerline of Beech, thence easterly along the
centerline of Military; on the south along the centerline of Elmdale, thence
northwesterly along the centerline of Gregory, thence westerly along the
centerline of Beech; and on the west and by the centerline of Outer Drive; with
the polling place at the DuVall School, Beech and South Military Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-71. - Number 45.
   Precinct No. 45 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Beech; on the northeast by the centerline of Gregory; on the
southeast by the centerline of Elmdale; and on the south by the centerline of
Outer Drive, thence southerly along the centerline of Monroe, thence westerly
along the centerline of Madison; and on the west along the centerline of
Pardee, thence westerly along the centerline of Oxford, thence northerly along
the centerline of Summer, thence westerly along the centerline of Outer Drive;
with the polling place at the Dearborn Christian Reformed Church, 21360
Donaldson.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-72. - Number 46.
   Precinct No. 46 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by the centerline of Outer Drive, thence
southwesterly along the centerline of Summer, thence easterly along the
centerline of Oxford, thence southerly along the centerline of Pardee; on the
south by the centerline of Princeton; and on the west by the centerline of S.
Telegraph; with the polling place at the O.L. Smith School, 23851 Yale.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-73. - Number 47.
   Precinct No. 47 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Princeton, thence southerly along the centerline of Pardee,
thence easterly along the centerline of Madison; on the east by the centerline
of McKinley, thence westerly along the centerline of Whitmore, thence southerly
along the centerline of Pardee, thence easterly along the centerline of Notre
Dame, thence southerly along the centerline of Roosevelt, thence westerly along
the centerline of Carlysle, thence northerly along the centerline of McKinley,
thence westerly along the centerline of Penn, thence southerly along the
centerline of Lincoln, thence westerly along the centerline of Carlysle, thence
southerly along the centerline of Pardee; on the south by the city limits; and
on the west by the centerlines of Parker, thence westerly along the centerline
of Madison, thence northerly along the centerline of Grindley Park; with the
polling place at the Nowlin School, Penn and Madison Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-74. - Number 48.
   Precinct No. 48 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the centerline of Princeton; on the east by the centerline of Grindley Park,
thence westerly along the centerline of Madison, thence southerly along the
centerline of Parker; on the south by the city limits; and on the west by the
centerline of Telegraph; with the polling place at the Nowlin School, Penn and
Madison Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-75. - Number 49.
   Precinct No. 49 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by South Telegraph; on the south by the city
limits; on the west by Westwood, thence easterly along the centerline of Ross,
thence northerly along the centerline of Bailey; with the polling place at the
Long School, Boston and Westwood Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Sec. 8-76. - Number 50.
   Precinct No. 50 shall be all that part of the city bounded on the north by
the Con-Rail Railroad; on the east by the centerline of Bailey, thence westerly
along the centerline of Ross, thence southerly along the centerline of
Westwood; on the south by the city limits; and on the west by the city limits;
with the polling place at the Long School, Boston and Westwood Avenues.
(Ord. No. 05-1035, 4-18-05)
Secs. 8-77—8-100. - Reserved.
Chapter 9 - FEES FOR PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; curbcuts, §
17-51 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. - Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Fee Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 101, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-2. - Scope.
   The purpose of this chapter is to incorporate, include and regulate any and
all fees and charges authorized and directed to be collected for permits,
compliance certificates and services by the Department of Economic Development,
the Property Maintenance and Buildings Division, and the Fire Department by the
ordinances, codes, charter and resolutions of the city, as well as the state
statute.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 102, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 20-1683,
9-22-20; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22)
Sec. 9-3. - Fees not covered.
   Any and all fees and charges authorized and directed to be collected for
permits, compliance certificates and services by the Department of Economic
Development, the Property Maintenance and Buildings Division, and the Fire
Department, by the ordinances, codes, charter and resolutions of the city, as
well as the state statutes, which are not included in this chapter, are
declared to continue in existence and remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 103, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 20-1683,
9-22-20; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-3a. - Permit and compliance certificate fees and charges, annual
increases.
   All permit and compliance certificate fees and charges of the Department of
Economic Development and the Property Maintenance and Buildings Division may be
increased on an annual basis effective July 1 of each year, provided the city
council approves the Department of Economic Development budget and sets the
percentage increase in an amount not to exceed five percent by resolution.
(Ord. No. 03-953, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 20-1683, 9-22-20;
Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-4. - Inspection charges.
   The permit fee for each building permit shall normally include only those
called inspections specifically enumerated in the governing ordinance. The
permit or compliance certificate fee for all other permits or compliance
certificates shall normally include no more than one rough and/or one final
inspection. All additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready
or not being properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all
reinspections of violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or
alterations not covered in the various permit or compliance certificate fees
schedules, all overtime inspection, all special inspections not otherwise
provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the
contractor shall be charged for as specified below:
   (1)   Additional inspections during normal working hours:
      a.   First one-half hour or fraction thereof    $60.00
      b.   Each additional one-half hour or fraction thereof    50.00
   (2)   Overtime inspections on regular working days:
      a.   First one-half hour or fraction thereof    50.00
      b.   Each additional one-half hour or fraction thereof    40.00
   (3)   Overtime inspections, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The charge for
such inspections when performed shall be determined on an individual basis and
shall reflect the entire cost to the city for the services provided including
wages, double time, minimum reporting time, fringe benefits, car allowance and
office clerical time necessitated by the service provided.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 104, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 10-1285,
7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-5. - Refunds.
   (a)   Requests for refunds must be made within one year of the date of
issuance of a permit or compliance certificate, unless specifically approved
otherwise by the directors of residential services and economic and community
development or their designees.
   (b)   A minimum of $30.00 shall be deducted to cover the cost of overhead.
If any inspections have been made prior to cancellation of a permit or
compliance certificate, an amount equal to the hourly rate for such inspection,
as specified in section
9-4, shall also be deducted.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 105, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 10-1285,
7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-6. - Fees for copies.
   (a)   Fees for copies made by the city of letters, violation notices,
certificates, etc., per page shall be $1.00, with a minimum fee of $5.00.
   (b)   For research of documents requiring written notification, with a
minimum of 24 hours notice, the base fee will be $25.00. Copies of documents
will be $1.00 per page.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1601, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-7. - Administrative processing fee.
   A nonrefundable administrative processing fee of $100.00 shall be required
upon the submittal of a permit or compliance certificate application, and for
the administration of interval inspections.
(Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 11-1341, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-
22)
Sec. 9-8. - Duplicate permits or compliance certificates.
   A $15.00 fee may be charged for duplicate permits or compliance
certificates.
(Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-9. - Revised permits or compliance certificates.
   The fee for revised permits or compliance certificates shall be as follows:
   (1)   Residential permits:$30.00 plus $15.00 for each $1,000.00 of increased
construction cost or fraction thereof, if any.
   (2)   Commercial permits: $75.00 plus $15.00 for each $1,000.00 of increased
construction cost or fraction thereof, if any.
(Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-10. - Fees for extensions.
   (a)   The fee to extend a fire protection permit shall be one-half of the
original permit fee.
   (b)   The fee for all other permit or compliance certificate extensions
shall be $30.00.
(Ord. No. 07-1137, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 14-1438, 9-23-
14; Ord. No. 14-1447, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 15-1453, 1-27-15; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Secs. 9-11—9-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 9-31. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of the building and building regulations chapter.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 201, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-32. - Cost factors.
   The cost factors which shall be used in the computing of fees shall be
determined by the building valuation data report per the current Marshall-Swift
standard in use at time of permit application. The construction cost as
determined shall serve as the basis for the charging of permit fees and for
statistical records.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 202, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 98-748, 12-15-98)
Sec. 9-33. - Construction permits.
   (a)   Residential and commercial buildings and structures. A nonrefundable
administrative processing fee of $50.00—$100.00 shall be required upon the
submittal of a building permit application. The building permit fees for new
buildings, additions, alterations and miscellaneous structures, including
garages, accessory buildings over 200 square feet, towers and antennae, shall
be based on the construction cost as follows:
      (1)   A minimum permit fee of $100.00 for the first $2,000.00 of
construction cost.
      (2)   $2,0001.00 to $1,000,000.00 of construction cost shall be $15.00
per $1,000.00 of construction cost.
 
Estimated construction cost                    Fee 
$1,000,0001.00 to $5,000,000.00, per $1,000.00 $10.00
$5,000,001.00 to $7,000,000.00 per $1,000.00   10.00
$7,000,001.00 to 10,000,000.00 per $1,000.00   10.00
Over $10,000,000.00, per $1,000.00             10.00
 
   (b)   Water fee. The water fee for construction work estimated at
$500,000.00 or less shall be 0.06 percent of the estimated construction cost.
The water fee for construction work estimated at a cost in excess of
$500,000.00 shall be $360.00 plus 0.02 percent of the estimated cost in excess
of $500,000.00.
   (c)   Use of hydrant fee. The permit is available at fire station no. 1 at a
charge of $90.00.
   (d)   Duplicate permits. The fee for duplicate permits shall be $20.00.
   (e)   Revised permits. The fee for revised permits shall be as follows:
      (1)   Residential permits, $30.00 plus $15.00 for each $1,000.00 of
increased construction cost or fraction thereof, if any.
      (2)   Commercial permits, $75.00 plus $15.00 for each $1,000.00 of
increased construction cost or fraction thereof, if any.
   (f)   Duplication costs. The fee for duplicate sets of approved plans shall
be $1.25 for each sheet.
   (g)   Tree planting. The unit fee for tree planting, based on the
requirement of one tree between sidewalk and curb for each 40 feet or major
fraction thereof, shall be based upon the rate at time of planting. Any owner
or contractor who finds it inadvisable or impossible to plant the required
number and species of trees because of weather or other considerations may pay
to the city a sum equal to the number of trees required multiplied by the unit
fee per tree, and such sum shall be used for the cost of purchasing and the
labor of planting such tree or trees when the season of the year will permit it
to be done. After such payment has been made to the city, the tree planting
requirements shall be determined to have been met for the purpose of issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for the premises involved.
   (h)   Concrete flatwork on private property. The permit fee for concrete
walks, drives, patios, and other flatwork shall be computed at the rate of
$8.00 for each 100 square feet of concrete to be installed with a minimum fee
of $30.00.
   (i)   Sidewalks and approaches on public property. The permit fee for
sidewalks and approaches on public property shall be computed at the rate of
$0.30 per lineal foot of sidewalk or apron for a side drive to be constructed;
provided, however, that in no case shall such permit fee be less than $100.00.
   (j)   Plan examination fee. For all structures, including new residential
and commercial buildings, additions, alterations, fire suppression drawings and
fire protection systems, the plan examination fees, in addition to any permit
fees, shall be as follows:
      (1)   Residential projects:
          a.   Plan examination fee shall be equal to $5.00 for each $1,000.00
of construction cost of the proposed structure with a minimum of $100.00 and
maximum of $250.00. The fee for revised plans shall be $10.00 per sheet, plus
any additional permit fees for increased costs of the project based on the
construction cost as per this section with a minimum fee of $50.00.
         b.   Site plan review fee by the engineering division, when
applicable, shall be $150.00. The fee for revised plans required by the
engineering division shall be $120.00.
      (2)   Commercial and industrial projects:
         a.   The plan review fee shall be calculated based on the State of
Michigan approved ICC valuation table according to the following values:
 
*$0-$500,000 .0013 of building valuation but not less than $200.00 minimum
$500,001 +   $700.00 plus 0.003 of building valuation over $500,001.00
*Based on the Bureau of Construction Codes square foot construction cost
table. Values will be adjusted based on the Bureau of Construction Code cycle.
Plan review and administrative fees are nonrefundable.
 
   The fee for the review of revised plans shall be based on the following
schedule:
First correction  (2nd Review)                  Minimum $50.00 administrative
                                                fee
Second correction (3rd Review)                  20% of original plan review
                                                fee, minimum $200.00
Third correction                               New plan submittal and payment
                                                of full plan review fees.
Applicant generated plan design changes         20% of the current plan review
                                                fee, minimum $200.00/hr
Foundation plan review fee                      $200.00/hr
Revisions to issued permitted plans             $200.00/hr
Miscellaneous commercial plan reviews;
demolition, reroofing, waterproofing, satellite $200.00/hr
dishes, concrete, trash enclosures etc.
 
         b.   Engineering site plan review fee shall be equal to one-half of
one percent of the cost of construction, including, but not limited to,
underground utilities and parking lot construction as determined by the
engineering division with a minimum fee of $250.00. The fee for revised plans
required by the engineering division shall be $120.00.
         c.   Planning/zoning review shall be $100.00.
   (k)   Fast track construction permits. The fees for permits issued to begin
construction of foundations or site work, or other preliminary construction
work pending the issuance of regular full permit, shall be as follows:
      (1)   For residential work    $50.00
       (2)   For commercial work   100.00
      Plus three percent of construction cost.
   (l)   Temporary construction permits. The fees for temporary permits for
construction-related temporary office structures, barricades, public
obstructions and construction shanties shall be $100.00 for each unit per six-
month interval from date of issuance.
   (m)   Other temporary permits. The fee for temporary permits for maintaining
or using other temporary structures or facilities or the temporary use of
property, as authorized by the economic and community development department,
the building board of appeals, the zoning board of appeals or the city council
shall be $100.00 for each permit per 12-month interval from date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 203, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 02-873, 1-15-02; Ord. No. 03-954, 5-
6-03; Ord. No. 07-1119, 2-5-0; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-107; Ord. No. 12-1351, 2-
27-12; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-33a. - Real estate fees.
   All persons contracting with the city to purchase vacant lots through the
sealed bid process shall pay a fee for the following applications:
   Application for extension of time to close the sale of real estate   
$250.00
   Application for extension of time to begin construction on real
estate   $500.00 and
   one percent (1%) of the purchase price multiplied by the number of months of
the extension.
(Ord. No. 99-797, 11-3-99; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8- 23-22; Ord. No. 22-1778, 12-6-
22)
Sec. 9-33b. - Compliance certificates.
   Concrete flat work on private property. The compliance certificate fee for
concrete walks, drives, patios, and other flatwork shall be computed at the
rate of $8.00 for each 100 square feet of concrete to be installed with a
minimum fee of $100.00. A compliance certificate shall be issued for fences and
sheds up to and including 200 square feet with a minimum fee of $100.00.
(Ord. No. 03-955, 5-16-03; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-
22)
Sec. 9-34. - Use of land.
   Use of land permits shall be approved by the city engineer and the director
of the Department of Economic Development (or their designee). The fee for such
permits shall be $100.00 per acre. Upon expiration of the term of the permit,
the land so used shall be returned to its original condition unless
specifically approved otherwise.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 204, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-35. - Moving permits.
   (a)   The permit fees for moving a building or structure from its location
on a parcel of land to some other location with or without passing over or
going upon a public street or way shall be as follows:
      (1)   Structure moved one-fourth mile or under    $175.00
      (2)   Over one-fourth mile   175.00
         plus per each additional one-fourth mile   75.00
      (b)   Prior to the issuance of a moving permit by the Department of
Economic Development, approval of the date, time schedule, route and
destination must be obtained from the department of public works,
communications, traffic safety division, engineering division and the fire
marshal's office. A deposit of $15,000.00 must be paid to the Department of
Economic Development as a cash bond to cover any damage to public property on
or along such route incurred as a result of moving operations.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 205, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-36. - Wrecking permits.
   The permit fees for the demolition of buildings or structures shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Residential garage   $100.00
   (2)   Structures 6,000 cubic feet or under   100.00
   (3)   Structures over 6,000 cubic feet   100.00
      plus per 1,000 cubic feet over 6,000 cubic feet   5.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 206, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-37. - Flammable liquid tanks and bulk storage tanks.
   The fees for tank installation permits for bulk storage of flammable liquids
and other materials shall be as follows:
   (1)   20,000 gallons or under   $100.00
   (2)   Over 20,000 gallons   150.00
   (3)   Removal of underground storage tanks, per tank   100.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 207, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-38. - Appeal boards.
   Application to the boards of appeals shall be accompanied by the following
fees, payable prior to scheduling of the appeal:
   (1)   Building board of appeals, including mechanical, electrical, plumbing,
fire, high pressure boiler and existing structural codes, request for variance:
      a.   Code interpretations or alternative compliance appeals   $750.00
      b.   Fence appeal   300.00
      c.   Medical marijuana caregiver facility appeal   500.00
      d.   Sign appeal   500.00
      e.   Special meeting (in addition to the standard fee that applies to the
appeal)   750.00
   (2)   Zoning board of appeals, request for hearing:
      a.   Residential zoning variance(s) (detached homes containing up to
three dwelling units; includes first hearing and one subsequent hearing if
tabled, the full fee to be charged for any subsequent hearings)   525.00
      b.   Commercial zoning variance(s) (including multiple family residential
buildings with more than three dwelling units; includes first hearing and one
subsequent hearing if tabled, the full fee to be charged for any subsequent
hearings)   1,250.00
      c.   Code interpretation review   1,000.00
      d.   Special meeting (this is in addition to the standard fee that would
apply to the variance request)   750.00
   (3)   If the application to either the building or zoning board of appeals
is withdrawn prior to the publication or mailing of hearing notices, the fee
shall be refunded to the applicant except for an amount equal to the
administrative fee established in section
9-33(a). Thereafter, no refund will be given.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 208, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 03-956, 5-
6-03; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 17-1587, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 20-1683,
9-22-20; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22; Ord. No. 22-1773, 9-13-22)
Sec. 9-39. - Annual maintenance permit.
   (a)   Industrial buildings, warehouses, engineering laboratories and large
office buildings where qualified licensed tradesmen are employed on a fulltime
basis, under the auspices of a licensed engineer relative to the trade, shall
apply for an annual maintenance permit. The fees charged for annual maintenance
permits shall be in lieu of regular permit fees for the maintenance, repair and
alteration to existing buildings of systems only and shall be paid in addition
to any appropriate annual inspection fee for such buildings or premises. Work
done by outside contractors automatically require permits. Work on new
buildings, additions, etc., or major alterations, shall require separate
building permits, as specified in section
9-33, and are limited to 600 man-hours per trade. A log shall be kept on
project man hours and made available for inspection by building and safety
department personnel upon request. Areas relating to egress, fire protection,
fire suppression and/or fire-rated assembly require permits.
   (b)   The fees for annual maintenance permits for buildings over 17,000
square feet in floor area shall be as follows:
      (1)   Building maintenance, per 1,000 square feet floor space   $5.00
      (2)   Plumbing maintenance, per 1,000 square feet floor space   5.00
      (3)   Electrical maintenance, per 1,000 square feet floor space   5.00
      (4)   Heating maintenance, per 1,000 square feet floor space   5.00
      (5)   High pressure boiler and unfired pressure vessel maintenance, per
1,000 square feet floor space   5.00
      (6)   Refrigeration maintenance, per 1,000 square feet floor space
   5.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 209, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-40. - Interval inspection.
   All commercial and industrial buildings and facilities, all multiple
dwellings, three and over, all places of public assembly and all public
establishments, when required to be inspected annually for compliance with
minimum health, safety, and public welfare requirements, shall be subject to
the following fee schedule:
   (1)   Assembly halls:
      a.   Not over 100 seats or 2,000 square feet    $100.00
      b.   Over 100 seats or 2,000 square feet   100.00
   (2)   Auto dealerships    100.00
   (3)   Auto parking structures   100.00
   (4)   Barber and beauty shops   100.00
   (5)   Barber colleges and beauty schools   100.00
   (6)   Bowling alleys   100.00
   (7)   Carwashes   100.00
   (8)   Churches   No charge
   (9)   Commercial establishments not otherwise provided for   100.00
   (10)   Drive-in restaurants   100.00
   (11)   Drive-in theatres   100.00
   (12)   Dry cleaning establishments   100.00
   (13)   Flammable liquid and bulk storage tanks:
      a.   Not exceeding 20,000 gallons   100.00
      b.   Over 20,000 but not exceeding 100,000 gallons   100.00
      c.   Over 100,000 but not exceeding 300,000 gallons   100.00
      d.   Over 300,000 gallons   100.00
   (14)   Funeral homes   100.00
   (15)   Government buildings   No charge
   (16)   Hospitals and institutional buildings:
      a.   Not over 2,000 square feet in area   100.00
      b.   Over 2,000 square feet in area   100.00
         plus per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   5.00
   (17)   Hotels and motels:
      a.   1 to 20 rooms   100.00
      b.   Over 20 rooms   100.00
         plus, per room   15.00
   (18)   Industrial buildings and warehouses:
      a.   1-10,000 square feet   100.00
      b.   Over 10,000 square feet   100.00
         plus for each additional 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   5.00
   (19)   Instructional institutions and business schools:
      a.   Not over 2,000 square feet in area   100.00
      b.   Over 2,000 square feet in area   100.00
         plus per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   5.00
   (20)   Junkyards and open storage yards, per acre   100.00
   (21)   Laboratories (medical, engineering, research):
      a.   Not over 2,000 square feet in area   100.00
      b.   Over 2,000 square feet in area   100.00
         plus per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   5.00
   (22)   Laundries   100.00
   (23)   Lumberyards and coalyards:
      a.   Up to 10,000 square feet   100.00
      b.   Over 10,000 square feet   100.00
         plus for each 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof   20.00
   (24)   Malls and enclosed shopping centers (public areas):
      a.   First 10,000 square feet   100.00
         each additional 10,000 square feet   60.00
      b.   Motor supply stations   100.00
   (25)   Marijuana caregiver facilities:
      a.   5,000 square feet or under   100.00
      b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet   50.00
      c.   Each additional sub-facility that is added to the caregiver facility
after the initial inspection   100.00
   (26)      Multiple dwellings, condominiums, townhouses, cooperative
apartments:
      a.   Three-family   150.00
      b.   Over three-family   150.00
         plus for each additional unit over three   30.00
   (27)   Office buildings:
      a.   Each floor not over 2,000 square feet   50.00
      b.   Each floor over 2,000 square feet   50.00
         plus per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   10.00
   (28)   Pool halls   100.00
   (29)   Public establishments (bars and restaurants)
   (30)   Recreational facilities, indoor
   (31)   Retail stores and tenant spaces:
      a.   Each floor not over 2,000 square feet   100.00
      b.   Each floor over 2,000 square feet   100.00
         plus per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   10.00
   (32)   Roominghouses   100.00
      plus per room   10.00
   (33)   Schools, primary and secondary   No charge
   (34)   Service garages (each building)   100.00
   (35)   Storage garages:
      a.   Not exceeding 2,000 square feet   100.00
      b.   Over 2,000 square feet   100.00
         plus per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof   10.00
   (36)   Theatres (each viewing area):
      a.   Not exceeding 400 seats   75.00
      b.   Over 400 seats   85.00
   (37)   Used car lots, each location   100.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 210, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 11-1341, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 20-1683,
9-22-20; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-1341, adopted Dec. 12, 2011, amended the title of §
9-40 to read as herein set out. The former title read Annual inspection.
Sec. 9-41. - Inspection charges.
   The permit fee for each building permit shall normally include only those
required inspections specifically listed in the building code. All additional
inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly
completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation
corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the
permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections not
otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the
owner or the contractor shall be charged for as specified in section
9-4 of this Code.
   An engineering division inspection fee shall be assessed for applicable
building permits for work performed in areas including but not limited to
public streets, rights-of-way, alleys, easements, utilities and parking lot
construction. Engineering division inspection fees shall be determined based
upon the estimated hours of inspection required and it shall be paid in advance
of scheduled inspections. Adjustments to these fees shall be made based upon
actual time spent inspecting the permitted work.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 211, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 07-1120, 2-14-07)
Secs. 9-42—9-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BOILER AND SAFETY CODE
Sec. 9-61. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule for fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of the high pressure boiler code and pertinent
sections of related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 301, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-62. - Installation permits.
   The permit fees for installations coming under the high pressure boiler and
energy code of the city shall be as follows:
   (1)   Anhydrous ammonia storage equipment: 
a. Systems using I.C.C. cylinders, each system:
  1. 5 cylinders or less                                      $30.00
  2. 6 to 10                                                  50.00
  3. 11 to 15                                                 75.00
  4. 16 or more                                               100.00
b. Systems using A.S.M.E. containers, each system:
  1. 1,000 lbs. capacity or less                              50.00
  2. 1,001 to 2,500 lbs.                                      75.00
  3. 2,501 to 5,000 lbs.                                      75.00
  4. Over 5,000 lbs.                                          100.00
c. Vehicles transporting Anhydrous Ammonia cargoes in A.S.M.E. 70.00
   containers, each
 
   (2)   Boilers:
 
a. Up to and including 1,000 square feet of heating surface 75.00
b. Over 1,000 square feet of heating surface                100.00
  plus for each 1,000 square feet of heating surface       10.00
No license required for low pressure boilers not exceeding 300 square feet of
heating surface.
c. Alteration permit                                        100.00
 
   (3)   Hazardous gases, storage:
a. Chlorine, sulphur dioxide and methyl chloride; total quantity on premises:
  1. 500 pounds or less              50.00
  2. Over 500 pounds to 1 ton        60.00
  3. Over 1 ton to 15 tons           75.00
  4. Over 15 tons                    200.00
b. Other hazardous gases - systems with connected containers:
  1. Hospitals                        
    20 outlets or less              75.00
    21 to 30 outlets                100.00
    Over 30 outlets                 150.00
  2. Occupancies other than hospitals
    2,500 cubic feet or less        50.00
    2,501 to 5,000 cubic feet       52.50
    5,001 to 10,000 cubic feet      63.00
    Over 10,000 cubic feet          150.00
  3. Other hazardous gases - total storage on premises, not connected to a
      system or appliance:
    2,500 cubic feet or less        50.00
    Over 2,500 to 5,000 cubic feet  60.00
    Over 5,000 to 10,000 cubic feet 75.00
    Over 10,000 cubic feet          175.00
 
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 302, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-63. - Periodic inspections.
   The fees for periodic inspections required by the boiler and safety code of
the city shall be as follows:
   (1)   Boilers:
      a.   Annual inspection:
         1.   Boilers up to and including 1,000 square feet of heating surface
..... $75.00
         2.   Over 1,000 square feet of heating surface ..... 100.00
            plus for each 1,000 square feet of heating surface ..... 10.00
      b.   Biennial inspections, low pressure heating boilers under 1,000
square feet ..... 60.00
      c.   Biennial inspections, low pressure heating boilers 1,000 square feet
or more ..... 75.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 303, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-64. - Regular inspection charges.
   (a)   Generally. The permit fee for each installation permit shall normally
include no more than one rough inspection and/or one final inspection. All
additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being
properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of
violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not
covered in the permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special
inspections not otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the
request of the owner or the contractor shall be charged for as specified in
section
9-4 of this Code.
   (b)   Special inspections. The following special inspections shall require
the payment of the indicated charges:
 
(1) Low pressure steam or hot water boilers, under 300 square feet      $75.00
    heating surface, when inspection is requested; each location
(2) Shop inspections of boilers and pressure vessels, each location     100.00
    visit, each unit
(3) Secondhand boilers and secondhand pressure vessels, each inspection 100.00
    visit, each unit
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 304, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-65. - License examination.
   (a)   The following fees shall be charged for the license examinations
required by the boiler and safety code of the city:
 
(1) Filing fee, to accompany application $10.00
(2) Examination fee, at time of testing  50.00
(3) Chief powerhouse stationary engineer 75.00
 
   (b)   License fees, as required, shall be paid to the city clerk after
meeting all requirements for a license.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 305, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-66. - Special permits.
   The fee for special permits will be based on inspection charges as set forth
in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 306, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-67. - Engineering certificates.
   The fee for each engineering certificate, which shall be issued annually,
shall be $12.00.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 307, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95)
Sec. 9-68. - Permit fees for automatic and/or monitored equipment.
   The permit fees for installation and annual inspections of all automatic
and/or monitored high pressure boilers or refrigeration systems coming under
the high pressure boiler and energy code shall be as follows:
(1) Boilers, and all other powerhouse auxiliary equipment:    
   a. Each boiler up to 1,000 square feet                      525.00
   b. Each boiler from 1,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet  1,000.00
   c. Each boiler over 10,000 square feet to 50,000 square feet   1500.00
   d. Each boiler over 50,000 square feet                         2,500.00
(2) Refrigeration systems:   
   a. Each chiller or system:
     1.   50 up to 1,000 tons                                 525.00
     2.   1,000 up to 2,000 tons                              650.00
     3.   2,000 and over                                      750.00
(3) Powerhouse equipment:
   a. Each turbine unit                                           2,500.00
   b. Each co-generator plant or unit                             5,500.00
 
(Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-69. - Energy fees and energy audits.
   The fee for an energy survey or audit shall be as follows:
   (1)   Energy survey or audit fee per boiler or heating unit, per unit .....
$50.00
   (2)   Building energy audit or survey:
      a.   Buildings under 15,000 square feet ..... 225.00
   (3)   Buildings 15,000 square feet up to 100,000 square feet ..... 350.00
   (4)   Buildings over 100,000 to 1,000,000 ..... 1,200.00
(Ord. No. 95-632, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-70. - Annual operating permits.
   The fees for annual operating permits are as follows:
   Boiler:
   (1)   Annual automatic monitoring permit, per unit ..... $1,200.00
      a.   Below 50 h.p. or 50 tons capacity cooling ..... exempt
   (2)   Annual operating permits:
      a.   Boilers and power plants:
         1.   Below 15 MW ..... exempt
         2.   15 MW-200 MW, per plant or boiler system ..... $1,200.00
         3.   Over 200 MW, per plant or boiler system ..... $2,000.00
(Ord. No. 99-786, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Secs. 9-71—9-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. 9-81. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of the "Electrical Code," and related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 401, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-82. - Permits.
   A minimum fee of $80.00 shall be charged for any one electrical permit.
Permit fees for all electrical work shall be as follows:
   (1)   Circuits, each ..... $10.00
   (2)   Fixtures, each lamp or tube ..... 1.00
      a.   Floodlights or lamps of 1,000 watts capacity, each 1,000 or over,
shall be considered as power units.
      b.   Each cluster of floodlights consisting of lamps, each 1,000 watts or
over, shall be considered as one power unit of sum of lamp wattages.
      c.   Each neon type gas-tube lamp shall be counted as one unit.
   (3)   Electrical power units, includes motors, transformers, heating units,
furnaces, power plugs, generators, rectifiers, capacitors, welders, floodlamps
1,000 watts or over, heating and/or power units based on horsepower, kw or kva
rating.
      a.   ¼ hp, kw, or kva to 30 hp, kw, kva or power plugs each unit .....
10.00
      b.   31 to 100, each unit ..... 20.00
      c.   Over 100, each unit ..... 50.00
         (Above fees include branch circuit wiring to the equipment)
         Fees for motors of less than ¼ hp on other heating units shall be
based on the number of circuits supplying such motors.
   (4)   Electrical ranges, ovens, dryers and water heaters, each unit .....
15.00
      A built-in oven and range top shall be considered as one unit in
determining permit fee.
   (5)   Service:
      a.   New or change of service:
         1.   100 amperes to 500 amperes ..... 50.00
         2.   Over 600 amperes ..... 75.00
         3.   Service entrance cable installation ..... 20.00
      b.   Temporary primary service ..... 60.00
      c.   Temporary secondary service ..... 30.00
         (Plus charge for each circuit in use)
      Connection of service for new single and two-family dwellings only may be
granted without charge as a temporary secondary service, if requested when
making application for the original wiring permit, and provided temporary is
ready at the time of first inspection.
   (6)   Transfer of permits, each permit ..... 30.00
   (7)   Outdoor meter cabinets, in existing services, each location .....
50.00
   (8)   Feeders:
      a.   First 100 feet or less ..... 20.00
      b.   Each additional 100 feet ..... 10.00
   (9)   Under floor raceways, headers for cellular floors, etc.:
      a.   First 100 feet or less ..... 20.00
      b.   Each additional 100 feet ..... 10.00
   (10)   Residential electrical space heating, each room .....    10.00
      For supplemental heating and other occupancies, use kw rating per unit.
   (11)   Motion picture apparatus, each machine ..... 50.00
   (12)   Industrial and commercial buildings. General maintenance and
installation of electrical equipment in existing buildings based on power units
(generators, motors, welders, transformers, feeders, circuits, fixtures, etc.):
      a.   1 to 25 power units, each ..... 30.00
      b.   26 and over, each ..... 15.00
   (13)   Sign connection only:
      a.   Each sign, first circuit ..... 35.00
         (provided inspection is made at the same time and same location)
      b.   Each additional circuit ..... 15.00
   (14)   Outline tubing, (connection) each 25 feet ..... 35.00
   (15)   Hospital or convalescent home generator sets:
      a.   0 to 30 total kw or kva ..... 100.00
      b.   Over 30 total kw or kva ..... 150.00
      Permits for generator sets shall be on a separate permit form. One hour's
time will be computed separately and not in combination with other items.
   (16)   Standby generator, any occupancy:
      a.   0 to 30 total kw or kva ..... 75.00
      b.   over 30 total kw or kva ..... 125.00
   (17)   Fire alarm/fire protection systems. The fees for the various elements
of fire alarm/fire protection systems shall be as specified in the following
list with a minimum permit fee for any one job to be $50.00 with the exception
of hard wired smoke detector systems in detached single family dwellings.
Permits for fire alarm systems shall be on a separate permit application
listing only fire alarm items.
      a.   Manual fire alarm box:
         1.   Fire station ..... 20.00
         2.   Each additional station ..... 15.00
      b.   Telephone stations (two-way communication units), each ..... 15.00
      c.   Fire alarm signal devices (horn, bell or voice):
         1.   First device ..... 15.00
         2.   Each additional device ..... 10.00
      d.   Heat or smoke detectors:
         1.   First detector ..... 15.00
         2.   Each additional detector ..... 10.00
      e.   Fire door holders, each doorway ..... 10.00
      f.   Building master panels, each ..... 35.00
      g.   Building master panel, each circuit or zone ..... 10.00
      h.   Telephone control panel, each circuit or zone ..... 10.00
      i.   Exit way door electrical unlocking systems:
         1.   First door ..... 20.00
         2.   Each additional door ..... 10.00
      j.   Sprinkler system flow switches, each switch ..... 20.00
      k.   Sprinkler valve tamper switches, each switch ..... 20.00
      l.   Sub panel, enunciator, each zone (floor) ..... 10.00
      m.   Ventilation fan dampers ..... 20.00
      n.   Data gathering and reporting panel, each panel ..... 25.00
      o.   Central computer ..... 60.00
      p.   Alterations or additions to existing systems ..... 150.00
      q.   Electric motors, circuits, fixtures, heater units, service changes,
etc., will be charged at the rates established by the applicable fee schedules
on a separate permit application.
      r.   Permits for fire alarm systems in detached single family dwellings
shall be charged as a general purpose circuit for the entire hard wired system
..... 10.00
      s.   Line type heat detection cable:
         1.   First foot ..... 20.00
         2.   Each additional foot ..... 5.00
   (18)   Self-service fuel dispensers. All self-service fuel pumps or
dispensing systems, together with central systems for same, shall be subject to
a minimum installation permit fee of $90.00, plus $12.00 for each nozzle
connected to the pump or system.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 402, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-652, 11-8-95; Ord. No. 98-723, 5-
5-98; Ord. No. 01-842, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 03-957, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-
10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-83. - Inspection charges.
   (a)   General. The permit fee for each electrical permit shall normally
include no more than one rough inspection and/or final inspection. All
additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being
properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspections of
violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not
covered in the permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special
inspections not otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the
request of the owner or the contractor shall be charged for as specified in
section
9-4.
   (b)   Special inspections. The fees for special inspections shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Shop inspection of equipment, each unit, each visit ..... $100.00
      (2)   Theatrical road shows ..... 100.00
      (3)   Temporary wiring: Conventions, displays, exhibits, etc., including
lighting, motors, and other electrical equipment:
         a.   Up to 100,000 square feet of display area ..... 100.00
         b.   Over 100,000 to 200,000 ..... 200.00
         c.   Over 200,000 to 300,000 ..... 250.00
         d.   Over 300,000 to 400,000 ..... 350.00
         e.   Over 400,000 ..... 450.00
         f.   Temporary outdoor decorative displays ..... 75.00
   (c)   Electrical sign tag inspection. Field inspection of signs necessitated
by lack of Underwriters' Laboratories inspection label shall be charged for on
an hourly rate basis, as specified above, and shall be in addition to the
following schedule:
      (1)   Each sign, including one circuit ..... 50.00
         (provided inspection is made at the same time and at the same
location)
      (2)   Each additional circuit ..... 10.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 403, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-84. - License examination.
   (a)   The following fees shall be charged for the license examinations
required by the electrical code of the city:
      (1)   Filing fee, to accompany application ..... $10.00
      (2)   Examination fee, at time of testing ..... 25.00
   (b)   License fees as required shall be paid to the city clerk after meeting
all requirements for license.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 404, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Secs. 9-85—9-105. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - HEATING CODE
Sec. 9-106. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of the heating code and related ordinances. The
minimum permit fee shall be $80.00. Total permit fee shall be the sum of burner
or heater fee plus duct work or distribution system fee.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 501, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 03-958, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-
19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-107. - Fuel, oil fired equipment.
   The permit fees for installations of fuel or oil fired equipment under the
heating code of the city shall be as follows:
   (1)   Burners, new or replacement:
      a.   Portable heaters, each ..... $ 50.00
      b.   All other oil burners, new or replacement, including aboveground
fuel oil storage not exceeding 550 gallons:
         1.   5 GPH and under, each ..... 75.00
         2.   Over 5 GPH, each ..... 100.00
         3.   Combination gas-oil burners ..... 150.00
         4.   Alterations to existing installations ..... 50.00
   (2)   Storage tanks or drums:
      a.   Total drums, not exceeding four in number, each location ..... 50.00
      b.   Not exceeding 550 gallons:
         1.   Above-ground, each installation ..... 50.00
         2.   Underground, each tank ..... 50.00
      c.   Over 550 to 5,500 gallons, each tank ..... 75.00
      d.   Over 5,000 to 20,000, each tank ..... 100.00
      e.   Over 20,000 to 50,000, each tank ..... 125.00
      f.   Over 50,000 to 200,000, each tank ..... 150.00
      g.   Over 200,000, each tank ..... 175.00
Note: Permit fee shall be the sum of burner or heater fees, plus tank or drum
fee.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 502, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-108. - Gas fired equipment.
   The permit fees for installations of new or replacement gas fired burners,
under the heating code of the city, shall be as follows:
   (1)   Burner with input rating not exceeding and including:
      a.   75,000 Btu per hour, each ..... $50.00
      b.   75,001 to 500,000 Btu per hour, each ..... 75.00
      c.   Over 500,000 Btu per hour, each ..... 100.00
   (2)   Combination gas-oil burner, each ..... 150.00
   (3)   Alterations to existing burner or furnace installations, each .....
50.00
   (4)   Preliminary inspections, each unit ..... 50.00
   (5)   Homeowner permit (includes burner, gas piping and examination):
      a.   Central heating unit, conversion burner, floor furnace, each .....
75.00
      b.   Room heater, wall heater, baseboard-type unit:
         1.   First unit at each address ..... 50.00
         2.   Each additional unit at same address ..... 30.00
         3.   Gas piping system permit, each system ..... 50.00 (Ord. No. 88-
425, § 503, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-109. - LPG equipment burners.
   The permit fees for installations of new or replacement liquefied petroleum
gas equipment burners under the heating code of the city shall be as follows:
   (1)   Each system, including appliances, having an aggregate connected water
capacity of:
      a.   30 gallons or less ..... $ 50.00
      b.   Over 30 to 60 gallons ..... 50.00
      c.   Over 60 to 500 gallons ..... 75.00
      d.   Over 500 to 1,200 gallons ..... 100.00
      e.   Over 1,200 gallons ..... 125.00
   (2)   Storage tanks, total storage on premises, not connected to a system or
appliance, having a water capacity of:
      a.   60 gallons or less ..... 50.00
      b.   Over 60 gallons to 1,200 gallons ..... 75.00
      c.   Over 1,200 gallons ..... 125.00
      d.   Alteration permit ..... 50.00
Note: Permit fee shall be the sum of burner or heater plus storage tank fee.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 504, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-110. - Electric heating equipment.
   The permit fees for installation of electric heating equipment under the
heating code of the city shall be as follows:
   (1)   Residential:
      a.   Furnace or boiler for central system ..... $50.00
      b.   Residential unit heaters covered by electrical permit.
   (2)   Commercial:
      a.   Unit heater ..... 50.00
      b.   Furnace or boiler for central system ..... 100.00
      c.   Makeup air units, each ..... 75.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 505, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-111. - Duct work, distribution systems.
   The permit fees for installation of duct work and distribution systems under
the heating code of the city shall be as follows:
   (1)   Residential duct work, stream and hot water distribution:
      a.   Complete system ..... $ 50.00
      b.   Addition or alteration to existing system ..... 30.00
      c.   Installation of flue dampers (furnaces) ..... 25.00
      d.   Installation of flue dampers (hot water tanks) ..... 25.00
   (2)   Commercial and industrial duct work, steam and hot water distribution
systems shall be based on the cost of the work and calculated as specified in
section
9-33.
      Fan coil units, in addition to distribution system fees, each unit .....
30.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 506, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-112. - Other systems.
   Permit fees and inspection charges for alternate systems using fuels or
energy sources other than those specified above shall be based on like charges
for systems of equivalent capacity or complexity as determined by the director
or the director's designee.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 507, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-113. - Inspection charges.
   The permit fee for each heating permit shall normally include no more than
one rough inspection and/or one final inspection. All additional inspections
necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly completed at the
time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation corrections, all
inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the permit fee
schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections not otherwise
provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the
contractor shall be charged for as specified in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 508, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-114. - Tandem installation fee.
   When simultaneously applying for heating and refrigeration code related
items, a single minimum base fee of $80.00 shall be charged for the primary
code discipline along with the individual line item charges for the alternate
code discipline. This avoids charging two minimum base fees of $80.00 for each
individual code.
(Ord. No. 03-980, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-
22)
Secs. 9-115—9-135. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE
Sec. 9-136. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges to be used relative to
the provisions of the plumbing code and related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 601, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-137. - Installation permits.
   The total permit fee shall be calculated by multiplying the fee for each
unit being installed, replaced, altered or repaired by the total number of all
such units with the provision that the minimum fee for any one permit shall be
$80.00. The unit fees shall be as follows:
   (1)   Fixtures. Each water closet, bathtub, shower, lavatory, sink (of any
description), urinal, bidet, laundry tray, floor drain, hot water tank,
drinking fountain, soda fountain, bar waste, grease interceptor, garbage
disposal, conductor trap, sump, dental chair, washing machine, air conditioner,
dishwasher, yard drain, manhole, catch basin, heating coil, or special fixture,
and each stack (soil, waste, vent and inside conductor), pump or water lift, or
other connected device or piece of equipment ..... $ 15.00
   (2)   Water distribution systems:
      Size:
      ¾"-1" ..... 30.00
      1¼"-1½ " ..... 40.00
      2"-4" ..... 75.00
      Exceeding 4" ..... 100.00
      Replacement of piping, no increase in size, when made in conjunction with
installation of replacement fixtures ..... 45.00
         a.   Fees for complete new systems shall be based on the size of the
distribution pipe at meter.
         b.   Fees for alterations, enlargements, and extensions shall be
charged for each new branch or extension according to its size at its
connection with an existing water distribution system, except that the total
fees for water piping shall not exceed $100.00 for one permit; however, if the
cost of inspectional services rendered exceeds the permit fee, the excess shall
be charged at the hourly rate, as specified in sections
9-138 and
9-4.
    (3)   Fire or lawn sprinkler systems: System installation fee shall include
fee for water distribution system, plus an additional fee of $5.00 per head.
Connection of the sprinkler system to the potable water system shall be made by
a master plumber under a separate permit.
   (4)   Residential lawn sprinkler system:
      a.   One- and two-family, flat rate ..... $ 40.00
      b.   Exhaust hood fire control system, each hood or system ..... 45.00
   (5)   Sewer taps:
      a.   Each sewer tap, lateral ..... 250.00
      b.   Each sewer tap, trunk ..... 400.00
      c.   Each sewer tap, connection outside city ..... 500.00
   (6)   Pavement restoration:
      a.   When a pavement or sidewalk break is required to make a sewer tap or
other connection, the permit fee for pavement restoration ..... 125.00
      b.   Fees for replacement of pavement by the city shall be:
         1.   Pavement, first square yard ..... 250.00
            Each additional square yard as needed for proper installation .....
75.00
         2.   Sidewalk, first 25 square feet ..... 175.00
            Each additional square foot ..... 10.00
   (7)   Sewer, drainage permits, sewer installations outside of buildings:
      a.   Lines 6 inches to 14 inches in diameter ..... 75.00
      b.   Lines over 14 inches in diameter ..... 100.00
      c.   Manholes, catch basins, each ..... $ 45.00
   (8)   Drains: Storm drains inside of buildings underground or aboveground
(plumbing permit). Storm drains outside of buildings (drainage permit):
      a.   Lines 6 inches to 14 inches in diameter ..... 75.00
      b.   Lines over 14 inches in diameter ..... 100.00
      c.   Manholes, catch basins, each ..... 45.00
   (9)   Building sewer to building drain connection, plumbing permit, crock to
iron. For each connection, when a new sewer and/or main drain is installed,
minimum permit fee ..... 100.00
   (10)   Septic tanks, plumbing permit:
      a.   Tanks not exceeding 850 gallons ..... 100.00
      b.   Exceeding 850 gallons ..... 125.00
         (including preliminary investigation tests)
   (11)   Transfer of permits, each permit ..... 30.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 602, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 03-959, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 06-1095, 9-
18-06; Ord. No. 07-1118, 2-5-07; Ord. No. 10-1285, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 22-1768,
8-23-22)
Sec. 9-138. - Inspection charges.
   The permit fee for each plumbing permit shall normally include no more than
one rough inspection and/or one final inspection. All additional inspections
necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly completed at the
time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation corrections, all
inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the permit fee
schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections, not otherwise
provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the
contractor shall be charged for as specified in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 603, 8-3-88)
Secs. 9-139—9-160. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENTIAL AND BUILDING OCCUPANCY[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1176, adopted Sept. 2, 2008, amended the title of
Art. VII to read as herein set out. The former title read "Housing Code."
Sec. 9-161. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges to be used relative to
the provisions of
chapter 11 of the City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances and related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 701, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 08-1176, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 12-1373,
11-13-12; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-162. - Reoccupancy and property maintenance and safety inspections.
   (a)   The fee for reoccupancy inspections shall include an initial
inspection and one reinspection to ensure all required repairs and corrections
are made.
      Residential:
      (1)   Single-family ..... $ 225.00
      (2)   Two-family dwelling ..... 275.00
      (3)   Multiple dwellings and apartments:
         a.   First unit ..... 225.00
         b.   Over one unit and up to and including six units ..... 60.00
         c.   Over six units and up to and including 25 units ..... 30.00
         d.   Over 25 units each ..... 20.00
      Commercial/industrial buildings:
      (1)   5,000 square feet or under ..... 350.00
      (2)   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 40.00
   (b)   Vacant property:
      (1)   The fee to register a vacant improved property shall be $160.00
annually. Registration fees include the cost of routine property maintenance
and external safety inspections.
      (2)   If an internal safety issue is suspected, the fee for an internal
inspection shall be $125.00.
      (3)   The fee to register new property owner information shall be $30.00.
      (4)   There is no fee to update the current owner's vacant property
registration information.
   (c)   The fee to inspect a fire-damaged dwelling is $150.00.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 702, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 91-514, § 702, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 03-
960, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 09-1239, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 12-
1373, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-163. - Additional inspections.
   The fees for any additional inspections which may be required shall be
$75.00. Instances when additional inspections shall be required include but are
not limited to the following:
   (1)   Unable to gain entry at time of inspection.
   (2)   Corrections not completed at time of inspection.
   (3)   Property in unsuitable condition for inspection.
   (4)   Utilities disconnected.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 703, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 08-1176, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 09-1239, 9-
8-09; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-164. - Special and overtime inspections.
   (a)   The fee for special inspections or informational inspections made at
the request of an owner or agent shall be charged for as specified in section
9-4.
   (b)   The fee for evening, weekend or holiday inspections shall be twice the
regular inspection fee.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 704, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-165. - Fees for copies, duplicate certificates and agreements.
   (a)   Fees for copies made by the city of letters, violation notices,
inspections reports, agreements, certificates, or other documents shall be
$1.00 per page, with a minimum fee of $5.00.
   (b)   A $20.00 fee may be charged to prepare duplicate certificates,
agreements or other documents.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 705, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 08-1176, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-
3-10; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-166. - Fee for residential compliance agreements.
   (a)   A nonrefundable fee of $350.00 shall be charged for all compliance
agreements.
   (b)   The director ofthe Department of Economic Development (or designee)
may, in their discretion, upon good cause shown, extend the due date of a
compliance agreement for a fee of $55.00 for each 30-day extension.
   (c)   In the event that after executing a compliance agreement and paying
the fee, the sale, transfer or conveyance of the subject property fails to
occur, then the agreement may be cancelled and the fee refunded less a $30.00
processing fee.
(Ord. No. 08-1176, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-13-10; Ord. No. 14-1429, 7-22-
14; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-167. - Extension fee for registered rental properties.
   The director of the Department of Economic Development (or designee) may, in
their discretion, upon good cause shown, extend the due date for a reinspection
of a registered rental property for a fee of $50.00 for each 30-day extension.
(Ord. No. 14-1429, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-1429, adopted July 22, 2014, in effect repealed the
former §
9-167, and enacted a new §
9-167 as set out herein. The former §
9-167 pertained to a fee for conditional occupancy agreements and derived from
Ord. No. 008-1176, adopted September 2, 2008 and Ord. No. 09-1239, adopted
September 8, 2009.
Sec. 9-168. - Refunds.
   Requests for inspection refunds must be made in writing within one year of
payment. Inspection payments will be refunded only if the inspection did not
occur. A $30.00 processing fee shall be charged for refund requests.
(Ord. No. 08-1176, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 09-1239, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-3-10;
Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-169. - Late fee for scheduling required inspections.
   The fee for failing to schedule a required inspection or re-inspection by a
specified due date shall be $50.00.
(Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-
22)
Sec. 9-170. - Waiver of fees.
   The director of the Department of Economic Development (or designee) may, in
their discretion, waive or modify any of the fees referred to in this article.
(Ord. No. 08-1176, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 09-1239, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 10-1270, 5-3-10;
Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-171. - Nonresidential certificate of occupancy owner name change.
   The administrative fee for an owner name change on certificates of occupancy
related to a nonresidential building or structure that has undergone an
ownership change as defined in
chapter 5 of this Code shall be as follows:
   (1)   Multipurpose common building ..... $50.00
   (2)   Building with independent units:
      a.   First unit ..... 50.00
      b.   Each additional unit ..... 10.50
(Ord. No. 11-1341, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-172. - Cancellation fee.
   The fee for cancelling a scheduled inspection shall be $75.00. There is no
cancellation fee if more than one business day notice is provided.
(Ord. No. 14-1429, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Secs. 9-173—9-185. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - REFRIGERATION CODE
Sec. 9-186. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges to be used relative to
the provisions of the refrigeration code and related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 801, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-187. - Installation permits.
   The permit fees for installations under the refrigeration code of the city
shall be as follows:
   (1)   Reserved.
   (2)   Self-contained systems activated by motors or engines, 5 hp or less,
each system ..... 30.00
   (3)   Remote systems activated by motors or engines of 5 hp or less, each
system ..... 30.00
   (4)   Systems and/or compressors activated by motors or engines:
      a.   Over 5 hp to 50 hp, each ..... 60.00
      b.   Over 50 hp to 100 hp, each ..... 90.00
      c.   Over 100 hp, each ..... 125.00
      d.   Alterations to each system ..... 40.00
      (This does not include additional compressors, such requiring
installation permits based on their horsepower.)
   (5)   Duct work and air distribution systems, residential:
      a.   Installation of complete system ..... 40.00
      b.   Addition to or alteration of existing system ..... 35.00
      Duct work and air distribution systems, installation, alteration or
repair, for commercial or industrial installations shall have fees based on the
cost of the work and shall be calculated as specified in section
9-33.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 802, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 95-651, 4-8-95; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-
23-22)
Sec. 9-188. - License examinations.
   (a)   The following fees shall be required for the license examinations
required by the refrigeration code of the city:
      (1)   Filing fee, to accompany application ..... $10.00
      (2)   Examination fee, to be paid at time of testing ..... 25.00
   (b)   License fees as required shall be paid to the city clerk after meeting
all requirements for license.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 803, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 9-189. - Inspection charges.
   The permit fee for each refrigeration permit shall normally include no more
than one rough inspection and/or one final inspection. All additional
inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly
completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation
corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the
permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections not
otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the
owner or the contractor shall be charged for as specified in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 804, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-190. - Tandem installation fee.
   When simultaneously applying for heating and refrigeration code related
items, a single minimum base fee of $75.00 shall be charged for the primary
code discipline along with the individual line item charges for the alternate
code discipline. This avoids charging two minimum base fees of $75.00 for each
individual code.
(Ord. No. 03-981, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Secs. 9-191—9-210. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - UTILITY INSTALLATION
Sec. 9-211. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to utility installations.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 901, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 99-765, 4-20-99)
Sec. 9-212. - Installation permits.
   The permit fees for installations by utility companies shall be as follows:
      (1)   Installation, erection, replacement, alteration or removal of
equipment, conduit, wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic lines, poles, tubing and
related items for connections to other equipment, any building or facility
shall be 0.02 times the total contract price of such installation including,
but not limited to, labor and materials.
      (2)   Tapping underground carriers:
         a.   When the city is required to replace the pavement for the utility
company, the fees shall be as follows:
            1.   Pavement:
               First one square yard ..... $200.00
               Each additional square yard ..... 60.00
            2.   Sidewalk:
               First 25 square feet ..... 125.00
               Each additional square foot ..... 5.00
      (3)   Failure to obtain a permit under this article shall result in a
fine of $500.00.
      (4)   There shall be a minimum charge for any permit of $100.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 902, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 99-765, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 03-991, 11-
18-03)
Sec. 9-213. - Inspection charges.
   All installations of mains, conduits or carrier services of any description
shall be inspected by the Property Maintenance and Buildings Division for
compliance with city ordinances during the construction work. The fees for
necessary inspection time shall be charged for at an hourly rate, as specified
in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 903, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22)
Sec. 9-214. - Annual utility maintenance permit.
   Each utility company will be required to obtain an annual maintenance permit
(AMP) which will allow them to repair and maintain existing installations. The
fee for the annual maintenance permit shall be $2,500.00.
   The annual maintenance permit shall be obtained and paid for by January
fifteenth of each calendar year. Failure to purchase an AMP by January
fifteenth shall result in a double fee thereafter.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 904, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 03-991, 11-18-03)
Sec. 9-215. - Definition.
   As used in this article, "utility company" shall mean all utilities
including, but not limited to, services of electric, natural gas,
telecommunications, and fiber optic systems.
(Ord. No. 99-765, 4-20-99)
Sec. 9-216. - Escrow for restoration of public facilities.
   For each permit obtained, an amount shall be deposited with the department
of finance for restoration of public facilities, including, but not limited to,
roads, sidewalks, curbs, approaches, aprons, and landscaping. The amount of
escrow shall be established by the engineering division after plan review to
determine the extent that public facilities are involved.
(Ord. No. 03-991, 11-18-03)
Secs. 9-217—9-235. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - CUTTING OF PUBLIC CURBS
Sec. 9-236. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of cutting of public curbs in chapter 17 of this
Code.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1001, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-237. - Permit fees.
   The permit fees for the cutting of all public curbs in the city shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Each lineal foot of curb to be cut and removed ..... $ 2.00
      (2)   Minimum fee for any one curb cut ..... 25.00
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1002, 8-3-88)
Secs. 9-238—9-260. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOTS
Sec. 9-261. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to automobile parking lots.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1101, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-262. - Permits.
   (a)   The permit fees for paving all Class I and Class II parking lots shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Asphaltic or bituminous paving: 
         a.   5,000 square feet or under ..... $40.00
         b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 10.00
      (2)   Concrete paving: 
         a.   5,000 square feet or under ..... 40.00
         b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 10.00
      (3)   Gravel surface (industrial only): 
         a.   5,000 square feet or under ..... 40.00
         b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 10.00
      (4)   Spot repairs to existing surface or drainage structures: 
         a.   5,000 square feet or under ..... 40.00
         b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 10.00
      (5)   Seal coat/crack repair: 
         a.   5,000 square feet or under ..... 40.00
         b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 10.00
      (6)   Stripe/re-stripe: 
         a.   5,000 square feet or under ..... 40.00
         b.   Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 10.00
   (b)   When simultaneously applying for any combination of the above items, a
single permit fee shall be charged.
   (c)   The above fees are in addition to any fees associated with catch
basins, manholes, sewer lines, approaches or curb cuts.
   (d)   The plan examination fee, in addition to any permit fees, shall be as
follows:
      (1)   $50.00 for Department of Economic Development review. The fee for
revised plans required by the department shall be $25.00.
      (2)   $250.00 for engineering division review. The review fee for revised
plans required by the engineering division shall be $120.00.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1102, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 07-1140, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 22-1734,
1-25-22)
Sec. 9-263. - Inspection charges.
   All inspections other than those normally included in the permit fees shall
be charged for as specified in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1103, 8-3-88)
Secs. 9-264—9-285. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. - FENCES
Sec. 9-286. - Scope.
   The article provides a schedule of fees and charges for compliance
certificates to be used relative to the provisions of the fence article in
chapter 5 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1201, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 08-1193, 12-1-08)
Sec. 9-287. - Compliance certificate fees.
   Fees for fence compliance certificates shall be $50.00.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1202, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 08-1193, 12-1-08; Ord. No. 16-1534,
4-12-16)
Sec. 9-288. - Plan examination fee.
   The plan examination fee, in addition to any compliance certificate fees,
shall be $40.00.
   The fee for revised plans required by the Department of Economic Development
shall be $25.00.
(Ord. No. 08-1193, 12-1-08; Ord. No. 16-1534, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-
22)
Sec. 9-289. - Administrative fee.
   The administrative fee, in addition to any compliance certificate fee and
plan examination fee, shall be $35.00.
(Ord. No. 16-1534, 4-12-16)
Secs. 9-290—9-310. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. - SIGNS
Sec. 9-311. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of the sign ordinance and related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1301, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-312. - Permit fees.
   (a)   In addition to the application and plan review fees, permit fees for
the erection, relocation, alteration or repair of all signs shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Wall and mansard signs: 
         Each sign ..... $25.00
      (2)   Projecting, marquee and ground signs: 
         a.   Each sign structure ..... 60.00
         b.   Directional signs for traffic control (less than four square feet
and under 30 inches in height) are exempt from fees.
      (3)   Interior mall sign: 
         Each sign ..... 25.00
      (4)   Face change: 
         Flat fee for all related face changes per business ..... 25.00
      (5)   Temporary signs:
      There is no permit fee for temporary signs. The application fee is still
applicable.
      (6)   Sandwich board signs  ..... 25.00
      (7)   Banners: Banners shall be subject to the fees and permits as
outlined in section
5-1339 of this Code.
   (b)   The plan examination fee for each new wall or ground sign, in addition
to any permit fees, shall be $50.00. The fee for revised plans required by the
Department of Economic Development shall be $25.00.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1302, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 01-852, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 02-907, 7-
16-02; Ord. No. 05-1055, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 07-1138, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 18-1622,
7-17-18; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-25-22)
Sec. 9-313. Reserved.
   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 18-1622, adopted July 17, 2018, deleted § 9-313 in
its entirety. Former § 9-313 pertained to annual inspections and derived from
Ord. No. 88-425, adopted Aug. 3, 1988 and Ord. No. 01-852.
Sec. 9-314. - Additional inspections.
   Any additional inspections required as a result of failure to comply with
approved plans, failure to remove signs after permits have expired, correction
of violations or unauthorized activities shall be charged for as specified in
section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1304, 8-3-88)
Secs. 9-315—9-335. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. - EARTH CHANGING ACTIVITIES
Sec. 9-336. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits to be used
relative to the provisions of the article on earth changing in chapter 5.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1501, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-337. - Fee schedule.
   (a)   The fees which may be imposed under the earth changing activities
provisions of the city shall be as follows:
      (1)   Plan review shall be $30.00, plus $10.00 per acre.
      (2)   Permit and inspection charges shall be $85.00 first acre, plus
$40.00 each additional acre.
   (b)   The above fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any construction
or installation permits for the projects involved.
   (c)   Ongoing earth changes (sanitary landfills, sand and gravel operations
and any similar nonconstruction type earth changes) permit and inspection fee
shall be $20.00 per acre per year. Strip projects (pipelines, sidewalks, roads,
railroads, etc.) plan review fees shall be $5.00 per 1,000 lineal feet ($20.00
minimum), permit and inspection fee shall be $10.00 per 1,000 lineal feet
($50.00 minimum).
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1502, 8-3-88)
Sec. 9-338. - Additional inspections.
   Any additional inspection required as a result of failure to comply with
approved plans, correction of violations or unauthorized activities will be
charged for as specified in section
9-4.
(Ord. No. 88-425, § 1503, 8-3-88)
Secs. 9-339—9-360. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XV. - SIDEWALK CAFES
Sec. 9-361. - Accumulation of dirt, trash, etc., deemed nuisance.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant, or any person having
charge of any lot or parcel of land being used for commercial or business
purposes of any nature within the city to permit or allow an unsightly amount
of dirt, rubbish, trash or debris of any nature to accumulate on the sidewalk
adjoining such establishment. The presence of such items upon any sidewalk
adjoining any business or commercial establishment within the limits of the
city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 84-317, § 1, 11-20-84)
Sec. 9-362. - Receptacles required.
   It is declared the duty of any owner, lessee, or occupant, or any person
having charge of any lot or parcel of land being used for commercial or
business purposes of any nature within the city, to provide adequate
receptacles for the deposit of trash or litter of any kind in a convenient
place located near such establishments.
(Ord. No. 84-317, § 2, 11-20-84)
Sec. 9-363. - Sidewalk occupancy permits.
   In the interest of promoting business by increasing activity and improving
the general business climate in business districts, the city may issue
revocable permits to businesses who apply for a permit to operate an outside
establishment as an extension of, or compatible with, the existing business on
a portion of a city sidewalk. The outside activities, sidewalk cafes, are
limited to activities carried on by the existing business. The permit may be
issued under the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   Such permits shall be issued if the director of the Department of
Economic Development, or their designee, determines the occupancy will not:
         a.   Unreasonably interfere with the use of the street and/or sidewalk
area for vehicular or pedestrian travel, respectively.
         b.   Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to or use of
property adjacent to such street.
         c.   Violate regulations adopted by the director to interpret and
implement the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Notice to the adjacent property owners or occupants shall be
required before another person can be issued a permit to occupy any sidewalk
area between the edge of the vehicle use area of the street and the property
line.
      (3)   Prior to issuance of a sidewalk occupancy permit, a permit fee
shall be paid of $15.00 for the period of the permit, not to exceed 120 days;
which fee shall be tripled if any such occupancy occurred prior to the issuance
of a permit.
      (4)   All permits shall specify the dates and duration of the permitted
sidewalk occupancy, and the permits shall be valid only for such specified
period, not to exceed 120 days. The permit shall be subject to immediate
revocation for failure to properly maintain the area being used as a sidewalk
cafe.
      (5)   Permits shall only be valid if displayed in a manner visible to the
public.
(Ord. No. 84-317, § 3, 11-20-84; Ord. No. 86-352, 4-1-86; Ord. No. 22-1734, 1-
25-22)
Secs. 9-364—9-399. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI. - CITY PLANNING
Sec. 9-400. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees for department of law city planning
division and city planning commission activities.
Rezoning                                  $2,000.00
Street or alley vacation                  900.00
Special land use                          1,200.00
   Special land use re-approval before 500.00
expiration
Zoning ordinance text amendment           1,500.00
Administrative site plan review           500.00
Planning Commission Site plan review      1,000.00
Site plan renewal                         400.00
PUD preliminary review                    1,750.00
PUD final review                          1,125.00
Zoning compliance letter                  50.00
Special meeting request                   1,000.00
Master plan (one copy)                    60.00
Zoning ordinance (one copy)               60.00
Zoning map (one copy)                     15.00
Compatibility reviews:                     
Initial compatibility review              200.00
Compatibility review resubmittal          100.00
Incentives application                       2,500.00 at time of application plus 5% of total incentives
                                          awarded
 
(Ord. No. 13-1389, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 16-1518, 1-26-16; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-
22)
Secs. 9-401—9-410. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII. - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Sec. 9-411. - Scope.
   This article provides a schedule of fees and charges for permits as they
pertain to compliance with chapter 10, entitled "Fire Prevention and
Protection."
(Ord. No. 14-1446, 12-9-14)
Sec. 9-412. - Fee schedule.
   The fees and charges for the application, permit and inspection of the
installation of fire protection systems shall be as follows. Additional fees
and charges listed in article I of this chapter may also apply.
   (1)   Plan review shall be $180.00 (non-refundable).
   (2)   Processing fee to convert plans to digital:
      First ten pages ..... $25.00
      Each additional page ..... 2.00
   (3)   Permit fees shall be as follows (minimum fee $100.00).
      Alarm devices: 
         Alarm device, each ..... $12.00
      Line type heat detection cable: 
         First foot ..... 18.00
         Each additional foot ..... 1.50
      Panels: 
         Fire alarm panel, each ..... 50.00
      Special systems ..... 250.00
      Sprinkler heads: 
         1—100 ..... 100.00
         101—200 ..... 200.00
         201—300 ..... 300.00
         301—400 ..... 400.00
         401—500 ..... 500.00
         501—1,000 ..... 600.00
         1,001 and above ..... 750.00
      Supply lines: 
         ¾ to 1 ..... 25.00
         ¼ to 1½ ..... 36.00
         2 to 4 ..... 65.00
         Larger than 4 ..... 78.00
         Fire main ..... 78.00
      Water elements: 
         Hydrant ..... 120.00
         Fire main/water line ..... 120.00
         Backflow device ..... 35.00
   (4)   Hydrostatic test of system:
      Initial hydrostatic test ..... No fee
      First additional
      hydrostatic test, per 2
      hour test block ..... $100.00
      Any additional
      hydrostatic test, per 2
      hour test block ..... 150.00
(Ord. No. 14-1446, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 19-1656, 7-16-19)
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Charter reference— Fire department, § 10.17.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 11;
water and sewers, Ch. 19.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. - Inspection for fire hazards.
   The fire chief shall have the power and authority, and it shall be his duty,
to order the inspection of all premises where he has reason to believe
combustible materials or defective heating devices exist to the danger of the
public. For this purpose duly authorized agents or employees of the city may go
upon private property; may demand and require admittance to any building within
the city, at any reasonable hour, and may require the removal, repair or
destruction of any defective and dangerous heating device or chimney, or other
connection or adjunct thereof, or the removal of combustible materials and
cleaning up or removal of rubbish or refuse matter wherever the same may be
dangerous to the safety of the public and capable of causing a fire or
increasing the danger of a fire.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-2. - Removal of fire hazards.
   Authorized employees in the fire department may inspect all stoves, furnaces
and heating apparatus in dwellings, buildings and structures within the city,
and where combustible or explosive substances are kept, and, if any place or
premises is found to be unsafe with respect to the danger of fire, such
employees shall order and require the source of such danger to be removed and
all places and premises be placed in a safe and proper condition. All such
orders shall be in writing signed by a duly authorized agent or employee of the
city and shall describe the condition ordered to be remedied, specifying the
thing or things to be done in order to remedy such condition and designating a
reasonable time within which such alterations must be made. Such notice shall
be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises involved. A duplicate copy
of such notice shall be kept and filed by the fire department and, if such
notice is not complied with within the time limitation allowed, it shall be the
duty of the fire department to make or cause to be made a complaint against the
person refusing to comply with such notice for the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-3. - False alarms.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to tamper
with, disturb, disarrange or in any manner interfere with any fire alarm box or
station, telephone reporting system or any signal apparatus of the signal
bureau or the fire department of the city; to ring or to give any false alarm
of fire; or in any manner disturb or obstruct the orderly working of the fire
department of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-4. - Interference with fire department.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or vehicle to obstruct, hinder or
retard the progress of any of the fire apparatus of the fire department when
going to or returning from a fire. Upon the approach of any vehicle of the fire
department, when on an emergency call, operators of other vehicles shall
immediately drive as closely as possible to the righthand curb and stop, and
shall not follow any vehicle or apparatus of the fire department until the same
shall be at least 500 feet away, or has stopped. No vehicle other than those of
the fire department or police department, except by direction of any authorized
employee of the fire department in charge, shall approach or park within 500
feet of any fire apparatus responding to a call after such fire apparatus shall
have reached the scene of the fire. No person shall drive a vehicle over, upon
or across any fire hose or other equipment in use by the fire department or at
any time obstruct free access to any fire hydrant within the limits of the
city.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-5. - Hydrant regulations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, use or in any manner disturb or
interfere with any fire hydrant or other apparatus without having first
obtained permission therefor. Any person other than members of the fire
department desiring to make use of any fire hydrant shall apply to the chief of
the fire department for the permission to do so, setting forth the name,
residence and business address of the applicant and the use and length of time
for which permission is desired. All applicants shall deposit with the city
treasurer the sum of $25.00 and shall not use or interfere with any hydrant
except by the use of tools approved by the fire department and in accordance
with directions given the applicant by the fire department. Any damage
resulting from the use of such hydrant shall be charged to the applicant and
deducted from the sum deposited. Such deposit shall not be returned to the
applicant until the hydrant shall have been inspected, and the applicant shall
pay an inspection fee of $2.50 for this inspection, plus any fees for use of
water imposed by the division of water supply of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-6. - Protection of combustibles.
   No person shall have, put or keep any hay, cotton, wood shavings, hemp or
other such combustible materials without having first securely enclosed such
materials so as to protect them from flying sparks or fire, and no open flame
shall be used in proximity to such combustible storage. No person shall have or
place in any stove, grate or furnace or use in lighting or kindling fires in
any private house, store, hotel, shop or other such building, any gasoline,
benzine, naphtha or other highly explosive or flammable substance.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-7. - Open burning.
   (a)   This section applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within
the City of Dearborn.
   (b)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Grilling or cooking food using charcoal cookers, propane or natural
gas in cooking or filling appliances, braziers, hibachis, grills, outdoor
fireplaces or gas-fired stoves and similar semi-enclosed devices on the
premises of a one-family detached dwelling.
      (2)   Burning for the purpose of generating heat in a stove, furnace,
fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal
habitation.
      (3)   The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in
a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
      (4)   The use of non-ash producing fuels being used not less than 15 feet
from combustible materials, when used in metal containers for the heating of
building materials or for the warmth of workers.
      (5)   Open burning being used by the fire department in connection with
training and performance of its duties.
   (c)   Definitions. 
      (1)   Clean wood means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished
or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with
preservatives, and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
      (2)   Construction and demolition waste means building waste materials,
including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood,
painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house,
commercial or industrial building, or other structure.
      (3)   Open burning means kindling or maintaining a fire where the
products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or a chimney.
      (4)   Outdoor burning means open burning or burning in a patio wood-
burning unit.
      (5)   Patio wood-burning unit means a portable fire pit, chimnea, patio
warmer, or other portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation and/
or heating. The unit must be enclosed with screening on all sides including the
top. The unit must be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other non-
combustible material.
   (d)   General prohibition on open burning. Open burning, outdoor burning,
and burning in in-ground fire pits are prohibited unless specifically permitted
by this section.
   (e)   Open burning of refuse. Open burning of refuse is prohibited including
the burning of brush, leaves, and grass clippings.
   (f)   A patio wood-burning unit may be used in the City of Dearborn only in
accordance with all of the following provisions:
      (1)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse.
      (2)   The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean wood.
      (3)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be located in the rear yard only.
         a.   For the purpose of this section, on corner lots, the rear yard
shall be considered the yard opposite the street on which the front door of the
house faces.
         b.   This subsection shall be waived during the evening hours of
Halloween when a patio wood-burning unit may be placed in a location near the
public sidewalk to facilitate greeting trick-or-treaters.
         c.   This subsection shall be waived during a block party licensed by
the city. During the block party, a patio wood-burning unit may be placed in
the public street as part of the block party festivities.
         d.   This subsection may be waived with the permission of the fire
marshal.
      (4)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least 15 feet from
the nearest structure which is not on the same property as the patio wood-
burning unit and at least 15 feet from the nearest structure on the same
property as the patio wood-burning unit.
      (5)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause a nuisance to
neighbors. Objectionable smoke shall be deemed a nuisance.
      (6)   Operational hours for any patio wood-burning unit shall be limited
to the time between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m.
      (7)   All fires shall be supervised by at least one person who is 18
years of age or older.
      (8)   There shall be a minimum of a garden hose connected to a reliable
water supply, one gallon bucket of water, or a 2a10BC rated fire extinguisher
within 20 feet of any patio wood-burning unit.
   (g)   The fire department and the police department are authorized to
enforce this section.
   (h)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed
responsible for a civil infraction.
      (1)   A third offense within a 12-month period shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 13-1394, 4-30-13)
Sec. 10-8. - Fireworks illegal.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, keep, sell, offer or keep for
sale, any fireworks or explosives within the city, except upon such conditions
as to time, place and manner of handling as the council may by resolution
determine.
(Ord. No. 81-96, § 1.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 10-9. - Private hydrant markings.
   (a)   All newly installed or relocated private hydrants shall be identified
as pressurized or nonpressurized. All pressurized hydrants over 80 p.s.i. are
to be painted red and all other hydrants are to be painted yellow with a two-
inch red band on the top of the dome. All hydrants must meet the city's color
code prior to acceptance.
   (b)   All mill water hydrants are to be painted purple (preferably
reflective).
   (c)   All existing private hydrants shall be cleaned and painted according
to the city's color code stated above.
   (d)   Any person who alters or tampers with a hydrant's required markings
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 02-922, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 09-1197, 1-5-09)
Sec. 10-10. - Firewood in residential districts.
   (a)   Definition. Firewood means and includes cut logs, scrap wood, cut
brush and similar materials that can be burned or otherwise used as fuel.
   (b)   Storage requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to store
firewood in a residential district in a manner not conforming with the
following:
      (1)   Location.
         a.   Firewood shall not be stored in any location other than the rear
yard, except that firewood may be stored on the front porch from October 1
through April 1 subject to the regulations of this section.
         b.   Where it is possible to place a firewood pile on the side of a
garage, accessory building, or behind the principal structure on the property,
the firewood pile shall be placed in one of those locations so as to minimize
the visual impact to neighboring property. If it is shown that placement in one
of these locations is not possible, the firewood may be stored behind a garage
or accessory structure, or along the property line.
      (2)   Dimensional requirements.
         a.   Firewood in the rear yard shall be stored in a rack or structure
that measures no more than five feet in height as measured from the ground and
two feet in depth. The width of a firewood pile may not exceed 25 percent of
the total width or depth of the rear yard, whichever is greater. Any firewood
pile stored on a surface other than concrete or pavers must be raised at least
nine inches above the ground.
         b.   Firewood on a front porch must be stored in a rack or structure
that measures no more than two feet in height, three feet in width, and two
feet in depth, or ten percent of the porch area, whichever is smaller. Firewood
on the front porch shall be stored so as not to impede ingress and egress to
and from the house, not to encroach on porch steps, and so as not to create a
trip hazard, regardless of the dimensions of the rack or structure.
         c.   The dimensional requirements of this section shall not apply to
storage of wood that is the product of a tree removed from the lot pursuant to
a permit issued by the city.
      (3)   No single lot shall be allowed more than one firewood pile.
      (4)   Storage of firewood is prohibited on vacant lots and in yards of
homes that are registered as vacant or qualify as vacant under chapter 11 of
this Code.
      (5)   No storage of firewood is permitted for use other than for the
dwelling contained on the lot or parcel.
      (6)   No firewood shall be stored that is rotting, infested with insects,
harboring animals, or otherwise causing a nuisance. A nuisance firewood pile
may be enforced against or abated as provided in this chapter or chapter 13 of
this Code.
(Ord. No. 11-1342, 12-12-11)
Secs. 10-11—10-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 10-36. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the city rules and regulations
to improve safety of the public by promoting the control of fire hazards;
regulating the installation, use and maintenance of equipment; the use of
structures, premises, and open areas; providing for the abatement of fire
hazards; and setting forth standards for compliance to achieve these
objectives.
(Ord. No. 77-1874, § 2, 10-4-77)
Sec. 10-37. - Enforcement.
   The chief of the fire department and any deputies, agents or inspectors
designated by him are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. No. 77-1874, § 4, 10-4-77)
Sec. 10-38. - Adoption.
   Unless specifically provided for in other codes or ordinances of the city,
the standards developed under the procedures of the International Fire Code
(IFC), 2024, including appendices A through G, I, N and O, as amended, and the
2015 Michigan Building Code, as amended, shall apply. Chapter 10 of IFC 2024
and appendices H, J, K, L and M shall be excluded from adoption. The
International Fire Code, 2024 edition, including appendices A through G, I, N
and O, adopted and published by the International Code Council, Inc., and the
2015 Michigan Building Code are hereby incorporated by reference and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this article. A complete copy of the
International Fire Code, 2024 edition, and appendices A through G, I, N and O,
and the 2015 Michigan Building Code,, are available for public use and
inspection at the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 77-1874, § 5, 10-4-77; Ord. No. 95-647, 9-19-95; Ord. No. 99-763, 4-
14-99; Ord. No. 06-1070, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 08-1181, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 11-1336,
11-7-11; Ord. No. 14-1448, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 17-1578. 5-9-17; Ord. No. 24-1834,
1-14-25)
Sec. 10-38.1. - Additions, insertions, and changes.
   The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2024 Edition, adopted
in this article are hereby added or revised as follows:
   (a)   Section 1002. Definitions. Section 1002 is amended to add the
following definitions:
      BANQUET HALL: Any enclosed hall, building or portion of any building
available for rental, lease or loan, for the purpose of public or private
assemblies, whether or not a fee or other consideration is provided by the
renter for use of the building.
      The building must be designated as a banquet hall with a use group of A-2
      indicated on the certificate of occupancy. The occupant load card issued
for the building will have "BANQUET HALL" indicated on the occupant load card.
      OCCUPANT LOAD: The number of persons for which the means of egress of a
building or portion thereof is designed. The occupant load is indicated on the
certificate of occupancy and the provided occupant load card issued by the
building official and fire marshal through the Department of Economic
Development. When an occupant load established by the Zoning Board of Appeals
is lower than the occupant load established by the fire marshal/building
official, the Zoning Board of Appeals' occupant load shall prevail until all
issues identified by the Zoning Board of Appeals in support of the decreased
occupant load are mitigated.
      The established occupant load will be clearly indicated on the
certificate of occupancy and occupant load card.
      RENTER: Shall mean any individual, group or association that rents,
leases or borrows a banquet hall.
   (b)   Section 1004.3.1. Posting of occupant load. Every room or space that
is an assembly occupancy shall have the occupant load of the room or space
posted in a conspicuous place, near the main exit or exit access doorway from
the room or space. Posted signs are provided by the building official and fire
marshal through the Department of Economic Development and shall be maintained
by the owner or authorized agent.
      Section 1004.3.2. Disclosure of banquet hall occupant load in rental
agreement; liability of owner or operator and renter. The owner or operator of
a banquet hall must include a clause in its rental or lease agreement, or
provide a separate form to the banquet hall renter, that includes the
following:
         1.   A statement of the occupant load of the banquet hall or portion
of the banquet hall being occupied by the renter.
         2.   Notification to the renter that, if the occupant load is exceeded
during the renter's event, the City (police, fire marshal's office, or the
building official) may terminate the event and evacuate the banquet hall
pursuant to section 110.6 of this code.
         3.   Notification to the renter that both the owner or operator and
renter may be held responsible for violations of this code pursuant to section
110.5 of this code, and shall be held liable for a misdemeanor in the event
that the occupant load is exceeded in an unreasonable manner during the
renter's event.
         4.   The signature of the owner or operator and the renter.
(Ord. No. 11-1337, 11-7-11; Ord. No. 17-1578. 5-9-17; Ord. No. 24-1834, 1-14-
25)
Sec. 10-38.2. - Inspection, testing and maintenance reports.
   All inspections and maintenance reports required to be furnished to the fire
department by the fire code shall be electronically forwarded to the fire
department using the IROL system (InspectionReportsOnLine.net). Any company
doing inspection and maintenance shall be required to register with IROL.
(Ord. No. 14-1422, 3-18-14)
Sec. 10-39. - Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this article, to permit or
maintain such violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or
refuse to comply with any provision or regulation, except as variation may be
allowed by action of the chief of the fire department in writing.
(Ord. No. 77-1874, § 6, 10-4-77)
Sec. 10-40. - State licensing requirements.
   Any individual or company that installs or maintains fire prevention, fire
suppression, or fire detection systems or equipment must comply with state
licensing requirements. Failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 06-1070, 5-15-06)
Sec. 10-41. - Fire Watch.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed by this section. Words
and phrases not defined in this section shall have the meanings as defined in
the International Fire Code 2015, and any subsequent amendments:
      (1)   Fire watch. Means a temporary measure intended to ensure continuous
and systematic surveillance of a building, its premises, or portion thereof,
including the premises on which the building is located, by one or more
qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire
hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and
notifying the fire department.
   (b)   Scope and authority. In addition to the provisions regarding fire
watch in International Fire Code 2015, and any subsequent amendments, this
section shall set forth the requirements of a fire watch when the Chief of the
Fire Department, or their designee, determines that a building or premises
presents a hazard to life or property as the result of a fire or other
emergency, or when it is determined that any fire protection equipment or
system is inoperable, defective, or has been taken out of service.
      (1)   Authority to require fire watch. The Chief of the Fire Department,
or their designee, may require implementation of a fire watch whenever it is
deemed necessary by the Chief or their designee to assure minimum fire and/or
life safety as regulated by this chapter. The Chief or their designee shall
specify the number of fire watch personnel and duties to be performed. Fire
watch duties shall be implemented immediately upon a determination by the Chief
or their designee.
      (2)   Authority of the Chief to assign department members; cost recovery.
Whenever the owner or person in charge of building and its premises does not
provide fire watch personnel as required, the Chief shall have the authority to
assign uniformed fire department personnel until such time as required fire
watch personnel are provided. If fire department personnel are assigned as fire
watch pursuant to this subsection, the owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of
the building or premises where such personnel are assigned shall be liable for
the costs of such assignment, which shall include labor, equipment usage, and
materials associated with fire watch responsibilities as determined by the fire
department.
       (3)   The provisions of this section are authorized by the International
Fire Code, 2015, and the Home Rule City Act, Public Act 279 of 1909, more
specifically but not limited to MCL 117.3(j).
    (c)   Fire watch maintained until safe. A fire watch shall be maintained
until such time that the Chief of the Fire Department, or their designee,
determines that the building or premises is safe from hazard to life or
property, or when fire protection equipment or systems are restored to service.
    (d)   Violation and penalty; repeat violation. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate this section, to permit or maintain such violation, to refuse
to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any
provision or regulation, except as variation may be allowed by the Chief of the
Fire Department, or their designee, in writing. A violation of this section is
a civil infraction punishable by a fine of $2,500.00, plus any costs imposed by
the court.
      (1)   An increased fine schedule shall be imposed for repeat violations
of this section. As used in this section, “repeat violation” means a violation
committed within ninety (90) days of an admission or determination of
responsibility for a violation of this section occurring upon the same
property.
       (2)   The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine
of $5,000.00, plus any costs imposed by the court.
    (e)   Responsibility for instruction. The owner, manager, or person in
charge or control of the building or premises shall assign to the fire watch as
many personnel as deemed necessary by the Chief of the Fire Department, or
their designee, and subject to the duties as determined by the Chief or their
designee, shall instruct fire watch personnel as to:
       (1)   The procedure for notifying the Fire Department.
      (2)   The area to be patrolled.
      (3)   A method of alerting building occupants and an evacuation
procedure.
      (4)   A procedure shall be provided for reactivating sprinkler valves in
the event of fire when the sprinkler system has been taken out of service.
       (5)   Any other instruction deemed necessary by the Chief or their
designee.
   (f)   Log book. The owner, manager, or person in charge or control of the
premises shall provide a log book which contains a directory of names,
telephone numbers, and other information to assist in making emergency calls to
key management personnel, and which shall be used to record a history of patrol
rounds. The log book shall be maintained on the premises and be available for
inspection by the Fire Department.
    (g)   Specific duty and minimum requirements. Assigned fire watch personnel
shall:
       (1)   Be thoroughly familiar with the area they are patrolling;
      (2)   Perform patrol operations according to instructions from management
and the Chief of the Fire Department (or their designee);
      (3)   Patrol their designated area at least once each hour;
       (4)   Make reports and document the patrol as instructed;
       (5)   Maintain a record of the fire watch for inspection by the Fire
Department;
       (6)   Send a record of the fire watch to the Fire Department upon
request;
       (7)   Be trained in the use of a fire extinguisher and have one
accessible at all times;
       (8)   Be capable of communicating with building and/or premises
occupants and the Fire Department to notify them about fires or other
emergencies; and
      (9)   Any other requirements deemed necessary by the Chief of the Fire
Department or their designee. (Ord. No. 22-1763, 8-23-22)
Secs. 10-42—10-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING AND USE OF FIRE
Sec. 10-61. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Combustible material shall mean any material which will burn when a fire is
applied thereto. It shall include cloth, paper and wood in all its various
forms and combinations, and hydrocarbons, but shall not be limited to these
materials.
   Retail store shall mean a place or building in which goods, wares or
merchandise is sold directly to the consumer or his agent.
   Smoke or smoking shall mean the use of cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco
in any form after the tobacco is ignited.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 6, 9-19-50)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 10-62. - Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the fire marshal of the city to enforce the
provisions of this article and to see that proper notices are posted in those
buildings or portions of buildings where smoking is prohibited, and in those
buildings which have been designated by the fire marshal as not being dangerous
to life or property for smoking or other fire producing devices to be operated
therein; provided, however, that the failure to post any of the notices herein
required shall not excuse or suspend the operation of this article.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 5, 9-19-50)
Sec. 10-63. - Smoking prohibited in stores.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any retail store which is
designed or arranged to accommodate more than 50 persons in the city in which
combustible material is sold, or offered or exposed for sale; provided,
however, that smoking shall be permitted in smoking and restrooms, executive
offices, restaurants, beauty parlors and barbershops in such stores and in
areas specifically designed by the fire marshal by written authorization to the
owner having control or management thereof, when the fire marshal has
determined that smoking therein is not dangerous to life or property.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 1, 9-19-50)
Sec. 10-64. - Use of fire restricted.
   It shall be unlawful to use any spark, flame, match or other fire producing
device for purposes of demonstration in any retail store, building or section
of building in the city unless written authorization therefor has been first
given by the fire marshal after he has determined that the use of such fire
producing device is not dangerous to life or property.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 2, 9-19-50)
Sec. 10-65. - Unlawful to start fire while smoking.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in smoking or in attempting to light or
to smoke a cigarette, cigar, pipe or tobacco in any form for which a lighter or
matches are used, to set fire to any bed, bedding, furniture, curtains,
drapery, or household furniture in any hotel, roominghouse or public
lodginghouse.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 3, 9-19-50)
Sec. 10-66. - Smoking prohibited in theaters.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any theater in the
city. It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of the theater to see that
the provisions of this section are obeyed by the patrons, employees or other
persons in such theaters.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, the word "theater" shall be deemed to
include and shall mean any assembly hall, auditorium, building or other
enclosed structure used for dramatic performances, vaudeville entertainments,
motion picture shows or other similar entertainment.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the owner, operator and manager of any
theater, or either or any of them, to comply with the provisions of this
section and to enforce the observance thereof by patrons and employees or other
persons in such theater. It shall be a violation of this section for any
employee of the theater who has been authorized to enforce any part of this
section to refuse or neglect to observe the same or to enforce its observance
insofar as it may be within his power so to do.
   (d)   Smoking may be permitted in executive offices and in areas
specifically designated by written authorization of the fire marshal to persons
having control or management thereof, when the fire marshal has determined that
smoking therein is not dangerous to life or property.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 3-a, 9-19-50; Ord. No. 51-631, 5-15-51)
Sec. 10-67. - Smoking prohibited in schools.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public or private
school building, school auditorium, or portions of buildings used for
instructional and educational purposes, or where an assembly of persons may
gather for educational purposes, regardless of the number.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the persons having control or management
thereof to see that the provisions of this section are obeyed by the occupants,
employees or other persons in any such building.
   (c)   Smoking may be permitted in executive offices and in areas
specifically designated by written authorization of the fire marshal to persons
having control or management thereof, when such fire marshal has determined
that smoking therein is not dangerous to life or property.
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 3-b, 9-19-50; Ord. No. 51-631, 5-15-51)
Sec. 10-68. - Posting of notice required.
   The owner or manager of every retail store, building or section of building
affected by the prohibition of section
10-63 shall post in a conspicuous place, a notice or sign reading substantially
as follows:
"SMOKING PROHIBITED CITY ORDINANCE"
(Ord. No. 50-573, § 4, 9-19-50)
Chapter 11 - OCCUPANCY AND BUILDING STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Housing department, §
2-121 et seq.; housing commission, §
2-471 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fees for housing
permits and inspections, §
9-161 et seq.; hotels, rooming and lodging houses and beds and breakfasts, §
12-736 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 11-1—11-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 11-26. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to help protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens by attempting to prevent blight, avoid the creation and
maintenance of a nuisance and insure minimum maintenance of dwellings through
recognition of how the conditions set forth in this article can affect the
general well-being and property values of residents.
(Ord. No. 81-102, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 84-289, 2-21-84)
Sec. 11-27. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
   Bedroom or room occupied for sleeping purposes shall mean a room
characterized by the following traits:
      (1)   A room not normally used for the preparation or consumption of
food.
      (2)   A room so arranged that it is not necessary to go through this room
in order to gain access to the principal bathroom of the dwelling unit or any
other room with the exception of a secondary bath or toilet room serving that
sleeping room only.
      (3)   A room with solid swing-type door with stop mouldings to afford
privacy.
      (4)   A room with adequate ventilation.
      (5)   A room normally with a closet.
   Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used, or intended
to be used, for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary
housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the health officer.
   Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
   Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
   Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
   Occupant shall mean any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
   Operator shall mean any person who has charge, possession or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   Ordinary minimum winter conditions shall mean the temperature 15 degrees
Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year
period.
   Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, possession or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
   Plumbing shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the following
supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water
pipes, garbage disposal units, water pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   Rooming house shall mean any dwelling or that part thereof containing one or
more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or
more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father,
or sister or brother to the owner or operator.
   Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking or eating purposes.
   Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
   Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control
of the owner or operator.
   Temporary housing shall mean any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached
to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
   Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "premises,"
are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed
by the words "or any part thereof."
(Ord. No. 81-102, §§ 1.1—1.25, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 11-28. - Conflict with other ordinances and laws.
   When a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision
of any state statute or any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance
or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail. If a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a state statute or any other ordinance or code of the city which
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to
prevail.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 14.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 84-289, 2-21-84)
Secs. 11-29—11-40. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTION
Sec. 11-41. - Right of entry, access.
   (a)   The Department of Economic Development director or their designee is
hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the conditions
of all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing
premises located within the city. These inspections are performed either to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter or code, upon identifiable external
violations documented by the director or their designee, upon inspection, or
set forth in complaints registered by area residents and/or neighborhood
associations, if such inspections are needed to correct violations heretofore
enumerated in this code.
   (b)   For the purpose of making such inspections, the director or their
designee, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at any reasonable
time all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing
premises. The owner or occupant of every residential and nonresidential
structure, or the person in charge thereof, shall give free access to such
residential and nonresidential structure and its premises, at any reasonable
time, for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
   (c)   Every occupant of a residential or nonresidential structure shall give
the owner thereof, or their agent or employee, access to any part of such
residential or nonresidential structure, or its premises, at any reasonable
time, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule
or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the owner, lessee, tenant, or
business owner in charge of the property from denying entry. However, nothing
shall prevent the director from asking permission from an owner, lessee, or
business owner in charge of the property for permission to inspect.
      (1)   In the event an owner, lessee, tenant, or business owner denies
entry for an inspection, nothing in this article shall prohibit the director
from seeking an administrative search warrant based on probable cause to
conduct an inspection.
      (2)   Refusal to allow an inspection under this chapter is considered a
violation under this chapter if an inspection is refused after an
administrative search warrant is obtained.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 10-1271, 5-
3-10; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22)
Sec. 11-42. - Inspection and occupancy requirements.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for anyone, including, but not limited to, the
owner, attorney, representative, lending institution, title company, real-
estate firm, broker, or salesman to assist in consummating a sale or transfer,
including installment sales such as land contracts or other transaction
involving real property in the city regardless of where the closing of the sale
occurs, without first presenting the prospective purchaser or grantee with a
certificate of occupancy issued by the Department of Economic Development.
   For closing purposes, the certificate of occupancy shall expire six months
after the date on which the real property was approved for occupancy. In the
event that the real property is not transferred or conveyed within such six-
month period, a new inspection is required.
   Exceptions:
      (1)   In the event that the real property has not been approved for
occupancy (i.e. is sold without a certificate of occupancy), then the purchaser
must sign a compliance agreement agreeing to correct all violations shown on an
inspection report prepared by the Department of Economic Development based upon
an inspection occurring not more than 12 months prior to the date of sale or
transfer.
      (2)   In the event the real property is sold or transferred at a
sheriff's sale, court-ordered auction, or through another means whereby an
inspection could not be performed prior to the sale or transfer, the purchaser
shall apply in writing to the director of the Department of Economic
Development within 30 days after the date of sale or transfer and pay the fee
for an inspection of the property and will enter into and pay the fee for a
compliance agreement referred to above. If there are no violations shown on the
inspection report, then the purchaser will be refunded the fee for the
compliance agreement.
      (3)   This section does not apply to the individual transfer of property
through inheritance where no bona fide sale is intended and the property has
been and continues to be occupied by the person or persons receiving the
inheritance.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or for any owner or
agent thereof to permit the occupation of any building or addition thereto, or
part thereof, for any purpose, until occupancy has been approved by the
Department of Economic Development.
      (1)   A certificate of occupancy is issued when all violations noted on
the inspection report issued by the Department of Economic Development have
been corrected and required repairs have been made.
      (2)   In the event an owner, prospective purchaser, or transferee
requests that occupancy be permitted prior to correction of all violations
noted on the inspection report, and if the absence of such complete conformance
does not, in the judgment of the Department of Economic Development, constitute
material health or safety hazards, conditional occupancy may be allowed upon
the condition that complete conformance be achieved within a reasonable time
specified by the Department of Economic Development, but in not more than 90
days.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 2.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 10-1271,
5-3-10; Ord. No. 14-1430, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22; Ord. No. 25-1852,
9-9-25)
Sec. 11-43. - Failure to comply.
   The penalty for any violation of this division by any person, firm and/or
corporation shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided under section
1-9 of this Code. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.
   Nothing in this division constitutes a waiver of the city's right to
petition the circuit court for the right to take action to prevent occupancy of
a property.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 2.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 97-707, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 02-898, 5-
21-02; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 10-1271, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 14-1430, 7-
22-14)
Secs. 11-44—11-55. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 11-56. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1037, adopted May 2, 2005, delete §
11-56 in its entirety. Former §
11-56 pertained to notice of violation and derived from Ord. No. 81-102, § 3.1,
adopted Nov. 4, 1981.
Sec. 11-57. - Hearing.
   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this article, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto that cannot be resolved by departmental appeal
procedures, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
building board of appeals; provided that such person shall file to the
Department of Economic Development a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the
building board of appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held at the next scheduled building
board of appeals meeting or at a special meeting of the building board of
appeals, not later than 30 days after the day on which the petition was filed;
provided that upon application of the petitioner, the building board of appeals
may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 30-day
period, if in the judgment of the board the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 3.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 22-1735,
1-25-22)
Sec. 11-58. - Action by appeal board.
   After hearing, the building board of appeals shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings to whether the provisions of
this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with. If the board sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be
deemed to be an order.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 3.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05)
Sec. 11-59. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1037, adopted May 2, 2005, deleted §
11-59 in its entirety. Former §
11-59 pertained to records and derived from Ord. No. 81-102, § 3.4, adopted
Nov. 4, 1981.
Sec. 11-60. - Emergency measures.
   Whenever the health officer or director finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice
or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, such order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the corporation counsel
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending
upon the finding as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, such order
shall be continued or may be modified or revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 3.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-61. - Enforcement officer.
   The director of the Department of Economic Development (or designee) shall
serve as an ordinance officer for purposes of enforcement of the provisions of
this article. The director of the Department of Public Works and Facilities (or
designee) shall be authorized to issue notices of violation and/or appearance
tickets requiring that corrective action be taken by the owner or occupant of
any dwelling and/or requiring the owner or occupant of any dwelling to appear
in court to answer for violations of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 13.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22)
Sec. 11-62. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1037, adopted May 2, 2005, deleted §
11-62 in its entirety. Former §
11-62 pertained to responsibility of owner, occupant; extensions, and derived
from Ord. No. 81-102, § 13.3, adopted Nov. 4, 1981; and Ord. No. 84-289,
adopted Feb. 21, 1984.
Secs. 11-63—11-75. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
Sec. 11-76. - Compliance required.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-77. - Kitchen required.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen with a properly installed
kitchen sink, a refrigerator in good working condition, and a properly
installed cooking range. The refrigerator and cooking range may be the personal
equipment of the tenant.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-78. - Bathroom required.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
within such room and which is equipped with a flush water closet, a stall
shower or bathtub, a lavatory basin and either a mechanical exhaust fan in good
working condition or an operable window meeting the requirements of section
11-98.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-79. - Laundry facilities.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain a properly installed laundry tray or other
facilities for laundering approved by the director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-80. - Plumbing generally.
   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, laundry tray and tub or shower required
under the provisions of sections
11-77,
11-78 and
11-79 shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines and all
plumbing fixtures within every dwelling unit shall be properly connected to a
water and sewer system approved by the director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-81. - Rubbish storage.
   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, the type and location of which are approved by the director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-82. - Garbage disposal.
   Every dwelling unit shall have a properly installed garbage disposal unit
installed in the waste line of the kitchen sink in a manner approved by the
director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-83. - Water-heating facilities.
   Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition, properly
connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of section
11-80, and capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees
Fahrenheit. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting
the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required under the provisions of section
11-101 are not in operation.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-84. - Egress.
   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to
safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and
the city.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-85. - Smoke detectors.
   Each apartment, suite or sleeping area of every single or multiple dwelling
unit shall be provided with a minimum of one smoke detector capable of sensing
visible or invisible products of combustion. The detector shall be approved or
listed by a recognized independent testing laboratory and, when actuated, shall
provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the individual dwelling
unit. A minimum of one smoke detector shall be located in the immediate area of
all sleeping quarters.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 4.9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 11-86—11-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
Sec. 11-96. - Compliance.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-97. - Windows.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between stops, for
every habitable room, shall be 12½ percent of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room
and such light obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a
window shall not be deemed to face directly outdoors and shall not be included
as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only
window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total
window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor
area of such room.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-98. - Ventilation.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can
easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room.
The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 60 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type
window size, as required under section
11-96, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-99. - Electric service panel.
   Every one-bedroom dwelling unit shall be supplied with a minimum 60 ampere
electric service panel, and every dwelling unit containing more than one
bedroom shall be supplied with a minimum 100 ampere electric service panel. All
connected loads to such panels shall be protected with fuses or circuit
breakers.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-100. - Electrical outlets, fixtures.
   Every habitable room of every dwelling unit shall contain at least two
separate wall type electric convenience outlets and one wall switched ceiling
light fixture or outlet plug. Every water closet compartment or bathroom shall
contain at least one wall type electric convenience outlet and one wall
switched light fixture. Laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and other such rooms
shall be provided with adequate electric outlets for their purpose. Every such
outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and
safe working condition, and shall be connected to the electric service panel in
a safe manner.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-101. - Minimum heating standards.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted or
undertaken or who shall be bound to heat or to furnish heat for any occupied
dwelling, in the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, to furnish
sufficient heat for any occupied part thereof from October 1 of each year to
May 1 of the succeeding year, so as to maintain in such occupied premises a
minimum temperature of at least 60 degrees Fahrenheit from 10:30 p.m. until 6:
30 a.m., 65 degrees Fahrenheit at 7:30 a.m., and 68 degrees Fahrenheit at 8:30
a.m. and thereafter until 10:30 p.m., whenever the outer or street temperature
shall fall below 55 degrees Fahrenheit; provided, however, that failure to
provide the heat required shall not constitute an offense when it is due to any
act or acts of the occupant thereof or any cause beyond the control of the
person so required to furnish. The term "contracted" shall mean a written or
oral contract or agreement which has been entered into.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the health officer or his authorized agent in
the department of health to receive, investigate and report all violations of
this section and to appear in court after complaint has been made by the party
aggrieved, for the purpose of furnishing testimony, and the health officer is
hereby authorized to adopt such methods of procedure and to make such rules and
regulations, subject to charter provisions as may be necessary, to accomplish
the intent of this section.
(Ord. No. 81-72, §§ 1, 2, 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-102. - Lighting of halls, stairways.
   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five or
more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall
and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing
not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located
light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on
when needed, instead of fulltime lighting.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-103. - Screening—Protection against mosquitoes, flies, etc.
   During that portion of each year when the health officer deems it necessary
for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening
directly from a dwelling unit to out-door space shall have supplied screens and
a self-closing device, and every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
supplied with screens; provided that such screens shall not be required during
such period in rooms deemed by the health officer to be located high enough in
the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such insects, and in rooms
located in areas of the city which are deemed by the health officer to have so
few such insects as to render screens unnecessary.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-104. - Same—Rodent control.
   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation,
and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively
prevent their entrance.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 5.8, 11-4-81)
Secs. 11-105—11-115. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE SAFE AND SANITARY
MAINTENANCE OF PARTS OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS
Sec. 11-116. - Compliance.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-117. - Foundations, floors, etc.
   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-118. - Windows, doors, etc.
   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-119. - Stairs, porches, etc.
   Every inside and outside stair, and every porch and every appurtenance
thereto, shall be so constructed as to be safe to use, and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-120. - Plumbing installations.
   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and
obstructions.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-121. - Bathroom floors.
   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-122. - Other facilities, equipment.
   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-123. - Disconnection of services.
   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required under this article to be removed from, shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except
for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance
of service is approved by the director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-124. - Condition of vacant units.
   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit
unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 6.8, 11-4-81)
Secs. 11-125—11-135. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 11-136. - Compliance.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-137. - Minimum floor space—Dwelling unit.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 250 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor
space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated
on the basis of total habitable room area.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 7.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-138. - Same—Sleeping rooms.
   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 100 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 7.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-139. - Access to bathroom.
   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall
have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment, intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room, can
be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements
be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room, bathroom or water closet compartment.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 7.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-140. - Ceiling height.
   At least one-half of the floor area of every second floor habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, six inches, and the floor
area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet
shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible
occupancy thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 7.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-141. - Use of cellar, basement restricted.
   No cellar or basement space shall be used as a bedroom or dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 7.5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 11-142—11-150. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
Sec. 11-151. - Shared public areas.
   Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-152. - Individual responsibility of occupant.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-153. - Disposal of rubbish.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by section
11-81.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-154. - Disposal of garbage.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a
clean and sanitary manner; by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers required by section
11-82. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or
containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four
dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on premises where more than
four dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-155. - Screens, storm doors and windows.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are
required under the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such
service.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-156. - Pest control.
   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation
is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or
reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of
the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in
any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-157. - Plumbing fixtures.
   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein
in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-158. - Maintenance of exterior.
   Every owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible
for maintaining the exterior of the building. Such maintenance shall include,
but is not limited to:
      (1)   Maintaining lawn so as to prevent tall grass, vegetation and weeds
in the front yard, side yard, rear yard, adjacent rights-of-way and easements.
Six inches or more in length shall constitute a violation of this article.
      (2)   Maintaining any structure, garages, deck, shed, fence and/or pool
including but not limited to preventing peeling paint, broken, damaged or
missing steps, handrails, guardrails and/or porches, detached or loose gutters,
fascia, siding, flashing and/or shingles, broken doors and windows, sagging
roofs and torn, damaged or missing screens.
      (3)   Disposing of any accumulation of debris in yards and easements.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 8.8, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 84-289, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 06-1072,
5-15-06)
Secs. 11-159—11-170. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - ROOMINGHOUSES
Sec. 11-171. - Compliance.
   No person shall operate a roominghouse, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse except in compliance with
the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-172. - Application to hotels.
   Every provision of this article which applies to roominghouses shall also
apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may conflict with
the laws of this state or with the lawful regulation of any state board or
agency.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-173. - Notice of violation, procedures.
   Whenever upon inspection of any roominghouse, the health officer finds that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this
article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the health
officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of such roominghouse
unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period,
to be determined by the corporation counsel, the operator's roominghouse permit
will be suspended. At the end of such period, the health officer shall
reinspect such roominghouse, and if he finds that such conditions or practices
have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that
the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension,
such operator shall immediately cease operation of such roominghouse, and no
person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-174. - Suspension, revocation; hearing.
   Any person whose permit to operate a roominghouse has been suspended, or who
has received notice from the health officer that his permit is to be suspended
unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are corrected, may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the corporation
counsel under the procedure provided by section
11-57; provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within ten days
following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit shall be
deemed to have been automatically revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-175. - Bathroom facilities.
   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower
properly connected to a water and sewer system, approved by the health officer,
and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or
fraction thereof residing within a roominghouse, including members of the
operator's family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided that
in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be
substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets.
All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably
accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement
except by written approval of the health officer.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-176. - Linens.
   The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to
any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-177. - Minimum area for sleeping rooms.
   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at
least 100 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor
space for each occupant thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-178. - Egress.
   Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to
safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and
the city.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-179. - Sanitary maintenance of walls, etc.
   The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the roominghouse; and he shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises, where
the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 9.7, 11-4-81)
Secs. 11-180—11-190. - Reserved.
DIVISION 10. - REGISTRY OF OWNERS AND PREMISES
Sec. 11-191. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1037, adopted May 2, 2005, deleted §
11-191 in its entirety. Former §
11-191 pertained to required (registry of owners and premises) and derived from
Ord. No. 81-102, § 10.1, adopted Nov. 4, 1981.
Sec. 11-192. - Penalty for violation.
   Any person failing to register, as required by this division, shall be fined
$100.00. Each day that an owner fails to register after receiving notice of the
registration requirements of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 10.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-193. Reserved.
   Editor’s note- Ord. No. 25-1852, adopted September 9, 2025, deleted § 11-193
in its entirety. Former § 11-193 pertained to data generally and change of
status, deriving from Ord. No. 81-102, adopted Nov. 4, 1981; Ord. No. 05-1037,
adopted May 2, 2005; and Ord. No. 22-1735, adopted January 25, 2022.
Sec. 11-194. - Agent information.
   If the premises are managed or operated by an agent, the agent's name and
place of business shall be reported to the department of building and safety.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 10.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05)
Sec. 11-195. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-1037, adopted May 2, 2005, deleted §
11-195 in its entirety. Former §
11-191 pertained to agent for service of process and derived from Ord. No. 81-
102, § 10.4, adopted Nov. 4, 1981.
Sec. 11-196. - Corporate ownership.
   If the owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers shall
be listed. If such corporation has no substantial assets other than the
dwelling in question and is controlled in whole or in part by another
corporation, the name, address and officers' names and addresses of such other
corporation shall be listed.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 10.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-197. - Change of address.
   Any change in owner, agent, or representative shall be reported to the
department of building and safety.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 10.6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05)
Sec. 11-198. Reserved.
   Editor’s note- Ord. No. 25-1852, adopted September 9, 2025, deleted § 11-198
in its entirety. Former § 11-198 pertained to inspections, deriving from Ord.
No. 81-102, adopted Nov. 4, 1981; Ord. No. 84-312, adopted August 21, 1984;
Ord. No. 02-875, adopted February 5, 2002; Ord. No. 03-985, adopted October 21,
2003; Ord. No. 05-1037, adopted May 2, 2005; and Ord. No. 22-1735, adopted
January 25, 2022.
Sec. 11-199. - Record of violations.
   If, upon inspection, the premises or any part thereof are found to be in
violation of any provision of this article or other applicable building code,
zoning regulation or other local code relating to home maintenance, the
violation shall be recorded by the Department of Economic Development and
notice given to the owner, agent or representative.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 10.9, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1037, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 22-1735,
1-25-22)
Secs. 11-200—11-210. - Reserved.
DIVISION 11. - BOARDING OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
Sec. 11-211. - Restricted.
   No window, door or other opening in a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
boarded up without specific prior approval of the Department of Economic
Development, the police department, or the fire department. Such boarding up of
a dwelling or dwelling unit will be only for the purpose of correcting
vandalism or the results of a disaster and then only for a duration not to
exceed two weeks, unless approved in writing for a longer duration not to
exceed two weeks, unless approved in writing for a longer duration by the
director of the Department of Economic Development. If boarding up is deemed
necessary, the means and material used must be approved by the Department of
Economic Development.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 11.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1105, 11-20-06; Ord. No. 22-
1735, 1-25-22)
Sec. 11-212. - Enforcement.
   (a)   Any individual found to be in violation of section
11-211 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit boarded up in violation of this division
shall be deemed a nuisance as defined in
chapter 13 of the Code of the City of Dearborn.
      (1)   Windows boarded up in excess of two weeks without the approval of
the director of the Department of Economic Development shall be considered a
violation of this division and shall be deemed a nuisance.
   (c)   Once deemed a nuisance, the Division of Property Maintenance and
Development Services shall be authorized to abate the nuisance in accordance
with the procedure identified in sections
13-5 and
13-8 of the Code of the City of Dearborn. Abatement may include the
installation of replacement windows and/or doors.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 11.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 84-289, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 06-1105,
11-20-06; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22)
Secs. 11-213—11-225. - Reserved.
DIVISION 12. - UNFIT DWELLINGS AND CONDEMNATION
Sec. 11-226. - Compliance.
   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings
or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the requirements of
this division.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-227. - Condemnation.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be
so designated and placarded by the health officer or director:
      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of
the occupants or of the public.
      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
      (3)   One which because of its general condition or location is
unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or
of the public.
(Ord. No. 81-102, §§ 12.1—12.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-228. - Vacation of premises.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, so
designated and placarded by the health officer, or director, shall be vacated
within a reasonable time, as ordered by the health officer or director.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 12.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-229. - Further use prohibited.
   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit
for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the health officer or
director. The health officer, or director, shall remove such placard whenever
the defect upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have
been eliminated.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 12.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-230. - Unauthorized removal of placard.
   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as
such, except as provided in section
11-194.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 12.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 11-231. - Hearing.
   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the zoning or
building board of appeals, under the procedure as set forth in section
11-58.
(Ord. No. 81-102, § 12.7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 84-289, 2-21-84)
Secs. 11-232—11-240. - Reserved.
DIVISION 13. - DUMPSTERS AND TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1139, adopted Nov. 19, 2007, supplied provisions to
be added to the Code as §§
11-251—11-254. In order to maintain the established numbering system of this
Code, these provisions have been redesignated as §§
11-241—11-244 to read as set out herein.
Sec. 11-241. - Prohibited.
   It shall be prohibited to store dumpsters or temporary storage containers on
private property except as herein after provided. Dumpsters and temporary
storage containers shall include, but are not limited to, the following
illustrative examples: construction dumpsters, portable on demand storage
containers, shipping containers, over-seas containers, inter-modal containers,
moving containers or trailers of any size, except trailers that are
recreational and habitable.
(Ord. No. 07-1139, 11-19-07)
Sec. 11-242. - Limitations.
   Dumpsters and temporary storage containers are allowed on private property
with the following limitations:
      (1)   Line of sight shall not be obstructed, as defined in the City of
Dearborn Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.09.
      (2)   Public walkways shall not be obstructed.
      (3)   Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall not extend into
the front set back.
      (4)   Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall not obstruct,
impair or impede the use and enjoyment of adjoining property, including but not
limited to the reasonable ability to enter and exit a vehicle.
      (5)   Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall be clearly
identified with the company name and phone number.
      (6)   Only one dumpster or temporary storage container is allowed on a
property at one time.
      (7)   Dumpsters and temporary storage containers are allowed on a
property for a period of an accumulative seven days within a 180-day period.
      (8)   Dumpsters shall not be used to store household trash or other items
or waste that will cause offensive odors, attract insects or vermin, and/or
create a nuisance in general.
      (9)   Dumpsters shall not be filled beyond the top edge.
      (10)   When not in use, open containers shall be securely tarped.
      (11)   Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall comply with all
other applicable codes, ordinances and zoning requirements of the City of
Dearborn.
(Ord. No. 07-1139, 11-19-07)
Sec. 11-243. - Exemptions.
   (a)   In cases where the physical limitations of a property prevent a
dumpster or temporary storage container from being stored on private property;
      (1)   The chief of police or their designee may allow a dumpster or
temporary storage container to be located on public property; provided that
such approval is in writing and compliance with all other regulations occurs,
or
      (2)   The director of the Department of Economic Development or their
designee may allow a dumpster or temporary storage container to be located in
the front set back, provided that such approval is in writing and compliance
with all other regulations occurs, or
      (3)   In granting this exemption, the timeframe for which the placement
may be allowed can be restricted below what otherwise would apply, or extended
beyond what is specified in subsection
11-252(7) if individual circumstances warrant.
   (b)   Construction dumpsters are allowed on a property for a period of six
months, provided that a valid construction permit exists for the same location
and compliance with all other regulations occurs.
   (c)   Dumpsters required for demolitions are allowed on a property for the
term of a valid demolition permit for the same location and compliance with all
other regulations occurs.
(Ord. No. 07-1139, 11-19-07; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22)
Sec. 11-244. - Violations.
   Violations of this division shall constitute a nuisance per se and may be
abated pursuant to chapter 13, article I.
(Ord. No. 07-1139, 11-19-07)
Secs. 11-245—11-250. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - TAX EXEMPTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 11-251. - Purpose.
   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a
service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 (MCL 125.140 et seq.). The city is authorized
by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of
taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at
an amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid, but for this
Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is
a public necessity, and as the City of Dearborn will be benefited and improved
by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate
tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the
continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service
charge in lieu of taxes during the periods contemplated in this article are
essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments
which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-252. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346
of 1966, MCL 125.140 et seq. of the State of Michigan, as amended.
   Annual shelter rents means the total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of a housing development representing rents or
occupancy charges exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other
utilities furnished to the occupants.
   Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   Contract rents are defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 8 of the U.S.
Housing Act of 1937 as amended.
   Housing development means a development which contains a significant element
of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as
the authority determines how to improve the quality of the development as it
relates to housing for persons of low income.
   HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United
States government.
   Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority or farmers home
administration or the department of housing and urban development to the
sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development
or a mortgage loan insured by HUD.
   Sponsor means persons or entities that have applied to either the authority
for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development or to another governmental
entity for a federally aided loan, as defined by the Act.
   Utilities mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical
services that are paid by the housing development.
   Very low income persons and families means those persons and families whose
annual income does not exceed 50 percent of the area median income as
determined by HUD.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-253. - Class of housing development.
   It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be multiple dwellings for persons and families of very low
income which are financed or assisted by the authority or which are federally
aided, as defined in the Act.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-254. - Establishment of annual service charge.
   Housing developments for persons and families of very low income and the
property on which they shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property
taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging
that the sponsor and the authority, have established upon the enactment and
continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing
developments for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of
taxes as established in this article, will accept payment of an annual service
charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service
charge shall be no less than four percent of the difference between the annual
shelter rent for authority-aided housing developments actually collected and
utilities, if the sponsor pays such utilities. The period used for this
calculation shall be the preceding calendar year.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-255. - Resolution of contractual effect.
   A resolution of the city council granting tax exempt status, as provided in
this article, shall be adopted for each housing development qualified under the
terms and provisions of this article. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
15(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the
sponsor with the authority as third-party beneficiary under the contract, to
provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes as previously
described will be effectuated by enactment of such a resolution by the city
council.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99)
Sec. 11-256. - Payment of service charge.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall
by payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city
except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before February 28 of the
succeeding year.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-257. - Duration.
   The tax exempt status of a housing development approved for such status by
resolution of the city council shall remain in effect and shall not terminate
so long as the mortgage loan for such housing development remains outstanding
and unpaid, or for such period as the authority or other governmental entity
has any interest in the property; provided, the construction of such housing
development commences within one year from the effective date of the resolution
of the city council approving the housing development for tax exempt status as
provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99)
Sec. 11-258. - Termination.
   Failure to comply with any term or condition in this article or in any
resolution that authorizes an exemption, after 30 days' written notice, shall
result in termination of this tax exemption. If the exemption is terminated,
the service fee shall immediately increase retroactively; 100 percent of the
taxes which would have been paid had there not been an exemption shall become
due and owing.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99)
Sec. 11-259. - Severability.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shell be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same
shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99)
Sec. 11-260. - Inconsistent Code provisions.
   All provisions of the Code of the City of Dearborn that are inconsistent
with the provisions of this article are repealed.
(Ord. No. 99-803, 12-21-99)
DIVISION 2. - VILLAGE GREEN APARTMENTS
Sec. 11-261. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish a service charge to be paid in
lieu of taxes by Village Green Apartments, a class of housing exempt from
taxation under the state housing development authority act Act No. 346 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 116.114(1) et seq.),
as amended. It is also acknowledged that this housing project offered by
Village Green Ltd. (A Michigan Limited Partnership), the sponsor, subject to
receipt of mortgage insurance and section 8 payments from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development to erect, own and operate the housing
development identified as Village Green Apartments, FHA Project #044-35516, on
certain real property located at Lapeer at Akron in Southeast Dearborn, is a
public necessity, and the city will be benefited and improved by such project.
(Ord. No. 82-200, § 1, 1-19-82)
Sec. 11-262. - Class of housing development.
   It is hereby determined that Village Green Apartments is a housing
development to which the tax exemption applies and for which a service charge
shall be paid in lieu of taxes as a housing development for families, which are
financed or assisted pursuant to section 221 of the National Housing Act, with
housing assistances under the provisions of section 8.
(Ord. No. 82-200, § 2, 1-19-82)
Sec. 11-263. - Establishment of annual service charge.
   The housing development identified as Village Green Apartments and the
property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property
taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging
that the sponsor and the U.S. Department of Housing, Urban Development have
established the economic feasibility of the housing development and reliance
upon the enactment and continuing effect of this division, the qualification of
the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in
lieu of taxes, as established in this division, and in consideration of the
sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage insurance and section 8
payments from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, to
construct, own and operate such housing development, hereby agrees to accept
payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property
taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four percent of the total
annual rents.
(Ord. No. 82-200, § 3, 1-19-82)
Sec. 11-264. - Contractual effect.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)5 of the State Housing
Development Authority Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the
sponsor to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof, as
previously described is effected by enactment of this division.
(Ord. No. 82-200, § 4, 1-19-82)
Sec. 11-265. - Payment of service charge.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes, as determined under this division,
shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are pay able to
the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before February 28
of each year.
(Ord. No. 82-200, § 5, 1-19-82)
Sec. 11-266. - Duration.
   This division shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid.
(Ord. No. 82-200, § 6, 1-19-82)
DIVISION 3. - VILLAGE PARK APARTMENTS
Sec. 11-267. - Purpose.
   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a
service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL Section
125.1401 et. seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change
the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing
exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the
taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such
housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will
be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by
providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public
purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for
tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period
contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of economic
feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in
reliance on such tax exemption.
   The city acknowledges that Village Park Preservation Limited Partnership
(the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the
Michigan State Housing Development Authority and an allocation of low income
housing tax credits ("LIHTC"), to rehabilitate, own and operate a 152 unit
housing development identified as Village Park Apartments on certain property
located at 2800 Liberty Avenue in the city to service persons of very low
income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this
housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all
taxes.
(Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-268. - Class of housing development.
   It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be those financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is
further determined that Village Park Apartments is of this class.
Sec. 11-269. - Establishment of annual service charge.
   The housing development identified as Village Park Apartments and the
property on which it is constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes
from and after the date that Village Park Preservation Limited Partnership
acquires legal title to the housing development. The city, acknowledging that
the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the
housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of
this division and the qualification of the housing development for exemption
from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this
article, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a
mortgage loan from the authority and an allocation under the LIHTC program to
rehabilitate, own and operate the housing department, agrees to accept payment
of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes.
The annual service charge shall be equal to 4.00 percent of the annual shelter
rents actually collected for the first ten years of this exemption, 5.00
percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected for the eleventh through
twenty-fifth years of this exemption, and 6.00 percent of the annual shelter
rents actually collected for the twenty-sixth through fortieth years of this
exemption.
(Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-270. - Limitation on payment of annual service charge.
   Notwithstanding section
11-269, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part
of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other
than very low income persons or families (except for up to two units that may
be leased to project employees) shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes
which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing
development were not tax exempt.
(Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-271. - Contractual effect of ordinance.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the
contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as
third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment
of this article.
(Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-272. - Payment of service charge.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the article shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city
except that the annual payment for each year shall be paid on or before
February 28 of the succeeding year.
(Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Sec. 11-273. - Duration.
   This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest
in the property or the housing development remains subject to income and rent
restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended.
(Ord. No. 06-1068, 4-3-06)
Secs. 11-274—11-279. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CITY HALL ARTIST LOFTS
Sec. 11-280. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is to provide for a service charge in lieu of
taxes for a housing project for low income persons and families to be financed
with a federally-aided mortgage loan or an advance or grant from the Authority
pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of
1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq.) (the "Act").
   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its low income
persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
Act. The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service
charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from
taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that
would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing
for low income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the city will
be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by
providing real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose.
It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this
division for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of all ad valorem
taxes during the period contemplated in this division are essential to the
determination of economic feasibility of the housing project that is
constructed or rehabilitated with financing extended in reliance on such tax
exemption.
   The city acknowledges that the sponsor (as defined below) has offered,
subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC Program by the Michigan
State Housing Development Authority, to acquire and rehabilitate, own and
operate a housing project identified as City Hall Artists Lofts on certain
property located at 13615 Michigan Avenue, Dearborn, Michigan 48126 and
commonly known as Dearborn City Hall, Annex Buildings and Parking Deck in the
city to serve low income persons and families, and that the sponsor has offered
to pay the city on account of this housing project an annual service charge for
public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-281. - Definitions.
   Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual
period from or paid on behalf of all occupants of a housing project
representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of utilities.
   LIHTC Program means the low income housing tax credit program administered
by the authority under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1866, as
amended.
   Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move
into a housing project.
   Mortgage loan means a loan that is federally-aided (as defined in the Act)
or a loan or grant made or to be made by the authority, for the construction,
rehabilitation, acquisition and/or permanent financing of a housing project,
and secured by a mortgage on the housing project.
   Sponsor means Artspace Projects, Inc. and any entity that receives or
assumes a Mortgage Loan.
   Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer and other
utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by the housing project.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-282. - Class of housing development.
   It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be housing projects for low income persons and families that
are financed with a mortgage loan. It is further determined that City Hall
Artist Lofts is of this class.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-283. - Establishment of annual service charge.
   The housing project identified as City Hall Artist Lofts and the property on
which it will be located shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes
from and after commencement of construction or rehabilitation. The city
acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic
feasibility of the housing project in reliance upon the enactment and
continuing effect of this division, and the qualification of the housing
project for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu
of taxes as established in this division. Therefore, in consideration of the
sponsor's offer to rehabilitate and operate the housing project, the city
agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in
lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of a mortgage loan,
the annual service charge shall be equal to four percent of the annual shelter
rents actually collected by the housing project during each operating year.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-284. - Contractual effect.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)5 of the Act to the contrary,
a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as the third
party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment
of this division.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-285. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
   Notwithstanding section
11-283, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part
of the housing project that is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than
low income persons and families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes
which would be paid on that portion of the housing project if the housing
project were not tax exempt.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-286. - Payment of service charge.
   The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this division
shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to
the city and distributed to the several units levying the general property tax
in the same proportion as prevailed with the general property tax in the
previous calendar year. The annual payment for each operating year shall be
paid on or before September 14 of the following year. Collection procedures
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act
(1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.).
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-287. - Duration.
   This division shall be effective the year the property is ready for
occupancy and shall remain in effect for 20 years after the start of the
following tax year.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-288. - Severability.
   The various sections and provisions of this division shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this division be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of this division as a whole or any section or
provision of this division, other than the section or provision so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec 11-289. - Inconsistent code sections.
   All code sections or parts of codes sections inconsistent or in conflict
with the provisions of this division are repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
Sec. 11-290. - Effective date.
   This division shall become effective as provided in the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 13-1409, 8-13-13)
DIVISION 5. DEARBORN TOWN CENTER SENIOR HOUSING
Sec. 11-291. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is to provide for a service charge in lieu of
taxes for a housing project for low income persons and families to be financed
with a federally-aided Mortgage Loan or an advance or grant from the Authority
pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of
1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq) (the "Act").
   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its low income
persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
Act. The City of Dearborn is authorized by this Act to establish or change the
service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing
exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the
taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such
housing for low income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the
City of Dearborn will be benefited and improved by such housing, the
encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemption for such
housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the
continuance of the provisions of this Division for tax exemption and the
service charge in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated
in this Division are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of
the housing projects that is constructed or rehabilitated with financing
extended in reliance on such tax exemption.
   The City of Dearborn acknowledges that the Sponsor (as defined below) has
offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC Program by the
Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to construct, own and operate a
housing project identified as Dearborn Town Center Senior Housing on certain
property Parcel Number 82-10-173-01-041 formerly known as 4550 Calhoun in the
City of Dearborn to serve low income persons and families, and that the Sponsor
has offered to pay the city on account of this housing project an annual
service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-292. - Definitions.
   Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual
period from or paid on behalf of all occupants of a housing project
representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of utilities.
   LIHTC Program means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program administered
by the Authority under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1866, as
amended.
   Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move
into a housing project.
   Mortgage loan means a loan that is federally-aided (as defined in the Act)
or a loan or grant made or to be made by the authority , for the construction,
rehabilitation, acquisition and/or permanent financing of a housing project,
and secured by a mortgage on the housing project.
   Sponsor means Redico/MHT Housing and any entity that receives or assumes a
mortgage loan.
   Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer and other
utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by the housing project.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-293. - Class of housing projects.
   It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be housing projects for low income persons and families that
are financed with a mortgage loan. It is further determined that Dearborn Town
Center Senior Housing is of this class.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-294. - Establishment of annual service charge.
   The housing project identified as Dearborn Town Center Senior Housing and
the property Parcel Number 82-10-173-01-041 formerly known as 4550 Calhoun,
Dearborn, MI on which it is/or will be located shall be exempt from all ad
valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction or
rehabilitation. The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have
established the economic feasibility of the housing project in reliance upon
the enactment and continuing effect of this division, and the qualification of
the housing project for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a
payment in lieu of taxes as established in this division. Therefore, in
consideration of the sponsor's offer to construct and operate the housing
project, the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for
public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of
a mortgage loan, the annual service charge shall be equal to 12% of the annual
shelter rents actually collected by the housing project during each operating
year.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-295. - Contractual effect.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the
contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as
third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment
of this division.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-296. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
   Notwithstanding section
11-294, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part
of the housing project that is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than
low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes
which would be paid on that portion of the housing project if the housing
project were not tax exempt.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-297. - Payment of service charge.
   The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this division
shall be payable in its entirety to the city. The annual payment for each
operating year shall be paid on or before September 14 of the following year.
Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General
Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq).
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-298. - Duration.
   This division shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as a
mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid and the housing project remains
subject to income and rent restrictions under the LIHTC Program.
(Ord. No. 17-1571, 3-21-17)
Sec. 11-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - VACANT AND NEGLECTED PROPERTIES
Sec. 11-300. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to help protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens by preventing blight, protecting property values and
neighborhood integrity, avoiding the creation and maintenance of nuisances and
ensuring safe and sanitary maintenance of dwellings, commercial and industrial
buildings. The city normally inspects properties upon a change of ownership or
use and, in the case of nonowner-occupied residential property, every three
years, and annually in the case of commercial properties. Due to economic
conditions, mortgage fraud, and increased bankruptcies, many homes and
buildings have become vacant and unsupervised. This has caused properties to
become attractive nuisances for minors and criminal activity. Vacant properties
have a negative impact on surrounding properties and neighborhoods. Potential
buyers are deterred by the presence of nearby vacant abandoned buildings. There
is an increased instance of unsecured or open doors and windows, broken water
pipes, theft of metals and other materials, overgrowth of grass, weeds, shrubs,
and bushes, illegal dumping, and rat and vermin activity at vacant structures.
Such neglect devalues properties and causes deterioration in neighborhoods and
commercial areas. The city also needs to be able to contact owners for fire
safety and police reasons.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08)
Sec. 11-301. - Scope.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing residential,
commercial and industrial structures and all vacant land.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08)
Sec. 11-302. - Definition of vacant property.
   A vacant property is defined as a lot, building, or structure that is not
legally or currently occupied.
   Evidence of vacancy shall include any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to:
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers
and/or mail; past-due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities;
accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; boarded-up windows; abandoned
vehicles, auto parts or materials; the absence of window coverings such as
curtains, blinds and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal
items consistent with habitation or occupancy; statements by neighbors,
passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is
vacant.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08)
Sec. 11-303. - Registry of vacant properties.
   There is hereby created in the Department of Economic Development a registry
of vacant residential, commercial, and industrial properties.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22)
Sec. 11-304. - Vacant properties to be registered.
   Owners and/or owners' agents of real property are required to register all
vacant properties within 90 days of the vacancy.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09)
Sec. 11-305. - Owner's affidavit.
   Owners who are required to register their properties pursuant to this
article shall submit a copy of a driver's license and an affidavit containing
the following information:
      (1)   The name of the owner of the property.
      (2)   A mailing address where mail may be sent that will be acknowledged
as received by the owner. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent to
the address and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed," or if
ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such
occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with
this requirement.
      (3)   The name of the individual responsible for the care and control of
the property. Such individual may be the owner, if the owner is an individual,
or may be someone other than the owner with whom he/she has contracted.
      (4)   A current address, phone number, fax, and email address (if fax and
email addresses are available) where communications may be sent that will be
acknowledged as received by the individual responsible for the care and control
of the property. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent to the
address and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed," or if
ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such
occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with
this requirement.
      (5)   Permission to city authorized staff to access the exterior of the
property for inspection purposes.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09)
Sec. 11-306. - Fees.
   There shall be an annual registration fee. The registration fee includes the
cost of routine property maintenance and safety inspections. In addition, in
the case where the owner has failed to register, there shall be assessed the
added costs of the city's expenses in having to determine ownership which may
include, but are not limited to, title searches. There shall be a fee for the
filing of any additional or new owner's affidavit. Fees are detailed in Chapter
9, Article VII.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09)
Sec. 11-307. - Requirement to keep information current.
   If at any time the information contained in the affidavit is no longer
valid, the property owner has ten days to file a new affidavit containing
current information. There shall be no fee to update the current owner's
information.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08)
Sec. 11-308. - Inspections required.
   Owners of vacant or unoccupied buildings who are required to file an owner's
affidavit under this article are subject to routine safety and maintenance
inspection of the building and property.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09)
Sec. 11-309. - Maintenance and safety requirements.
   Properties subject to this section shall be kept free of weeds; grass more
than six inches high; dry brush; dead vegetation; trash; junk; debris; building
materials; any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except
those required by federal, state or local law; discarded items including, but
not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed
material, signage, containers, equipment, construction materials, or any other
items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior of the structure.
   All visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and properly
maintained. Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark designed
and maintained in an appropriate manner. Landscaping does not include weeds,
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed materials, plastic sheeting,
indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. Maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of
required landscaping and removal of all trimmings.
   Pools, spas, and other water features shall be kept in working order so the
water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry
and free of debris. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must
comply with the minimum security fencing and barrier requirements of the
Michigan building, construction and maintenance codes.
   Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so
as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is
not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through,
sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow
a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). Broken
windows must be repaired or replaced within seven days. Boarding up of open or
broken windows is prohibited except as a temporary measure.
   The owner or the owner's agent shall demonstrate that all water, sewer,
electrical, gas, HVAC, plumbing systems, exterior finishes and walls, concrete
surfaces, accessory buildings, roofing, structural systems, foundations,
drainage systems, gutters, doors, windows, parking areas, signage, driveway
apron(s), service walk(s), sidewalk(s), and other public areas are sound
operational, or properly disconnected.
   If the property is owned by a corporation and/or the beneficiary/trustee/
owner is located more than 30 miles away, a local property management company
shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the
requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.
   Vacant commercial/industrial property shall be posted with name and 24-hour
contact phone number of the property management company located within 30 miles
of the subject property. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches × 24
inches and shall be of a 72-point Arial font and shall contain along with the
name and 24-hour contact number, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO
REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS, CALL". The posting shall be placed on the interior
of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible
from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing
the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or if
no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a
location that is visual from the street to the front of the property but not
readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and
printed with weather resistant materials.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09)
Sec. 11-310. - Fire damaged property.
   If a building is fire damaged, the owner has 90 days from the date of the
fire to apply for a permit to start construction or demolition. The director of
the Department of Economic Development may grant additional 90-day extensions,
provided the owner can demonstrate substantial progress towards completing
repairs. Failure to do so will result in the property being deemed vacant and
subject to the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 22-1735, 1-25-22)
Sec. 11-311. - Criminal penalties.
   Violations of this article shall be treated as a strict-liability offense
regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any
portion of this article shall be subject to prosecution and/or administrative
enforcement under section
1-9 of this Code. Registration of property under this article is in addition
to, and not in lieu of, the requirements of MCL 125.539(i), which allows for
demolition of vacant structures, or nuisance abatement by the city.
   Each day that a required affidavit is not on file and each day that an owner
and/or owner's agent fails to maintain current information in an affidavit on
file shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 08-1148, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 09-1238, 9-8-09)
ARTICLE V. SHORT-TERM RENTALS AND NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
DIVISION 1. SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Sec. 11-312.   Title, purpose, and intent.
   (a)   This division shall be known as the “Short-Term Rental Ordinance” of
the City of Dearborn.
   (b)   The city recognizes that tourism supports many different types of
businesses in the city, including the hospitality market, the restaurant and
dining market, and the shopping and retail market among others.
   (c)   The city also recognizes that an important part of the tourism
industry is the short-term rental marketplace. This marketplace has grown
exponentially with the increasing use of online booking websites, and will most
likely continue to grow as municipalities in the region limit, restrict, or
eliminate the practice.
   (d)   While short-term rentals can provide community benefits, their
proliferation can also cause difficulties for residents and neighborhoods,
where the character of the use takes on a more transitory and commercial
character. Examples of these difficulties include, but are not limited to,
increased noise complaints, nuisance issues related to trash, and increased
neighborhood traffic.
   (e)   The city has determined that regulation of short-term rentals is
necessary to establish a community standard for the integration of short-term
rentals in the city to ensure health, safety, and welfare of visitors and
residents by re-affirming police, fire, and building safety guidelines. Toward
that end, the city has determined that all persons or entities that desire to
operate a short-term rental within the city must be issued a license pursuant
to the requirements of this division.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-313. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Director shall mean the director of the Department of Economic Development.
   Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used, or intended to
be used, for living or sleeping by human occupants. In no case shall a travel
trailer, motor home, automobile, tent or other portable building not defined as
a recreational vehicle be considered a dwelling.
   Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   Guest means the persons renting lodging from a short-term rental host, or
through a hosting platform on behalf of the short-term rental host, for a term
of less than 30 consecutive days.
   Host means the person engaged in providing a short-term rental unit.
   Host platform means a marketplace in any form or format which facilitates
short-term rental units, through advertising, matchmaking or any other means.
   Local agent means an individual designated by the owner of a STR to do the
following:
      (1)   Oversee the STR in accordance with this division;
      (2)   Respond to calls from renters, concerned citizens, and
representatives of the city; and
      (3)   Act as an agent of the owner(s) with respect to a STR, which shall
include the authority to accept service of legal papers and notices relating to
the STR on the owner's behalf.
      (4)   Owner-occupied homestay STR. For an owner-occupied homestay STR,
the local agent shall be the property owner staying on-site throughout the
visitors' stay.
      (5)   Local agent must be an individual person. A local agent must be an
individual corporeal person that resides in the state, and may not be a
business, partnership, or corporate entity such as a limited liability company,
incorporated business entity, or property management company.
   Principal residence (owner-occupied) means the one dwelling or dwelling unit
where an owner of the property, has their true, fixed, and permanent home to
which, whenever absent, they intend to return and that shall continue as a
principal residence until another principal residence is established.
   Short-term rental certificate of compliance (or "STR certificate") means a
written document issued by the Director, or their designee, indicating that the
dwelling or dwelling unit identified thereon is authorized to operate as an STR
in accordance with this division. When used in this division, the word
"certificate" refers to an STR certificate of compliance.
   Short-term rental reservation summary (or "STR reservation summary") means a
standard form issued by the Economic Development Department on which the owner
or local agent of a STR shall document, for each anticipated STR term, the name
of each occupant that will be staying at the property; and the dates on which
the short-term rental term will commence and end.
   Short-term rental term (or "STR term") means the duration of a short-term
rental occupancy by a given renter or group of renters. A rental term shall be
deemed to end when there is a complete turnover in the occupancy of the short-
term rental by the renter or group of renters.
   Short-term rental unit (or “STR”) means the rental of a dwelling or dwelling
unit, either wholly or partly, for compensation for periods of 30 consecutive
days or less, by persons other than the permanent resident or owner. When used
in this division, the acronym “STR” shall mean short-term rental unit. The
following types of STRs are allowed under this division:
      (1)   Non-owner-occupied STR means an activity where the owner of a non-
owner-occupied residence hosts visitors, for compensation, for periods of 30
consecutive days or less.
      (2)   Owner-occupied homestay means an activity whereby the property
owner(s) hosts visitors in their home, for compensation, for periods of 30
consecutive days or less, while at least one of the owners lives on-site in the
dwelling unit throughout the visitors’ stay.
      (3)   Owner-occupied off-site means an activity whereby the property
owner(s) hosts visitors in their home, for compensation, for periods of 30
consecutive days or less, while the home is unoccupied by the owner of record
during a guest’s stay.
      (4)   Exceptions. A short-term rental does not include the following:
non-owner-occupied dwellings or dwelling units with a rental term of more than
30 consecutive days; lodginghouse; roominghouse; multiple dwelling; hotel;
dependent housing facilities such as nursing homes; state-licensed residential
facilities such as adult foster care facilities, foster care homes, and group
homes; hospitals; housing provided by a substance abuse rehabilitation clinic,
mental health facility, or other health care related clinic; or dwelling units
owned by a business entity and made available on a temporary basis to employees
of that business entity or employees of a contractor working for that business
entity.
   Visitor guideline materials mean materials prepared by the director or their
designee that include: (1) a summary of the city’s Noise Ordinance, Fireworks
Ordinance, Trash Disposal Ordinance, and applicable offenses against the public
peace and nuisances; (2) a reminder that the rental property is located near a
residential area; and (3) a statement informing the renters that neighboring
property owners may contact the local agent and local police to report any
issues relating to the property.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-314.   Short-term rental certificate; applications, requirements, and
review.
   (a)   Certificate required; limitations. STRs are prohibited unless the
property is registered with the city and has received a certificate of
compliance pursuant to this division.
      (1)   The city shall only issue a certificate to the owner of the
property serving as the STR. A certificate shall not be issued to the lessee,
renter, tenant, or local agent of a property.
      (2)   The city shall issue only one certificate per dwelling or dwelling
unit.
      (3)   The location of a STR is subject to applicable regulations of the
city’s Code of Ordinances and Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   Application. The application for a certificate of compliance shall, at
a minimum, include the following:
      (1)   The name, date of birth, address (principal residence and not a
P.O. Box or corporate/business address), email address, and telephone number
(home and cell phone) of each and every owner of the property.
      (2)   The name, date of birth, address (principal residence and not a
P.O. Box or corporate/business address), email address, and telephone number
(home and cell phone) of the local agent.
      (3)   The street address of the STR.
      (4)   The type of dwelling or dwelling unit being used as the STR (e.g.,
single-family home, apartment, condominium, townhouse).
      (5)   The type of STR (non-owner-occupied, owner-occupied homestay,
owner-occupied off-site).
      (6)   For owner-occupied STRs (homestay or off-site), the owner shall
submit a sworn statement affirming that the dwelling or dwelling unit being
used as an STR is and will remain the applicant’s principal residence for the
duration of the certificate.
      (7)   Number of bedrooms available to rent.
      (8)   A statement certifying that each bedroom has a working smoke
detector and working carbon monoxide detector installed in compliance with the
requirements of this division (See section
11-321 below), and that the owner(s) or local agent check those devices at
least every 90 days to ensure they are unexpired and in working order.
      (9)   A statement certifying that the STR has a working fire extinguisher
located in compliance with this division (See section
11-321 below).
      (10)   A statement certifying that the owner has obtained liability
insurance to cover the short-term rental use.
      (11)   A statement certifying that the property is not currently in
violation of the city’s Code of Ordinances, Zoning Ordinance, or any state or
federal housing law, and is in habitable condition.
      (12)   A statement certifying that the owner is not in arrears or in
default to the city, including but not limited to any unpaid, outstanding and/
or delinquent property tax, income tax, special assessments, and/or fines.
      (13)   A statement certifying that the owner consents to inspections by
the city and that the owner or local agent will make the dwelling unit
available to inspections upon request.
      (14)   A non-refundable application fee of $750.
      (15)   The application must be signed by the applicant-owner(s) and local
agent.
      (16)   Submit the property to an inspection for compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances, including but not limited to, all regulations
applicable to dwellings and occupancy found in
Chapter 11 of the city’s Code of Ordinances. Failure to complete an inspection
shall be grounds for withholding a certificate or revoking an existing
certificate. Revocation of a certificate for failure to complete an inspection
is not applicable to the appeal procedures provided in section
11-325.
   (c)   Non-transferable. The certificate shall not be transferred or assigned
to another person or address, nor shall the certificate authorize any person,
other than the person named therein or their designated local agent, to operate
an STR on the property.
   (d)   Certificate issuance and inspection; zoning compliance. To the extent
certificates are available in the pertinent zoning district at the time of
application, a certificate or certificate renewal shall be granted after a
successful inspection if the requirements of this division and any applicable
requirements under law are met, including but not limited to the city’s Code of
Ordinances, Zoning Ordinance, and Michigan Building Code.
   (e)   Delinquent payments. No certificate shall be issued or renewed unless
the owner is current on the payment of all real property taxes, utility rates,
fees, charges, special assessments, or other amounts due to the city.
Delinquencies on any such payments to the city, regardless of whether they
relate to the rental unit for which a certificate is sought, shall result in
denial of the certificate.
   (f)   Changes in information. An owner or local agent shall notify the
director in writing within 14 calendar days of any change in the information
provided on the application form. An owner of an STR shall also notify the
director in writing within 14 calendar days of any change in the designated
local agent.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-315.   Certificate validity and renewal.
   An STR certificate will become invalid in each of the following
circumstances:
   (a)   A certificate expires three years from the date it is issued, unless
otherwise revoked pursuant to this division;
   (b)   A certificate is terminated when the property to which the license
applies is conveyed to another party;
   (c)   A certificate may be renewed only by making application as required by
this division.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-316.   Local agent required.
   All STRs must have a designated local agent that, in addition to the
requirements under the definition of local agent in section
11-313, satisfies the following:
   (a)   The local agent shall be an individual who resides within 20 miles of
the geographic boundaries of the City of Dearborn.
   (b)   An owner may serve as the local agent so long as they have the ability
to continue residing at a location within 20 miles of the City of Dearborn
during the duration of any STR term.
   (c)   For owner-occupied homestay STRs, the local agent shall be the owner
of the property.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-317.   Responsibilities of short-term rental operators.
   The owner(s) and local agent for each short-term rental unit shall each be
responsible for ensuring compliance with the following regulations, except
where expressly provided otherwise:
   (a)   Local agent availability. During each STR term, the local agent shall
be available 24-hours per day, seven days per week, for the purpose of
responding within 30 minutes to complaints regarding the condition, operation,
or conduct of occupants of the short-term rental unit or their guests.
   (b)   Timely and effective response. The local agent shall, upon
notification that any occupant or guest of the STR has created unreasonable
noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct, or committed any other
violations of applicable laws, rules or regulations pertaining to the use and
occupancy of the STR, respond in a timely and appropriate manner to halt and
prevent a recurrence of such violations.
   (c)   Reasonably prudent business practices. The owner and/or the owner’s
authorized local agent shall use reasonably prudent business practices to
ensure that the occupants and/or guests of the STR do not create unreasonable
noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate any applicable
law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject STR.
   (d)   Duty to provide certificate and post in window. Upon request by any
occupant, prospective occupant, law enforcement officer, or code enforcement
official, the owner(s) or local agent shall provide a copy of the STR
certificate. Further, a full-sized copy of the STR certificate must be posted
in a prominent first-floor window of the STR during each STR term.
   (e)   Criminal code compliance. Pursuant to Code of Ordinances section
14-7 , the owner of a STR shall post a copy of Code of Ordinances section
14-7  in a conspicuous place adjacent to the site of registration for the STR
or inside the STR.
   (f)   Compliance with safety equipment requirements and applicable codes.
All STRs will comply with the safety equipment requirements in section
11-321  below, as well as all applicable zoning, construction, fire, property
maintenance, occupancy, habitability, and nuisance codes, ordinances, or other
regulations. A violation of any of the foregoing shall also be a violation of
this division.
   (g)   Basement regulations. No basement can be used for a bedroom unless it
has an ingress/egress window approved by a city inspector and found in
compliance with local and state code requirements.
   (h)   Maximum occupancy. The number of occupants in a STR shall comply with
applicable requirements under the law, including but not limited to the city’s
Code of Ordinances, the city’s Zoning Ordinance, and the Michigan Building
Code.
   (i)   Reservation requirements. At least 24-hours prior to the commencement
of an STR term, the owner or local agent shall do the following:
      (1)   Obtain the contact information for the occupants who will be
staying at the STR unit;
      (2)   Complete the STR reservation summary form and submit it through the
city’s website, www.dearborn.gov;
      (3)   Ensure that a copy of the STR reservation summary form is available
within the dwelling during each STR term so that rental occupants can produce
it upon request in conformance with section
11-318 below; and
      (4)   Provide a copy of the visitor guideline materials to the
prospective occupants.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-318.   Responsibilities of short-term rental occupants and guests.
   (a)   STR reservation summary. Occupants shall produce a copy of the STR
reservation summary to a city police officer or other ordinance enforcement
officer upon request.
   (b)   Duty to comply with applicable laws. STR occupants and guests shall
comply with all local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the
city’s noise, fireworks, trash disposal, open burning, and public peace
regulations. A violation of any of the foregoing shall also be a violation of
this division.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-319.   Unauthorized rentals and advertising.
   (a)   Unauthorized rentals. It shall be unlawful to engage in STR activity
with respect to any dwelling or dwelling unit that has not been issued a
certificate pursuant to this division. In any prosecution or action to
determine a violation of this division, the following shall apply:
      (1)   Advertising that offers a property as a STR shall constitute prima
facie evidence of STR activity involving the property, and the burden of proof
shall be on the property owner or other defendant to establish that the subject
property has not been used as a STR.
      (2)   Subject to the exceptions listed in the definition of a “short-term
rental unit” found in section
11-313, any communication in which a person offers a dwelling or dwelling unit
for rent for a term of less than 30 days shall constitute prima facie evidence
of short-term activity, and the burden of proof shall be on the property owner
or other defendant to establish that the subject property had not been used for
short-term rentals.
   (b)   Unauthorized advertising. It shall be unlawful to advertise any
dwelling or dwelling unit that does not have a short-term rental certificate
issued pursuant to this division. Such advertisement shall constitute a
violation of this division.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-320.   Inspections; opportunity to correct; voiding certificate.
   (a)   Inspection schedule. Dwellings and dwelling units being used as STRs
shall be inspected as follows:
      (1)   Upon the sale or transfer of any ownership interest in the
property.
      (2)   Upon the application for, or renewal of, a STR certificate.
      (3)   Upon identifiable external violations documented by the city or set
forth in complaints received by the city, if such inspections are needed to
correctviolations of this division or any applicable law.
      (4)   Inspections shall generally occur during the city’s regular
business hours, except in emergency situations or when otherwise agreed to by
the city and the owner or local agent. All fees shall be paid prior to the
inspection.
   (b)   Scheduling. Upon written notice from the city, it shall be the owner’s
or local agent’s responsibility to schedule and allow the city’s inspection of
the STR.
   (c)   Opportunity to correct deficiencies. If an inspection reveals that the
STR is not in compliance with this division, or any other applicable law or
code, the owner(s)shall be provided a list of deficiencies or violations that
must be corrected. Failure to correct such deficiencies in a reasonable time
shall be grounds for withholding a STR certificate or revoking an existing
certificate.
   (d)   Additional inspections. The city may conduct additional inspections as
it deems necessary, upon reasonable notice to the owner(s) or local agent, for
the following:
      (1)   A complaint is filed with the city; or
      (2)   The city otherwise has reasonable cause to believe a STR is in
violation of any city ordinance or applicable law.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-321.   Safety equipment.
   (a)   Smoke detectors. The owner(s) and local agent of each STR shall each
be responsible for the installation of smoke detectors/alarms in each STR. All
smoke detectors/alarms shall be installed in accordance with applicable code
requirements.
   (b)   Smoke detector locations. Smoke detectors/alarms shall be installed in
the following locations:
      (1)   In each sleeping room;
      (2)   Outside of each separate sleeping areas in the immediate vicinity
of the bedrooms; and
      (3)   On each additional story of the STR, including basements and
cellars, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics.
   (c)   Carbon monoxide detectors. The owner(s) and local agent of each STR
shall each be responsible for the installation of a carbon monoxide detector in
each rental unit. All carbon monoxide detectors shall be of the type described
in MCL 125.1504d.
   (d)   Fire extinguisher. The owner(s) and local agent of each STR shall each
be responsible for the installation of a fire extinguisher in the kitchen of
each unit and near each outdoor cooking device.
   (e)   Tampering prohibited. No person shall tamper or interfere with the
effectiveness of a smoke detector, carbon monoxide detector, or fire
extinguisher required by this section.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-322.   Violations; notice of violations; responsible party.
   (a)   Violations as civil infraction. A violation of this division shall be
punishable as a civil infraction with a fine of not less than $500, plus costs
and other sanctions. Repeat offenses shall be subject to an increased civil
fine as follows:
      (1)   The fine for a first repeat offense shall be no less than $750,
plus costs and other sanctions.
      (2)   The fine for a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat
offense shall be no less than $1,000, plus costs and other sanctions.
      (3)   A “repeat offense” shall mean a second (or any subsequent)
violation of this division:
         a.   Committed within any 12-month period; and
         b.   For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be
responsible.
   (b)   Notice of violation in lieu of citation. As an alternative to the
immediate issuance of a citation, the city may issue a notice of violation to
the owner(s) and/or local agent for the STR to which the violation pertains to
obtain compliance with this division. Upon the service of a notice of
violation, the owner(s) and local agent shall immediately cease the offending
conduct and take corrective action to terminate the violation described. Each
notice of violation shall be served in accordance with section
11-323  below and contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the responsible person(s);
      (2)   The code section violated;
      (3)   The address where the code violation occurred;
      (4)   A description of the code violation; and
      (5)   The names and contact information of the issuing department and
enforcement officer.
   (c)   Responsible party. The property owner or local agent shall be held
responsible for violations of this division. This subsection has no impact or
effect on the enforcement of other violations of the law that occur as a result
of activity allowed under this division.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-323.   Service of notices and citations.
   (a)   Any notice or citation issued pursuant to this division, or in
connection to a violation of this division, shall be considered served as of
the date of the earliest of any of the following events:
      (1)   The posting of the notice on or adjacent to the premises, in
conjunction with the mailing of the notice to the responsible party’s last
known address by first-class mail;
      (2)   The sending of the notice by email to an email address designated
on an STR certificate for the property;
      (3)   Personal delivery of the notice to the responsible party; or
      (4)   The responsible party’s receipt of the notice by certified U.S.
mail, as indicated in a notification of receipt.
   (b)   When possible, service of a citation for violation of this division,
or in connection to a violation of this division, shall be done by hand-
delivering the citation directly to the individual responsible for the
violation under this division, whether that be the owner or local agent.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-324.   Revocation of short-term rental certificate; appeal.
   (a)   Grounds for revocation. The director shall revoke the STR certificate
for any short-term rental which is the site of at least three separate
incidents within a 12-month period (occurring on three separate days) that
constitute a violation of this division, whether committed by an owner, local
agent, occupant, or guest. To qualify as an incident for purposes of this
subsection:
      (1)   The city must have issued a civil infraction citation regarding the
offending conduct prior to commencing revocation proceedings pursuant to
subsection (b) below; and
      (2)   The violation must be either admitted by the owner or proven by a
preponderance of the evidence in a civil-infraction prosecution.
   (b)   Notice of revocation. Upon a determination by the director that the
STR certificate is subject to revocation pursuant to subsection (a), the
director shall serve a notice of revocation, pursuant to section
11-323 , to the owner(s) and local agent of the STR stating the following:
      (1)   The grounds for revocation of the STR certificate;
      (2)   The effective date of the revocation;
      (3)   That the owner(s) may request, in writing and within 20 calendar
days of the date of the notice of revocation, an appeal hearing before building
board of appeals pursuant to section
11-325.
   (c)   Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect 21
calendar days from the date of the notice of revocation.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-325.   Appeal hearing.
   (a)   Request for appeal. The owner(s) of a STR that has its certificate
revoked pursuant to section
11-324  above, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the building board of appeals. Such request must be made as follows:
      (1)   The request for appeal must be made in writing to the director
within 20 calendar days of the date notice of revocation is made, pursuant to
section
11-323.
      (2)   The request must be filed with the Department of Economic
Development.
      (3)   The request must include a brief statement explaining the nature
and grounds for appeal.
Upon receipt of the request, the building board of appeals will set a time and
place for the hearing and provide notice of same pursuant to section
11-323.
   (b)   Exception to appeal. Pursuant to section
11-314 (b)(16), revocation of an STR certificate for failure to complete an
inspection cannot be appealed under this section.
   (c)   Hearing. At the hearing, the appellant will be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why the revocation of their certificate should be modified
or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held at the next scheduled meeting of the
building board of appeals or at a special meeting of the board, no later than
30 calendar days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that
upon application of the petitioner, the board may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 30-day period, if in the judgment of
the board the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement. The building board of appeals may also postpone the date of the
hearing if it does not have quorum.
   (d)   Action by appeal board. After hearing, the building board of appeals
shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the certificate revocation, depending upon
its findings to whether the provisions of this division have been complied
with. If the board sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-326.   Revocation and fines not exclusive penalty.
   Nothing in this division shall be deemed to prohibit the director, their
designee, or the city from imposing other penalties authorized by the Dearborn
Code of Ordinances and Dearborn Zoning Ordinance, or to file a public nuisance
lawsuit or take any other legal action authorized by law.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-327.   Enforcement.
   The Department of Economic Development shall be primarily responsible for
enforcement of this division. However, nothing in this division shall be deemed
to prohibit other departments within the city from enforcing the provisions of
this division, including but not limited to the Dearborn Police, Dearborn Fire,
and the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-328.   Severability.
   If any sentence, paragraph, section, clause, or provision of this division
is declared unconstitutional, void, illegal, or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such sentence, paragraph, section, clause, or provision
declared to be unconstitutional, void, or illegal shall thereby cease to be
part of this division, but the remainder of this division shall stand and
remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-328.1.   Effective date of division.
   The terms and conditions of this short-term rental division shall become
effective on January 1, 2026.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
DIVISION 2. NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
Sec. 11-329.   Title, purpose, and intent.
   (a)   This division shall be known as the “Non-Owner-Occupied Residential
Properties Ordinance” of the City of Dearborn.
   (b)   The city recognizes that many residents in the city live in
residential properties that they rent from the property owner or a
representative/agent of the owner.
   (c)   The purpose of this division is to maintain quality structures for the
public health, safety, and welfare, and to establish safeguard controls for
non-owner-occupied residential properties in the city.
   (d)   All applicable provisions of the City Code, including but not limited
to the preceding regulations of this
Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances, shall apply unless stated otherwise
herein.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-330.   Definition.
   Non-owner-occupied means any residential building or structure in which the
owner does not occupy the dwelling or dwelling units contained in the building
or structure for more than 30 consecutive days, and/or receives less than 100%
of the homestead credit on the homestead property list of the City Assessor.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-331.   Inspection and occupancy requirements.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or for any owner or
agent thereof to permit the occupation of any building or addition thereto, or
part thereof, for any purpose, until occupancy has been approved by the
Department of Economic Development.
   (b)   A certificate of occupancy is issued when all violations noted on the
inspection report issued by the Department of Economic Development have been
corrected and required repairs have been made.
   (c)   In the event an owner, prospective purchaser, or transferee requests
that occupancy be permitted prior to correction of all violations noted on the
inspection report, and if the absence of such complete conformance does not, in
the judgment of the Department of Economic Development, constitute material
health or safety hazards, conditional occupancy may be allowed upon the
condition that complete conformance be achieved within a reasonable time
specified by the Department of Economic Development, but in not more than 90
days.
   (d)   Non-owner-occupied residential property, or portions thereof, shall be
inspected and a new certificate of occupancy obtained every three years, or
upon change in ownership. Non-owner-occupied residential property with three or
more units shall be inspected annually.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-332.   Data generally; change of status.
   The Department of Economic Development maintains information on non-owner-
occupied properties, including name and address of owner, inspection history
and certificate of occupancy information. If the status or owner of a dwelling
changes, it must be registered within seven days of the change. This
information is available upon request by following departmental procedures for
requesting non-owner-occupied property information.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Sec. 11-333.   Inspections.
   (a)   The director of the Department of Economic Development, or such other
building officials as the director may designate, is hereby authorized to make,
and shall make, inspections of non-owner- occupied properties, the non-owner-
occupied portions of two-family dwellings, including common areas or any other
dwelling, except owner-occupied single-family dwellings and the owner-occupied
portion of two-family dwellings as follows:
      (1)   Upon sale or transfer of any ownership interest.
      (2)   Upon a change in occupancy if any inspection has not been made
within the last three years.
      (3)   Upon identifiable external violations documented by the Department
of Economic Development or set forth in complaints registered by area residents
and/or neighborhood associations, if such inspections are needed to correction
violations heretofore enumerated in this article.
      (4)   At least once every three years, in accordance with section
11-331 above.
   (b)   An owner, agent, representative or tenant shall consent to such
inspections to determine the condition of a vacant dwelling or any other
dwelling in the city. For the purpose of making such inspections, the building
inspector, or their authorized representative, is hereby authorized, upon seven
days' notice, to enter and inspect at all reasonable times. The owner, agent,
representative or tenant shall give the building inspector, and their
authorized representative, free access to the premises. The owner or their
authorized representative shall be present for each such inspection.
   (c)   The owner of a non-owner-occupied property must obtain a new
certificate of occupancy for each inspection required herein within 90 days of
such inspection. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued at the
discretion of the Department of Economic Development when outstanding
violations cannot be reasonably and timely corrected or completed. Temporary
certificates of occupancy are set to expire in a reasonable timeframe for
completing repairs, at which time a certificate of occupancy is required.
(Ord. No. 25-1847, 7-15-25)
Chapter 12 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Charter reference— Licenses, §
8-3.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Distributor equipment shall mean any mechanical amusement device or any
mechanically operated device which shall dispense food, tobacco or beverages.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 1, 6-2-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-2. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct a business,
trade or other activity, or operate a vehicle requiring a license under any law
or ordinance of the city unless such business, trade, activity or vehicle shall
have been licensed according to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee to engage in or continue to conduct a business,
trade, activity or continue to operate a vehicle requiring a license during the
time that his license has been revoked or suspended.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 2, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-3. - Application.
   (a)   Every person required to secure a license under the provisions of any
law or ordinance of the city shall submit an application for such license to
the city clerk upon forms provided for that purpose by the clerk. The
application should include but should not be limited to the following
information:
       (1)   Name of applicant.
      (2)   Residence address of applicant.
      (3)   Mailing address if requested.
      (4)   Telephone number of applicant.
      (5)   Telephone number of one other responsible party.
      (6)   Email address of applicant.
      (7)   Name of business to be licensed.
      (8)   Address of business to be licensed.
      (9)   Type of business.
      (10)   Quantities (number of rooms, number of seats, etc.).
      (11)   Brief statement about how the business will operate or the nature
of the business.
   (b)   All buildings wherein a licensed business is conducted shall be
inspected annually, and the issuance of a license for a business or activity
specified in this chapter shall not relieve the licensee or owner of any such
building from the responsibility of complying with the provisions of any other
law or ordinance pertaining to such buildings including, but not limited to,
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Any department or division may
charge a fee for inspecting any commercial building, such fee to be separate
and in addition to any license fee specified in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 3, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 05-1040, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 22-1724, - - )
Sec. 12-4. - Police chief's certification; investigation of applicant's
character.
   (a)   In all cases where the certification of the police chief is required
prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification
shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such
license is of good moral character.
   (b)   The phrase "good moral character," when used in this chapter for the
purpose of licensing, shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of
the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open
manner.
   (c)   A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil
action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of a person's lack of good
moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination, and, when so
used, the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence
by showing that at the current time he has the ability and is likely to serve
the public in a fair, honest and open manner, that he is rehabilitated, or that
the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation
or profession for which he seeks to be licensed.
   (d)   The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or
requested by the city in a determination of good moral character:
      (1)   Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction.
      (2)   Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated,
including the arrest records relevant to that conviction.
      (3)   Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony
unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and
open manner.
      (4)   Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the
conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison.
   (e)   When a person is found to be unqualified for a license because of a
lack of good moral character, or similar criteria, the person shall be
furnished by the city clerk with a statement to that effect. The statement
shall contain a complete record of the evidence upon which the determination
was based. The person shall be entitled, as of right, to a rehearing on the
issue before the council if he has relevant evidence not previously considered
regarding his qualifications.
   This section shall not bar the use by the city in its determination of a
person's fitness, of any other public record, not related to arrest or
prosecution, or of any other source of unbiased and accurate information.
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 338.41 et seq., MSA 18.1208(1) et
seq.
Sec. 12-5. - License year; renewal.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every license issued by
the clerk shall be for a period of one full year commencing with the date of
issuance of the first license.
   (b)   Renewal notices will be mailed to all licensees by the city clerk
prior to the expiration of the license. The licensee must enclose payment with
his renewal notice and return it to the city clerk prior to the expiration date
in order to have his license renewed for another year. License renewals may be
effected by mail up to the expiration date of the license; after that date the
licensee must renew in person. Licensees who renew more than seven days late
will be assessed a ten percent penalty on the total cost of the license.
   (c)   The following licenses will expire on December 1 annually:
distributor, distributor equipment, hauling vehicle, junk dealer vehicle, motor
bus, exhibitors, moving van, fuel oil truck, and vendor vehicle. Dog licenses
shall expire on March 1 annually unless otherwise stated in this chapter or the
Code (See sections 4-23 and 12-6 specifically). The following licenses shall
expire on December 31 annually: building contractor, building contractor
registration, building subcontractor registration, concrete contractor,
electrical contractor registration, excavating contractor and equipment, tank
installer, fire repair contractor, mechanical contractor registration (heating,
cooling, ventilation, refrigeration), plumbing contractor registration, sign/
awning erector contractor, tent erector contractor, and drainlayer contractor.
Registration of reciprocal licenses will expire at the time the original
license expires.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 4, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 84-308, 7-3-84; Ord. No. 05-1040, 6-6-
05; Ord. No. 23-1803, 10-10-23; Ord. No. 24-1827, 10-22-24)
Sec. 12-6. - License fees.
   The various businesses, trades, occupations or professions enumerated in
this section shall pay a license fee as established in this schedule. Unless
otherwise specified, the fee shall be on an annual basis. The fee for
replacement of lost or duplicate licenses shall be half the annual fee,
or$40.00, whichever is less, unless otherwise indicated in this schedule.
Amusement                                        $50.00
Apartment (ten or less units)                    100.00
Apartment (more than ten units), per unit        10.00
Athletic club                                    100.00
Auctioneer (single-day)                          25.00
Auctioneer (annual)                              100.00
Automobile parts and accessories (new or used)   �50.00
Awning erector                                   50.00
Billiard room (each table)                       10.00
Block party                                         25.00
Boiler operator, high-pressure                   50.00
Boiler operator, low-pressure                    40.00
Bowling alley                                    100.00
Building contractor                              40.00
Building contractor registration                 40.00
Building subcontractor registration               
                                                    40.00
Card or game room                                50.00
Carnival                                         300.00
Carnival deposit (for grounds cleanup)            
                                                    1,500.00
Concrete contractor                              50.00
Chief powerhouse stationary engineer              
                                                    100.00
Christmas trees                                  150.00
Circus                                           300.00
Circus deposit (for grounds cleanup)              
                                                    1,500.00
Coffeehouse                                      50.00
Concrete supplier                                250.00
Distributor, vending machine                     40.00
Distributor equipment, each machine; not amusement   
devices                                          20.00
Distributor, amusement device only                
                                                    300.00
                                                     
                                                    $20.00 for unsterilized dog
                                                    with no microchip, or
Dog, (1-year license, expires March 1)              $10.00 for spayed or
   The following fees take effect March 1, 2025: neutered dogs
                                                    $15.00 for unsterilized dog
                                                    with a microchip
                                                    $10.00 for sterilized dog
                                                    with or without microchip
                                                    $60.00 for unsterilized dog
                                                    with no microchip
Dog (3-year license, expires March 1)               $45.00 for unsterilized dog
   The following fees take effect March 1, 2025: with a microchip
                                                    $30.00 for sterilized dog
                                                    with or without microchip
Dog [license with automatic renewal (no additional  $100.00 for sterilized dog
fee)]                                               with microchip
   The following fee takes effect March 1, 2025:  
                                                    A $3.00 processing fee will
                                                   be added for mailing any
                                                    dog license and tag.
Drain layer contractor                           50.00
Drive-in theater                                 600.00
Electrical contractor registration               40.00
Escrow license, type                             40.00
Exhibitor (expires December 1)                   75.00
Exhibitor equipment (each amusement device, expires  
December 1)                                      50.00
Explosives contractor                            35.00
Fire repair contractor                           50.00
Fire sale (30 days only)                         75.00
Fire sale renewal (maximum of 2)                 75.00
Flea market                                      250.00
Food establishment                               140.00
   31-50 seats                                192.00
   51-100 seats                               237.00
   101-150 seats                              280.00
   More than 150 seats                        315.00
   Satellites (each satellite)                85.00
   Catering kitchen and/or commissary food     
                                                    315.00
Food truck                                          200.00
Fuel oil truck                                   40.00
Garage sale                                      10.00
Garage sale (second sale)                        15.00
Garage sale (third sale)                         20.00
Garage sale (fourth sale)                        25.00
Garage sale advertisement fee                       10.00
Going-out-of-business sale (30 days only)         
                                                    65.00
Going-out-of-business sale renewal (maximum of 2)    
                                                 65.00
Golf course                                      500.00
Hauling vehicle, each vehicle                    40.00
Hotel, per room                                  10.00
Junk dealer vehicle, each vehicle                40.00
Junkyard                                         200.00
Lodging or rooming house                         35.00
Manager, motel, hotel, apartment, rooming house,     
coffee house, athletic club                      50.00
Mechanical contractor registration (heating,         
cooling, ventilation, refrigeration)             15.00
Mechanical excavating and grading                 
                                                    50.00
Mechanical excavating and grading equipment, each    
                                                 30.00
Motel, per room                                  5.00
Motor bus, 1 to 300 each                         50.00
Motor bus, over 300, no further charge            
                                                    n/c
Motor supply station                             75.00
Motor vehicle for hire                           50.00
Motor vehicle parts recycling                    100.00
Moving contractor                                200.00
Moving van, each vehicle                         30.00
Nightclub and nightclub promoter                    200.00
Plumbing contractor registration                 40.00
Refrigeration contractor registration           40.00
Refrigeration operator, first class              60.00
Refrigeration operator, second class             50.00
Secondhand dealer                                   75.00
Sidewalk sale                                    35.00
Sign erector                                     50.00
Solicitor or vendor                              50.00
Stationary engineer, first class                 95.00
Stationary engineer, second class                85.00
Stationary engineer, third class                 75.00
Stationary engineer/facilities engineer          100.00
Tank installer                                   50.00
Taxicab, expires June 30                         100.00
Taxicab driver                                   25.00
Tent erector                                     50.00
Theatre                                          150.00
Tobacco                                          500.00
Transient merchant, first 30 days or less        250.00
Transient merchant renewal, each additional 30 days 100.00
in one year    
Tree removal                                        50.00
Turbine and reciprocating engineer operator      50.00
Used motor vehicle lot                           200.00
Valet parking                                       300.00
Vendor vehicle                                   150.00
Welder                                           30.00
 
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 5, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 81-192, 12-1-81; Ord. No. 81-192, 12-1-
81; Ord. No. 82-214, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 82-214, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 82-233, 6-15-
82; Ord. No. 84-308, 7-3-84; Ord. No. 85-333, 8-6-85; Ord. No. 85-337, 9-17-85;
Ord. No. 89-441, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 90-479, 2-6-90; Ord. No. 95-633, 4-18-95;
Ord. No. 96-670, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 96-685, 10-10-96; Ord. No. 98-741, 10-20-98;
Ord. No. 05-1040, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 06-1113, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 10-1280, 6-21-
10; Ord. No. 11-1323, 5-16-11; Ord. No. 17-1590, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 19-1641, 1-
29-19; Ord. No. 19-1650, 5-21-19; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22; Ord. No. 22-1725,
1-25-22; Ord. No. 23-1803, 10-10-23; Ord. No. 24-1824, 10-8-24; Ord. No. 25-
1848, 7-15-25)
Sec. 12-7. - Referrals.
   Applications for all licenses must be referred to the police department and
fire department, for approval, with the exception of the following, auctioneer,
dog, garage sale, going-out-of-business sale, hauling vehicle, junk dealer
vehicle, manager, motor vehicle for hire, moving van, solicitor, tobacco.
Vendor vehicles must be referred to the police department for approval.
Taxicabs and taxicab drivers must be referred to the police department only for
approval. Motor buses must be referred to the police department. The applicant
shall not be in default under the provisions of this chapter or indebted or
obligated for personal property taxes to the city, and all businesses shall
have received a tax clearance from the city treasurer before a license can be
issued. If no disapproval is received by the city clerk within one month, she/
he is then authorized to issue the license.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 6, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 83-282, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 05-1040, 6-6-
05)
Sec. 12-8. - Council approval of licenses.
   Arcade, carnival, circus and motor bus licenses must be approved by the city
council.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 7, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-9. - Renewal of licenses.
   (a)   The city clerk shall send a notice of renewal to all affected
departments at least 45 days prior to the expiration of any license. Upon
receipt of fees, the city clerk shall issue all renewal licenses immediately
unless refusal is requested in writing by affected city departments. The clerk
shall then correspond with the licensee concerning such refusal in accord with
suspension and revocation provisions of this chapter. An application for
renewal will not be considered a renewal if there has been a change in business
or owner.
   (b)   If a licensee who is not actively engaged in the occupation for which
a license was issued desires to obtain an escrow license for the annual fee in
lieu of a regular annual license, the licensee shall so respond upon receipt of
the notice of renewal. The city clerk shall renew such escrow licenses on an
annual basis if requested by the licensee. If an individual with as [an] escrow
license desires to activate the escrow license on a single occasion during the
escrow license period, one-half of the regular fee shall be paid to the city
clerk. If the escrow licensee desires to perform services under the authority
of a regular license on more than one occasion during the license period, the
full license fee shall be paid. An escrow license may be renewed for up to five
continuous years without the applicant/licensee required to take additional
instruction or a competitive test, unless required by state law.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 8, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 83-284, 10-4-83)
Sec. 12-10. - Identification cards; fingerprinting; bonds.
   With the exception of metal dog tags, no identification cards or metal
badges shall be issued by the city clerk. Fingerprinting of a licensee, other
than taxicab drivers, shall not be required. Bonds shall not be required.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 9, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-11. - Vehicle tags.
   Every vehicle licensed as a coal dealer vehicle, concrete supplier vehicle,
mechanical excavating and grading vehicle, hauling vehicle, junk dealer
vehicle, motor bus, moving van, fuel oil truck, food truck, taxicab or vendor
vehicle shall display a vehicle tag in either a rear or left side window, or a
metal license plate affixed to the rear of the vehicle, indicating that the
vehicle has been licensed for the current year.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 10, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-12. - Suspension and revocation.
   The city clerk, upon his own investigation or upon the investigation and
complaint of any other city department properly charged with the enforcement of
any applicable city ordinance, may order any license issued to be suspended or
revoked. The notices of suspension or revocation shall be in writing and shall
reasonably apprise the affected person of the reasons for such suspension or
revocation. Depositing such notice in the United States mail shall constitute
service thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 11, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-13. - License appeal board established.
   (a)   There is hereby established and created for the city a license appeal
board which shall consist of the following members:
      (1)   The city health officer.
      (2)   The chief of police.
      (3)   The corporation counsel.
   (b)   Any of the officers hereabove mentioned may nominate a representative
from their department to act in their behalf, which representative shall have
the same power and authority of action which the named officer would have under
the provisions of this article. Such board shall make its own rules and
regulations pertaining to operating procedure and shall meet publicly at such
times and places as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 12, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-14. - Right of appeal.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk concerning a
revocation or suspension of a license shall have a right to appeal to the
license appeal board by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten
days following the effective date of the action or decision complained of.
   (b)   Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed
from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon to avoid such
order.
   (c)   At the time of filing any such appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed
by the appellant with the city clerk.
   (d)   The license appeal board shall fix a time and place for hearing the
appeal and shall see that a written notice is served upon the appellant
informing him thereof. The license appeal board shall also give such notice to
the city clerk, and such officer shall appear at such hearing and defend the
order of suspension or revocation.
   (e)   The findings of the license appeal board shall be final and
conclusive, and the appellant shall be served a notice in writing of such
findings forthwith.
(Ord. No. 81-25, § 13, 6-2-81)
Secs. 12-15—12-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - AUCTIONS
Sec. 12-41. - License required.
   No new or used personal property such as goods, wares, merchandise or
automobiles shall be sold at auction in the city except by an individual or
corporation who has obtained an auctioneer's license from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-42. - Issuance of license.
   The license required by this article shall be applied for and issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-43. - License fees.
   The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-44. - Expiration of license.
   The city clerk may issue licenses for any period of time not to exceed one
year. All yearly licenses issued shall expire at 12:00 midnight, December 31,
of the year of issuance.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-45. - Terms and conditions of sale at auction.
   In the case of a sale by auction:
      (1)   Where goods are put up for sale by auction in lots, each lot is the
subject of a separate contract of sale.
      (2)   A sale by auction is complete when the auctioneer announces its
completion by the fall of the hammer or in other customary manner, until such
announcement is made, any bidder may retract his bid and the auctioneer may
withdraw the goods from sale, unless the auction has been announced beforehand
to be without reserve.
      (3)   A right to bid may be reserved expressly by or on behalf of the
seller.
      (4)   Where notice has not been given beforehand that a sale of auction
is subject to a right to bid on behalf of the seller, it shall be unlawful for
the seller to bid himself or to have any person bid on his behalf. Any sale in
violation of this rule shall be considered fraudulent.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-46. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-584, adopted Feb. 1, 1994, repealed former §
12-46, which pertained to business hours and days.
Sec. 12-47. - Regulation of premises.
   The licensee shall be required to provide sufficient personnel to properly
safeguard the public and to direct traffic and parking upon the premises of the
licensee.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-48. - Judicial sales.
   The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to auction sales
conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators,
receivers or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the
sale of real property at auction.
(Ord. No. 81-99, § 9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-49—12-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - COFFEEHOUSES, CARD ROOMS AND ATHLETIC CLUBS
Sec. 12-71. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Athletic club shall mean and include any room, place or building conducted
and maintained by one or more persons, corporate or otherwise, in which
activities, facilities, equipment and devices of a recreational, athletic,
social, educational, health-promoting, body-building or body weight-reducing
character are used or operated for the pleasure, entertainment, benefit,
development, good fellowship, social contact or enjoyment of its members or
patrons; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply
to any group or organization which is sponsored or supported in whole or in
part by the city or the school district of the city or by any other public tax
supported agency.
   Card room shall mean any room, place or building where one or more suitable
tables and chairs or benches are provided whereby the patrons might play cards;
provided, however, the provisions of this article shall not apply to private
residences, either single or multiple dwellings, or to the recreational rooms
of churches, fraternal or veterans' organizations affiliated with national
organizations or groups, or to those establishments which are licensed and
regulated by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
   Coffeehouse shall mean any room, place or building where the serving of
coffee is the principal business and where tables are provided for the use of
patrons for the playing of games.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 2, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-72. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or maintain any coffeehouse, card room or
athletic club, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, manage or be
actively in charge of any such coffee house, card room or athletic club, within
the limits of the city without first having obtained a license, as required in
this article. It shall be unlawful for the licensee of premises under this
article to employ or permit a person who is not licensed under this article to
be actively in charge of, manage, or operate any premises licensed under this
article.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-73. - Application for license.
   (a)   Every person desiring to engage in the business of, or setting up an
establishment for maintaining, conducting or operating a coffeehouse, one or
more card rooms, or an athletic club shall make application in writing to the
city clerk for a license for such business, such application stating the street
and location of the place where such business is to be conducted or situated,
the approximate size of the space in floor area where such business or
activities will be carried on, the number of floors where the business or
activity will be carried on, the location thereof (whether in the basement,
first or ground floor, second floor or some higher floor), the owner of the
real estate upon which the licensed premises are located, and if the applicant
is not the owner of the real estate, the application shall set forth the
interest of the applicant in the real estate, such as lessee or tenant from
month to month, or otherwise.
   (b)   Every person who will be actively in charge of or operate an
establishment licensed under this article shall make application in writing to
the city clerk for a license to operate such establishment, such application
stating the street address of the place where such establishment is to be
operated, and whether the applicant will operate such establishment as an
owner, employee, copartner or an officer of a corporation or voluntary
association. If the place where the applicant will work is operated under an
assumed name, the application shall set forth such assumed name, and the name
of the owner, if an individual, or the names of the copartners, if a
copartnership, or the names of the principal officers, including the resident
agent, if a corporation or a voluntary association.
   (c)   If a manager's license is issued as required in this article and if
the manager changes the place where he works during the period covered by such
license, such licensed manager shall forthwith notify the city clerk of such
change in location and, in connection with such notice, shall set forth and
make a new application for a license for the balance of such license year and
shall pay the manager's license fee in connection with the application as
herein provided.
   (d)   Any and all applications for a license for conducting and maintaining
a coffeehouse, card room or athletic club, or for operating or managing any
such establishment as required in this section, shall indicate the name and
address of the applicant if an individual, or if the applicant is a
copartnership, the names and addresses of the copartners, or if the applicant
is a corporation or voluntary association, the names and addresses of the
principal officers, including the resident agent thereof. The application shall
further state whether the applicant, or if he knows, whether any of the
copartners, if a copartnership, or whether any of the principal officers of the
applicant, if a corporation, or voluntary association has ever been convicted
of violating any ordinance of the city or of any other city, excepting minor
traffic violations, or any laws of the state or of the United States of
America, and, if such conviction exists, the approximate dates and the nature
of the charges, and the name and location of the court where the conviction was
made.
   (e)   If the business to be licensed will be conducted under an assumed
name, such assumed name must be recorded in the county clerk's office, as
required by law.
   (f)   The applicant shall sign the application and shall swear to it before
a notary public or other official authorized to administer oaths.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-74. - Investigation; report; issuance.
   (a)   If any application for premises to be licensed under this article has
been filed, it shall be referred to the police department, fire department, the
health department and the department of building and safety for investigation
as to whether any ordinances are being or will be violated by the proposed use,
and for approval as to whether the license should be issued.
   (b)   If any application for a manager's license under this article is
filed, it shall be referred to the police department for investigation and
report. If, upon such investigation, the police department determines that the
facts set up in such application are true and accurate, and that the applicant,
or any copartners, if a copartnership, or the principal officers including the
resident agent, if a corporation or a voluntary association, meets the
definition of good moral character found in section
12-4 of this chapter, and, if such person is otherwise law-abiding, is not
connected with reputed racketeers or professional gamblers, and is a suitable
and proper person for operating or managing such establishment, the chief of
police shall approve it in writing and report to the city clerk that the
manager's license should be issued. If the chief of police approves the
issuance of any such license, the license shall be issued by the city clerk
forthwith. If the chief of police recommends that no manager's license be
issued, his reasons therefor shall be stated in writing at the time the
application is returned to the city clerk.
   (c)   If all of such departments shall approve the issuing of a license for
the premises indicated, such approval shall be reported to the city clerk who,
upon the receipt thereof, will issue the appropriate license forthwith. If any
of such departments fail or refuse to approve the issuing of a license, such
fact shall be reported to the city clerk and the application appropriately
noted.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-b, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-75. - Display.
   A license to conduct a coffeehouse, card room, or athletic club when issued,
shall be posted on the inside wall near the front entrance of the licensed
premises in a conspicuous place and shall be kept posted continuously during
the time the license is in force and effect.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-b, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-76. - Failure to exhibit license.
   Any licensee under this article shall, upon request of any police officer or
law enforcing official in the city, produce evidence of the existence of any
license, to be hung on the wall where the establishment is being conducted,
identifying the licensed manager. A failure on the part of any licensee to
exhibit such license upon request shall be deemed a violation of this article
and shall be the basis of revocation of the license covering the premises where
such violation took place, as well as the license of the manager committing
such violation.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-c, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-77. - Inspection of premises.
   Any and all premises licensed under the provisions of this article shall be
made available, accessible and subject to inspection by any member of the
police department or by any other law enforcing official or authorized
inspector of the city at any time when the licensed premises are occupied by
any persons, whether employees, members or patrons. It shall be unlawful for
any person to refuse to permit a member of the police department or other law
enforcing official or authorized inspector to have access or entrance to such
premises on request.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-c, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-78. - Scope of license.
   A license issued under this article shall cover both a coffeehouse, a card
room, and athletic club or either or any one, as desired.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-d, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-79. - Nontransferable.
   Any license issued under this article shall not be transferable.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-d, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-80. - Payment of taxes.
   No license shall be issued under this article unless and until the city
treasurer shall have issued his certificate that all personal taxes assessed
against personal property at the address of the premises to be licensed have
been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 3-d, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-81. - Hours for conducting business.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to operate a
coffeehouse or card room, or to keep such establishment or place of activity
open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-82. - Prohibited conduct.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to use or occupy any other room or
space in any building for the purpose of carrying on the coffeehouse business
or card room activity, except that room or space specified in the application
for license.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the licensee under this article to possess,
keep, store, consume, serve or give away intoxicating beverages or permit such
intoxicating beverages to be kept, sold, stored, consumed, served or given away
on any premises, or part thereof, licensed under this article.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for minors under the age of 18 years to frequent
or loiter or to be allowed by the licensee to frequent or loiter on the
licensed premises.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for the licensee to lock or to permit to be
locked any of the exit doors of the licensed premises during the hours such
premises are open for business.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for the licensee to allow or permit, after
warning by any member of the city police department, any known or reputed
gambler, racketeer, narcotic addict, hoodlum, police figure or habitual
drunkard to frequent or loiter in the licensed premises.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-83. - Suspension, revocation of license—Authorized, procedure.
   (a)   The license authorized to be issued under this article may be
suspended by the chief of police for falsifying as to any statements made in
the application therefor, or for violating any of the provisions of this
article or any other ordinances of the city or any laws of the state or of the
United States of America. If such license is suspended, the license and
evidence thereof shall be surrendered by the licensee and shall be held by the
police department until the final disposition is made of such suspension. It
shall be unlawful for the licensee or anyone working in his behalf to operate
the coffeehouse, card room or athletic club while such suspension continues to
exist.
   (b)   In connection with the notice of suspension, a statement in writing
shall be prepared by the chief of police, setting forth specifically the
charges or grounds for which the license was suspended and the facts on which
such suspension is based, and such statement shall be served on the licensee or
the person in charge of the licensed premises at the same time the notice of
suspension is served.
   (c)   Immediately upon such suspension, the chief of police shall give a
notice in writing to the licensee, or to any person in charge of the licensee's
business at the address designated in the license, that a hearing will be held
before the city council at such time and place stated in the notice, not less
than three days and not more than ten days from the date of such suspension, at
which time the cause of such suspension shall be investigated by the council to
determine if the basis for the suspension exists. If the council finds that the
cause of suspension is established by the facts, the license shall be revoked
forthwith, but if the cause of suspension is not established by the evidence
submitted, the license shall be reinstated.
   (d)   If a license issued under this article is revoked, such person and all
persons officially connected with such licensee shall be ineligible to obtain
another coffeehouse, card room or athletic club license in the city for a
period of five years from the date of such revocation.
(Ord. No. 81-76, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-84. - Same—Prohibited acts.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct and maintain an
establishment licensed under this article at any time during which any such
license is under suspension or revocation.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in active charge of, manage
or operate any establishment licensed under this article during any time when
such person's manager's license is under suspension or revocation.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner or part owner,
whose license has been revoked, to operate or work in a coffeehouse, a licensed
card room or an athletic club either as owner, part owner, or employee during
the period of revocation, or when such person is ineligible to obtain a
license.
(Ord. No. 81-76, §§ 3-d, 4, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-85—12-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
Sec. 12-111. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling
Christmas trees in the city, or operate a building or yard where Christmas
trees are sold at retail in the city, without first obtaining a license
therefor; provided, however, no license will be required for the sale of
Christmas trees by any religious or charitable organization for the purpose of
raising money for religious or charitable purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-98, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-112. - Application.
   Application for a license required by this article shall be made in writing
to the city clerk, on forms to be provided. The application shall be signed by
the applicant and shall set forth the name and address of the person proposing
to engage in such business and, if the applicant is a corporation, the names
and addresses of the officers of such corporation. The application shall also
set forth the location of the premises where Christmas trees will be sold, and
proof shall be furnished that the person to whom such license is to be issued
is the holder of a sales tax license, as required by the provisions of Act No.
167 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 205.51 et seq., MSA 7.521 et
seq.), as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-98, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-113. - Fees.
   The applicant for a license under this article shall pay a license fee for
each location where the sale of Christmas trees is conducted, and the license
fee is maintained in Section
12-6 of this Chapter. Such applicant shall also make a cash deposit with the
city of $150.00 for each location for the purpose of guaranteeing the cleaning
up of the premises and removal of any unsold trees or debris therefrom within
15 days after Christmas of the year in which the permit was taken out.
Merchants and property owners who pay personal property taxes to the city and
sell Christmas trees on a lot adjacent to their place of business will be
granted a license for one-third of the total fee in Section 
12-6 of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-98, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 88-425, § 1402, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 22-
1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-114. - Expiration.
   All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 following
issuance.
(Ord. No. 81-98, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-115. - Duty of licensee; refund of deposit.
   It shall be the duty of each licensee under this article to clean up the
premises where his Christmas tree sales business was conducted within 15 days
after Christmas and remove all leftover trees, branches, paper, waste and
debris therefrom. The licensee's cash deposit shall not be refunded until after
certification by the city clerk that the premises have been properly cleaned
up, and that the licensee has paid the sales tax applicable to his Christmas
tree sales business under the provisions of Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1933 (MCL 205.51 et seq., MSA 7.521 et seq.), as amended. If the
premises are not properly cleaned up as herein required within 15 days after
Christmas, the city may cause such premises to be cleaned up, and the costs
thereof shall be certified by the city clerk to the director of finance, and
such costs shall be deducted from the cash deposit before refund to the
licensee. Such cash deposit, or the balance thereof, shall be refunded within
30 days after certification by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-98, § 5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-116—12-135. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - GARAGE SALES AND SIDEWALK SALES
DIVISION 1. - GARAGE SALES
Sec. 12-136. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Garage sale, lawn sale, attic sale, rummage sale or flea market sale shall
mean any sale of tangible personal property not otherwise regulated in city
ordinances, advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be
made aware of such sale.
   Goods shall mean any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable
of being the object of a sale regulated under this article.
   Online advertising shall mean an optional fee-based online garage sale
database with a map that will be used to display and advertise all licensed
garage sales occurring in Dearborn. The registry will be available to the
public, and will be published and maintained on the City Clerk’s website. The
fee shall be charged per license. Garage sales will be advertised for up seven
(7) days prior to the last date of the garage sale license and will only
display the address and date range for each licensed garage sale event.
(Ord. No. 81-108, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96; Ord. No. 22-1725, 1-
25-22)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-137. - License required.
   A license issued by the city clerk shall be obtained by any person before
selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by
any means to be one of the types of sales coming under this article.
(Ord. No. 81-108, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96)
Sec. 12-138. - Application for license.
   An application for a license for any of the sales regulated under this
article shall be made at the office of the city clerk on a form to be provided
therefor, which application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of the person conducting such sale.
      (2)   Location of which such sale is to be conducted.
      (3)   The dates during which such sale is to be conducted within the time
limits prescribed in section
12-140.
(Ord. No. 86-361, § 3, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96; Ord. No. 19-1648, 5-
21-19)
Sec. 12-139. - License fees.
   (a)   Residents are allowed up to four garage sales per calendar year.
   (b)   An application shall be filed with the City Clerk and a license fee
shall be paid to the city at that time.
   (c)   An applicant may advertise their sale through the City Clerk’s Online
Advertising on the City Clerk’s website. This option will be available for an
additional fee on the form approved by the City Clerk for garage sale
applications.
   (d)   The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 86-361, § 3, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96; Ord. No. 10-1279, 6-
21-10; Ord. No. 19-1648, 5-21-19; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22; Ord. No. 22-1725,
1-25-22)
Sec. 12-140. - Conditions of license.
   (a)   No person shall conduct, advertise or promote any sale regulated by
this article without a license issued pursuant thereto.
   (b)   No signs advertising a sale regulated by this article shall be placed
on public property or on private property without the express consent of the
owner. Within 24 hours after the conclusion of a sale, all signs shall be
removed.
   (c)   No license shall be issued authorizing any such sale to be conducted
for a period longer than three days; provided further, that the clerk may issue
a flea market sale license for a period not to exceed six months for a business
activity to be conducted in an appropriately zoned district (industrial) and
subject to revocation for cause.
   (d)   The license authorizing such sale shall be displayed in the front
window or other prominent place, clearly visible from the street, at each
location where a sale is being conducted.
(Ord. No. 86-361, § 4, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96)
Sec. 12-141. - Persons and sales excepted.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
      (1)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
      (3)   Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed ten in number.
      (4)   Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or
other communication media who publishes or broadcasts in good faith without
knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge
that the provisions of this article have not been complied with.
      (5)   Any sale regulated under any other provision of the ordinances of
the city.
      (6)   Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of the
presently nonconforming section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly
zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in the ordinances of the city.
      (7)   Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the burden of
establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on the organization
or institution claiming such exemption.
(Ord. No. 81-108, § 5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96)
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALK SALES
Sec. 12-142. - Definition.
   Sidewalk sale shall mean a special event outdoor sale conducted on sidewalks
immediately adjacent and contiguous to commercial establishments; provided, the
merchandise being sold is consistent with the merchandise of the adjacent and
contiguous business.
(Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96)
Sec. 12-143. - License required; fee.
   (a)   A license issued by the city clerk shall be obtained by a
representative of the commercial establishment before any goods are offered for
sale at a sidewalk sale.
   (b)   The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96; Ord. No. 19-1649, 5-21-19; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-144. - Restrictions.
   (a)   No sidewalk sale shall be conducted for more than 30 days each
calendar year; no credit shall be given for sidewalk sales cancelled due to
inclement weather, or for any other reason. The 30 days permitted under this
section need not run consecutively. No additional time shall be permitted
without prior permission from the city council.
   (b)   Sidewalk sales shall be conducted in commercial districts only.
   (c)   Sidewalk sale displays shall not cover more than 20 percent of the
width of the sidewalk and a picture or diagram of the area utilized must be
provided to the city clerk as part of the application, and must be approved by
the city engineer or his/her designee.
   (d)   All sidewalk sales are subject to the provisions of
chapter 17 of this Code, entitled "Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places."
(Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96; Ord. No. 19-1649, 5-21-19)
Sec. 12-145. - Repeal.
   Adoption of this article shall serve to repeal section
2.07(A)(5)(b), "sidewalk display and sale of bedding plants," of Ordinance No.
93-553, entitled "Zoning Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 96-662, 3-20-96)
Secs. 12-146—12-160. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - JUNK DEALERS AND HAULERS FOR HIRE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 12-161. - Licenses subject to rules and regulations.
   Licenses issued under this article shall at all times be subject to the
reasonable rules and regulations of the several departments of the city
authorized to enforce the provision of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-162. - Enforcing officers.
   Any member of the police department or any inspector in the department of
public works or in the department of weights and measures, or the health
officer of the city or any person duly authorized by him is hereby authorized
and empowered to enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-163. - Inspection of licensed premises, vehicles.
   Any person authorized under the provisions of this article to enforce this
article, or any authorized inspector from any department in the city whose
approval must first be obtained before any license shall issue under this
article, is hereby authorized and empowered to inspect the premises and any and
all vehicles and equipment licensed or governed by the provisions of this
article at any reasonable hour of the day or night for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this article or determining that any and all provisions of
all ordinances, codes and rules and regulations of the city pertinent thereto
are being complied with. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or
attempt to prevent or interfere with anyone herein authorized from making an
inspection or investigation, as above provided.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-164. - Payment of personal property taxes.
   No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any person under this
article unless and until a certificate has been obtained from the city
treasurer to the effect that all personal property taxes levied and assessed
against such applicant for license has been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-165. - Issuance of licenses.
   Unless otherwise specified in this article, all licenses covered by the
terms of this article shall be issued by the clerk upon the payment to the
treasurer of the prescribed fee as listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter and upon the approval of the application for license by
the several departments of the city to which such application is referred,
showing that all laws and all ordinances and codes of the city have been
complied with.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-166. - License not transferable.
   Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall cover but
one person, vehicle or means of conveyance, and a new license shall be obtained
by the purchaser, transferee or assignee of such equipment each time a licensed
wagon, vehicle or means of conveyance is sold, transferred or assigned and is
again used in any manner regulated by this article.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-167. - Fees not to be refunded.
   Any and all monies paid as fees for permits or licenses issued under this
article shall be retained by the city treasurer, and no refund shall be made if
such permit or license has been granted and is later revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-168. - Expiration of licenses.
   Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 1; provided, however, that the date of expiration indicated in this
section shall not be applicable if the license has been terminated prior to
such date by operation of law.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-169. - Revocation or suspension of license—Authority.
   All licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall
be issued on the express condition that such license will be suspended or
revoked in the event of failure or refusal on the part of the licensee to
comply with the provisions of this article, which suspension or revocation
shall be made as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-170. - Same—Filing charges.
   (a)   No license shall be revoked except for cause upon proof of charges
filed with the city clerk by any person in the several departments of the city
who are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article or to approve the
issuance of a license, specifying with reasonable detail any facts hereinafter
referred to, which facts are hereby declared to be grounds for suspending any
license issued under this article; facts showing that the applicant for a
license made one or more fraudulent statements or misrepresentations or
concealed material information in the application for license; facts showing
that such licensee has violated or permitted a violation of this article which
injuriously affects the public health, the public safety, public morals or the
public welfare; or facts showing that this article has been violated in con-
nection with operations for which the licensee was responsible and of which the
licensee was aware, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have been
aware that such violation had occurred, or that licensee has been convicted of
any crime which was perpetrated on or in connection with the licensed vehicle
or premises, or that the licensee has carried on or permitted to be carried on
any unlawful or illegal act or acts on or in connection with such licensed
vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the filing of such charges, the person making such charges shall
forthwith suspend the license involved and shall give to such licensee a notice
of such suspension together with a copy of the charges specifying the facts on
which the suspension was made. At the same time such copy of the charges is
given to the licensee or his agent in charge of the vehicle, an order shall be
served upon such licensee or such agent, signed by the director of the
department making the charges, directing such licensee to appear before the
license appeal board at a date and place therein specified, which date shall
not occur more than ten days from the day of such suspension, to show cause why
the license suspended should not be permanently revoked.
   (c)   Upon the filing of such charges with the city clerk, the person making
such charges is hereby authorized and empowered in connection with the
suspension of a license, to remove and take into his possession the license or
certificate or certificates of such licensee, together with all license plates
and badges given to the licensee at the time the license was issued, and to
hold them until the license appeal board has determined whether such license
should be revoked as provided in section
12-171.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-171. - Same—Investigation; hearing.
   (a)   The license appeal board is hereby empowered and authorized to
investigate the charges set forth in the notice of suspension or revocation of
a license issued under this article; subpoena, swear and examine witnesses and
receive other competent evidence in connection therewith, offered either by the
person making the charges or by the licensee; or the license appeal board, on
its own motion, may make such investigation of the facts as it deems necessary.
The licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel. The decision of
the license appeal board shall be final and binding as to all questions of
fact.
   (b)   If the license appeal board shall find as the result of such
investigation that the licensee failed or refused to show cause or has not
shown sufficient cause why his license should not be revoked, or if the license
appeal board finds that such suspension was for a violation of any of the
provisions or requirements of this article, that any facts have been shown
which constitute grounds for suspending a license under this article, the
license appeal board may order such license permanently revoked or revoked for
such period of time as the license appeal board deems necessary. If the license
appeal board shall find the charges on which the license was suspended are not
sustained by the proofs, the license shall be reinstated by the license appeal
board.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-172. - Same—Waiting period for relicensing.
   In the event of any permanent revocation, the former licensee shall be
ineligible to receive any license under this article for a period of two years
thereafter, and no license shall be issued during such period for the
conducting of any business required to be licensed under this article.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-173. - Same—Rules, regulations.
   The license appeal board is hereby authorized to make such rules and
regulations to carry out the powers and duties imposed upon it by this article
as it may deem necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-174. - Same—Unlawful to conduct business.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business or activity, or
operate any vehicle required by the provisions of this article to have a
license issued therefor when a license has been suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-175. - Health cards, physical examinations.
   (a)   Whenever health cards are required by the terms of this article to be
carried upon the person of anyone subject to the terms and provisions of this
article, such health cards shall be in the form of a certificate issued by the
health officer to the effect that the bearer of the card has had a physical
examination by a reputable physician, has met all the requirements of the
health department of the city, and is a suitable person to carry such card. The
physical examination by a physician, as above referred to shall include such
laboratory tests that will assist the physician in securing the necessary data
desired to determine the presence or the absence of the diseases mentioned in
the physical examination report, the form of which shall be furnished by the
city department of health.
   (b)   The health card shall be valid only for the license year in which it
is issued and must be renewed annually by the bearer thereof without charge
therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 1.10, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-176—12-185. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - JUNK DEALERS
Sec. 12-186. - Definition.
   Whenever the phrase "junk dealer" is used in this division it shall mean a
person who purchases or sells materials, commonly called junk, such as old
rags, waste paper, bags, bagging, iron, brass, copper, tin, zinc, aluminum,
scrap or discarded metal, wrecked automobiles, bottles or other articles,
whether manufactured or in the process of manufacture, or raw material whether
old or new, or who transports through the streets or alleys of the city any of
such materials in conveyances while in the process of collecting or disposing
of such articles; provided, however, that such phrase and this division shall
not apply to persons or vehicles which are simply conveying such materials
while in the process of passing through the city; and provided further, such
phrase shall not be deemed to mean and include persons who are members of
established religious, charitable or patriotic organizations who collect old
newspapers.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-187. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in the business of
junk dealer without first obtaining a license therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-188. - Application for license.
   (a)   Every person who desires to engage in the business of junk dealer in
the city shall file an application with the city clerk setting forth his full
name, his residence address, the location of his yard or place of business, and
the number and kind of vehicles to be licensed. If the applicant is a
partnership, association, or copartnership, wherein more than one person
operates as owner or part owner, the names and residence addresses of all such
additional persons shall be set forth in the application, as well as the
assumed name, if any, under which they operate. The application shall further
state whether the applicant or any of the persons associated with the applicant
has ever been convicted of any crime. Upon the filing of such application, the
applicant shall pay to the city treasurer the fee or fees incident to such
application as hereinafter required. A junkyard application shall then be
referred to the police de-partment, the fire department and the department of
public works for investigation and report as to whether the data set forth in
the application will comply with this article and all of the ordinances of the
city, as well as the state laws in connection with the operation of such
business. All junk dealer applications shall be referred to the police
department for investigation and report as to whether such applicant complies
with the laws and ordinances of the city.
   (b)   The applicant and any and all persons associated with the applicant in
the business shall have their fingerprints taken and filed by the police
department in connection with such investigation.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-189. - Issuance of license.
   After the application for a license has been approved by the departments of
the city, a written report thereof has been made to the clerk, and upon the
payment of the license fee, as listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, the clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license of the
kind applied for. In connection with the issuance of such license for vehicles,
the city clerk shall issue a license tag not less than four inches by six
inches in size, having inscribed thereon in suitable language the type of
license issued and the date of expiration thereof, which license tag shall be
securely fastened in a conspicuous place on the outside of the vehicle to be
licensed.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-190. - Pledge or pawn.
   No licensee under this division shall receive in the course of business any
article by way of pledge or pawn, and he shall not loan or advance any sum of
money on the security of any article or thing.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-191. - Licensee to give information on demand.
   Every licensee under this division with a fixed or established place of
business shall, on demand, exhibit to any officer of the police department any
and all goods bought or received and give the name, residence and description
of the person from whom such goods were purchased or received. The licensee
shall keep a record written in ink, in the English language, containing the
name and residence of the person selling any of such goods, together with a
brief description thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-192. - Retention period.
   All articles or goods purchased or received by any licensee having a fixed
or established place of business shall be retained by such licensee for at
least 15 days before disposing of them, such articles or goods to be kept in an
accessible place on the premises where such articles are purchased and
received; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to old rags and
waste paper; provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall make it
necessary for the licensee to retain articles or goods purchased from anyone
having a fixed place of business after a record shall have been made of the
purchase of such articles in the book mentioned in section 12-291.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-193. - Written statement as to ownership.
   No licensee having a fixed place of business shall purchase or receive any
new or old metals or metal products, or any material composed wholly or in part
of any metal, without obtaining a written statement in the English language
describing the articles being purchased, and signed by the person from whom the
same was purchased or received, which writing shall set forth the time when
such articles were received by such person and from whom, and declaring that
such articles were not obtained unlawfully or by theft. All such statements
shall be preserved for at least one year. The burden of proving ownership and
the right to transfer any of such articles mentioned in this section shall be
assumed and maintained by the licensee under this division.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-194. - Hours of business; dealing with minors, other persons.
   (a)   No licensee under this division shall purchase or receive by sale,
barter, gift or exchange, or otherwise, any articles or goods referred to in
this chapter from any person between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of
the following morning; shall not receive any of such articles or goods from any
person under the age of 17 years; shall not receive any such articles or goods
from any person who at the time is intoxicated, or is a habitual drunkard or
from any person known by such licensee or reputed to be a thief or from any
association of thieves, a receiver of stolen property, or from any person the
licensee has reason to suspect of being such. No minors under the age of 17
years shall be permitted to loiter about the premises of any such licensee. No
person shall be permitted upon the premises of such licensee between the hours
of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning excepting a necessary
watchman.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, receive or pick up any
junk or abandoned materials or articles from along any street or alley in the
city between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions hereinabove set forth, the licensee
may, with his family, dwell upon the premises where his business is located,
providing that he shall not conduct such business nor receive buy or sell junk
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-195. - Resolution for use of premises.
   No building, land or premises shall be occupied by a person engaged in the
business of junk dealer in the city unless permission so to do shall have first
been obtained by resolution of the city council. If 65 percent or more of the
property owners within a radius of 500 feet of any part of such building, land
or premises shall object in writing to the establishment thereof, the city
council shall pass the resolution only on a 75 percent affirmative vote.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 2.9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-196—12-205. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - HAULERS FOR HIRE
Sec. 12-206. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, use or cause to be driven or
used in and upon the streets, alleys, parks or parkways of the city any wagon,
cart, truck or vehicle, whether self-propelled or otherwise, for the purpose of
hauling or carting earth, dirt, ashes, sawdust, hay, straw, waste concrete,
mortar, ice, manure, shavings, filth or rubbish of any kind, without first
having obtained a license to do so; provided, however, that nothing set forth
in this section shall require a person engaged in the business of selling any
of such material to obtain a license before delivery thereof could be made, or
prevent a person from hauling such material along the streets for his own
personal use, if the material being hauled is confined to the vehicle and not
permitted to blow or scatter, or become scattered, along the streets; provided,
further, that nothing in this section set forth shall require a person engaging
in any of the various kinds of mercantile business to obtain a license from the
city in order to make delivery of such merchandise.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 3.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-207. - Application for license; fee.
   Every person who desires to haul or convey any of the materials specified in
section
12-206 shall make and file with the city clerk an application for a license so
to do, such application setting forth the full name and residence address of
the applicant, the name and residence address of the owner of such vehicle, the
number and types of vehicles to be licensed, and if such vehicle is motor pro-
pelled, the name of the manufacturer, the motor number and the state license
registration number thereon. Fee shall be as shown in section
12-6 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 3.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-208. - Issuance of license.
   Upon filing of an application for a license under this division with the
city clerk, the clerk shall issue a license covering one or more vehicles to be
licensed, and in connection with such vehicle to be licensed, the clerk shall
give to the licensee a license decal which shall be attached in a conspicuous
location on the rear of the licensed vehicle, which license decal shall have
inscribed thereon, "Dearborn, Michigan expires December 1, 19 ____________ ."
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 3.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-209. - Condition of vehicles; scattering of contents.
   (a)   The police department is authorized to see that all vehicles to be
licensed under this division shall have mounted thereon one or more boxes or
containers constructed of tightfitting boards or sheet metal so as to prevent
the scattering or dropping on the streets or in public places any of the
materials being hauled, and if such vehicle is being used for the conveying of
shavings, sawdust, ashes, unbailed waste paper or other substances which are
likely to be blown off by the wind, such load shall be securely covered by a
canvas or other suitable material to prevent such scattering.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the operator or owner, or either of them, of
any vehicle hauling materials of any kind, whether for hire or not, to spill,
strew or drop or permit to be spilled, strewn or dropped any such materials
being hauled on the streets or in public places in the city, or to have
sticking or fastened to the wheels or tires thereof mud or soft earth which is
being or is likely to be shaken, thrown or dropped off on any pavement or
blacktop street in noticeable quantities in the city after such vehicle has
come from a dirt road or from a place off any pavement or blacktop street where
the wheels have picked up such mud or soft earth. The driver of such vehicle
and the owner thereof, or either of them, shall be subject to arrest for any
such ordinance violation; shall be subject to having the permit revoked if they
are operating under a permit from the city; shall be subject to having their
licenses revoked, if any have been issued by the city and shall be subject to
having such vehicle impounded until such time as the owner or operator thereof
shall post a cash bond in the amount of $100.00, conditioned upon such owner or
operator cleaning up or causing to be cleaned up the mud and dirt thrown or
shaken or dropped off daily by and from the wheels of such vehicle on the
pavement.
   (c)   All enforcing officials of the city are authorized to impound any
vehicle violating the provisions of this section, and such vehicle shall not be
released until the owner or operator thereof shall post a cash bond in the
amount of $100.00 for each vehicle thus impounded, conditioned upon such owner
or operator cleaning up or causing to be cleaned up the mud and dirt thrown or
shaken or dropped off daily by and from the wheels of such vehicle on any
pavement in the city, and conditioned further upon such owner or operator
reimbursing the city for any expense to which it may be put in cleaning up the
mud and dirt thrown or shaken off from such vehicle as above referred to.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 3.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-210. - Unloading.
   No person shall unload or cause to be unloaded or dumped in any street,
alley, way or other public place, or upon private property, the contents of any
wagon, cart, truck or vehicle unless written permission is obtained from the
owner thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-70, § 3.5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-211—12-229. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - STREET VENDORS
Sec. 12-230. - Purpose.
   The primary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways
is for uses by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Reasonable regulation of
vending on public ways is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. The regulations contained in this article are not intended to prohibit
or hamper speech which is protected by the First Amendment, but merely to
regulate specific activities which are commercial in nature.
   Exception. This article does not apply to mobile food establishments,
commonly known as “food trucks,” as defined by state law, MCL 289.6135 (see
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Article VIIA).
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 1, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 18- 1614, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 25-1840,
4-22-25)
Sec. 12-231. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Public way shall mean all areas legally open to public use such as public
streets, roadways, highways and alleys.
   Special event shall mean any occasion including, but not limited to parades,
golf tournaments, fairs, shows, exhibitions, city-wide celebrations, festivals,
etc., within a specifically defined area of the city.
   Stand shall mean any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart,
pushcart or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed
and registered by the department of motor vehicles, and is used for the
display, storage or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor.
   Vendor shall mean any individual, including an employee or agent of a group
of individuals, partnership or corporation, who sells or offers to sell food,
beverages, goods or merchandise on any public way from a stand, motor vehicle
or from his person.
   Vendor vehicle shall mean any vehicle used for the displaying, storing or
transporting of articles for sale by a vendor which is required to be licensed
and registered by the state department of motor vehicles. The term is to
include trailers, trucks and automobiles, but does not include mobile food
establishments (aka “food trucks”).
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 1, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 96-664, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 25-1840, 4-
22-25)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-232. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display or offer for sale any
food, beverage, goods or merchandise within the city without first obtaining a
license from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 2, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-233. - Application; special events.
   (a)   The application for a vendor's license shall contain all information
relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued,
including but not limited to:
      (1)   Full name, home address, permanent business address, if any,
telephone number, driver's license number, three copies of a current full-face
photograph, and proof of identity.
      (2)   A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the
food, beverages, goods or merchandise to be sold.
      (3)   The specific location, if any, in which the vendor intends to
conduct business.
      (4)   If vendor is employed by or is an agent of another, the name and
business address of the principal person hiring such vendor.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a
description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number
and the license number; such vehicles shall be subject to annual safety
inspections to be conducted by the police department.
      (6)   A complete listing of any other licenses or permits issued to
applicant by the city within the past five years.
   (b)   For special events with two or more street vendors, the event
organizer may apply for a vendor license on behalf of the participating vendors
subject to compliance with all requirements for licensure under this article.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 3, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 96-664, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 25-1840, 4-
22-25)
Sec. 12-234. - State health license.
   The application for a license required by this article of any vendor engaged
in the sale of food or beverages shall also be referred to the local health
department for approval of a health license, in addition to the regular vending
license. Such vendor's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the health
department at the time of application, as required by the state public health
code.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 4, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-235. - Issuance of license and expiration.
   Not later than 30 days after the filing of a completed application for a
vendor's license, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city clerk
of the decision on the issuance or denial of the license. If the vendor
applicant complies with all application requirements, the applicant shall be
issued a vendor's license. If a food and beverage applicant meets the prior
requirements and receives health department approval, then such applicant shall
be issued both a vending license and a state department of health license. A
vending license expires on December 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 5, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 25-1840, 4-22-25)
Sec. 12-236. - Exemptions.
   The following vendors are exempt from the licensing fee requirements, but
shall otherwise be required to comply with the provisions of this article:
      (1)   Any person who proposes to sell produce which he has raised
himself. Produce may only be sold on the site where it is raised.
      (2)   Any person who has been honorably discharged as a war veteran from
any of the armed services of the United States.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 6, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-237. - Fees.
   Each vendor granted a license under this article shall pay an annual license
fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, which must be paid before the license is issued. A
processing fee of $5.00 per vehicle shall be paid for each vendor vehicle
inspection.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 7, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 96-664, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-
8-22)
Sec. 12-238. - Insurance; hold harmless.
   (a)   No license shall be issued under this article to an applicant unless
the applicant furnishes proof to the city of a public liability bond or
insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for property damage and
injuries, including injury resulting in death caused by the operation of the
vending business. The city shall be an additional named insured on such bond or
policy.
   (b)   No license shall be issued under this article unless the licensee
signs a statement that they shall hold harmless and indemnify the city, their
officers, and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to
persons which may occur as a result of any activity carried on under the terms
of the license.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 8, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 25-1840, 4-22-25)
Sec. 12-239. - Display of licenses, identification badges.
   (a)   The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the vendor and
displayed at all times when he is engaged in the business of vending. If the
vendor sells food or beverages, the health license must also be displayed.
   (b)   Every vendor shall display on his person an identification card while
vending within the city. Such identification card shall be issued by the police
department. A reasonable fee shall be charged by the police department to cover
the cost of issuing identification cards.
   (c)   Licenses and identification badges shall be used only by the person to
whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 9, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-240. - Restrictions applicable to all vendors; limited exception for
special events.
   (a)   Stands. Vendor stands shall not impede access to the entrance or
driveway of any adjacent building. Vendor stands shall be located only on
private property within the city, when permission of the property owner has
been obtained.
   (b)   Handicapped areas. No vendor shall conduct business within 20 feet of
any handicapped parking space or access ramp.
   (c)   Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within 20 feet of
any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in a trash
container. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles
adjacent to or as a part of their stands.
   (d)   Prohibited areas; limited exception for special events.
      (1)   Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within 500 feet of
a fire escape, bus stop, loading zone or driveway of a fire station, police
station or hospital.
      (2)   Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within 500 feet of
any public, private or parochial school building, or the lands on which such
school buildings are located in the city on any days during which such school
is in session.
      (3)   Vendor stands are prohibited on public property and on public ways.
      (4)   Limited exception for special events. Vendor stands are allowed on
public property and public ways if the vendor is participating in a special
event or temporary use authorized and approved by the city, or if applicable,
city council. This limited exception is subject to all rules, regulations, and
conditions applicable to the event or use.
   (e)   Noise. No vendor may sound any device which produces a loud and
raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio,
sound amplifier or similar device to attract public attention.
   (f)   Nuisance prohibited. Except as otherwise stated in this article,
vendors shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 13 of the city’s Code of Ordinances regarding nuisances, including but
not limited to regulations regarding noise, smoke, and odors.
   (g)   Power and utilities. Power required for a vendor shall be self-
contained and self-provided. However, a vendor may request authorization from
the Building Official to utilize public utilities where available. No power
cable shall be extended on or across any city street or sidewalk except in a
safe, concealed manner designed to prevent tripping if reviewed and approved by
the Building Official or their designee.
   (h)   Generator noise. All generators must operate at a level of 80 decibels
or lower, exclusive of any other noise, when measured from a distance of 15
feet.
   (i)   Motor vehicles. Vending from a motor vehicle is restricted to public
ways. No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park the vehicle within 200 feet of any
intersection, within any other prohibited area, or during prohibited hours.
      (2)   Conduct business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion
or delay, constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting
property owner, or obstruct access to emergency vehicles.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 10, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 25-1840, 4-22-25)
Sec. 12-241. - Suspension or revocation of license.
   (a)   Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license.
      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business
of vending.
      (3)   Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of
the license.
      (4)   Conducting the business of vending in such manner as to create a
public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety and
welfare.
      (5)   Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude while holding a
vending license from the city.
      (6)   Intervention by the state department of health due to uncorrected
health or sanitation violations.
   (b)   Upon suspension or revocation, the city shall deliver written notice
to the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such
action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's place of
business or mailed to the license holder's last known address.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 11, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-242. - Appeals.
   Persons whose licenses under this article have been suspended or revoked may
appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 12, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-243. - Contracts.
   The city reserves the right to contract with individual vendors to provide
limited vending services in public areas.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 13, 12-18-90)
Sec. 12-244. - Renewals.
   Licenses may be renewed, provided an application for renewal and license
fees are received by the city no later than the expiration date of the current
license. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new
applications. The city shall review each application for renewal to determine
that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this article.
If the city finds that the new application meets the above requirements, the
city shall issue a new license.
(Ord. No. 90-497, § 14, 12-18-90)
Secs. 12-245—12-249. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIIA. FOOD TRUCKS
Sec. 12-250. - Definitions.
   Food trucks shall mean a business serving or offering for sale food and/or
beverages from a mobile food unit which, for purposes of this article, shall
mean a fully enclosed vehicle or trailer that is also licensed by the state as
a mobile food service establishment special transitory food unit.
   Local Health Department shall mean the health department having jurisdiction
in the city where the mobile food service establishment is based (Act 92 of
2000, MCL 289.3105).
   Mobile food service establishment shall mean a food service establishment
operating from a vehicle or trailer which is not fully equipped for full food
service and, therefore, must return to a licensed commissary at least once
every 24 hours for servicing and maintenance (Act 92 of 2000, MCL 289.1109 and
MCL 289.6135).
   Special transitory food unit (or “STFU”) shall mean a temporary food service
establishment licensed to operate without 14-day limits or a mobile food
establishment that is not required to return to a commissary (Act 92 of 2000,
MCL 289.1111 and MCL 289.6137).
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24; Ord. No. 25-1842, 5-20-25)
Sec. 12-251. - License required; compliance and scope of article.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any food truck to operate in the City of
Dearborn without first obtaining a food truck license from the city clerk and
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist or help any person with
the operation of a food truck in the City of Dearborn except as provided by
this article.
   (c)   The provisions of this article shall apply to food trucks operating in
the city pursuant to the terms and conditions in this article.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24)
Sec. 12-252. - Application, review, and inspection; reservation of location not
guaranteed; application on behalf of food trucks at events.
   (a)   Application. The application for a food truck license shall be on
forms approved by the city clerk and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name of the applicant; name of the business; applicant’s signature;
phone number, email contact, and business address of the applicant.
      (2)   If the owner of the business is different than the applicant, name
of the business owner; owner’s signature; phone number, email contact, and
business address of the owner.
      (3)   Information on the food truck, including the year, make and model
of the vehicle or unit and its dimensions.
      (4)   A statement of the status of monies owed to the city including, but
not limited to, water bills, real property taxes, personal property taxes, and
miscellaneous fees. An applicant with any unpaid fees owed to the city shall
not be eligible for a license under this article.
      (5)   a.   Copies of all necessary licenses or permits issued by the
Wayne County Health Department, another county health department in the State
of Michigan, and/or the State of Michigan, including but not limited to a copy
of the food service establishment license issued by the State of Michigan,
Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, or successor agency.
         b.   Retention of state license. The clerk shall keep a copy of the
type of state license (e.g., mobile food establishment or special transitory
food unit) that each licensee under this article has for the duration of their
local license.
      (6)   A signed statement that the licensee shall hold harmless and
indemnify the city, their officers, and employees for any claims for damage to
property or injury to persons which may occur as a result of any activity
carried on under the terms of the license.
      (7)   Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
         a.   Proof of commercial general liability policy with limits of no
less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence with a $2,000,000.00 general aggregate
including products liability issued by an insurer licensed to do business in
the State of Michigan.
         b.   For food trucks operating on city-owned public property,
insurance coverage naming the city as an additional insured is required.
         c.   Proof of liability and property damage motor vehicle policy with
limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 used by an insurer licensed to do business
in the State of Michigan.
   (b)   Fee. Payment of the non-refundable fee listed in
Chapter 12, Section
12-6 of the Code of Ordinances shall be submitted with the application.
   (c)   Code compliance. In addition to the application requirements under
this subsection, each applicant must successfully pass review and inspection to
ensure that they are in compliance with all relevant requirements of the Fire
Prevention Code.
   (d)   Inspection requirements; proof of inspection. The following inspection
requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Consent to inspection. The filing of an application for a food
truck license shall constitute consent to inspection by the city’s fire
department for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations
of this article, the city’s Code of Ordinances, and applicable law. This
subsection shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable
inspections of the food truck pursuant to this article.
      (2)   Scheduling and scope of inspection. Upon the filing of a completed
application, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the
Dearborn fire department to schedule an inspection. Inspections will occur
during normal city business hours or at another mutually agreeable time, and
the applicant shall allow representatives of the fire department into the food
truck to complete inspection. Inspections of the food truck shall be for the
following:
         a.   Compliance with the city’s Fire Prevention Code, Section
10-38 of the Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to code requirements
related to propane use and storage, as referenced in Section
12-255 of this article;
         b.   Inspection of the food truck for compliance with generator noise
decibel levels. Per Section
12-255 below, all generators must operate at a level of 80 decibels or lower,
exclusive of any other noise, when measured from a distance of 15 feet; and
         c.   An inspection to confirm that exhaust from the food truck is
directed away from the service side of the vehicle; and
      (3)   Alternative inspection. Proof from the Western Wayne County Fire
Department Mutual Aid Association that the applicant’s food truck complies with
the fire safety, propane, generator noise decibel, and exhaust requirements of
this article is sufficient if proof of such compliance is provided to the
Dearborn fire marshal for verification.
   (e)   Location disclaimer. Application under this section does not guarantee
access to city-approved locations for operation of a licensee’s food truck.
Licensees interested in accessing approved locations must seek and receive
approval as indicated in Section
12-255  of this article.
   (f)   License validity. A license issued under this article is valid for a
food truck and its employees.
   (g)   Non-transferable. A license issued under this article shall not be
transferable from one food truck to another.
   (h)   Third-party application for events. For events with 2 or more food
trucks, the event organizer may apply for a food truck license on behalf of the
participating food trucks subject to compliance with all requirements for
licensure under this article.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-
22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-24; Ord. No. 25-1842, 5-20-25)
Sec. 12-253. - License renewal and expiration.
   Food truck licenses must be renewed annually by submitting an application
pursuant to the terms and requirements of this article. Licenses issued under
this article shall expire annually on April 30. Food trucks that have a valid
license on the effective date of the amendments to this section, and whose
license is scheduled to expire on December 1, 2024, are hereby granted an
extension of their license until April 30, 2025.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24)
Sec. 12-254. - Display of license.
   The license issued to a food truck owner/operator by the city clerk shall be
displayed in a conspicuous location whenever the food truck is open for
business in the City of Dearborn. In addition, food trucks shall be ready to
provide visual proof of the city license and all necessary county health
department and/or State of Michigan permits and licenses at all times.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24)
Sec. 12-255. - Rules, guidelines, and restrictions; authorized locations and
reserving space; block parties.
   (a)   Rules, guidelines, and restrictions.
      (1)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation in designated park locations
shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless otherwise allowed
in writing by the Director of Recreation.
      (2)   Interference with adjacent buildings prohibited. Food trucks shall
not impede access to the entrance or driveway of any adjacent building.
      (3)   Trash collection by operator. All trash or debris accumulating
within 20 feet of any food truck shall be collected by the operator and
deposited in a trash container. All food truck operators must provide trash
receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their truck. Operators may also rent
trash receptacles from the city at an additional cost. It shall be unlawful for
any food truck operator, or anyone aiding or assisting in the operation of a
food truck, to throw or deposit any goods, merchandise, packaging, containers,
fat, grease, paper, or other liquid waste upon any alley, street or sidewalk,
or in any sewer, in the city.
      (4)   Waste disposal by operator. All waste originating from the food
truck, and not from customers, shall be collected and disposed of off-site by
the food truck operator each day. Spills of food or food by-products shall be
cleaned up and no dumping of greywater on the street or in parks and storm
drains is allowed. Food truck operators should take appropriate precautions to
prevent spills or other damages to the public property as a result of their
operation. Food trucks are responsible for all greywater, grease, and other
food waste, which shall NOT be dumped or disposed of on or into public
property, including but not limited to drains and public trash receptacles.
      (5)   Noise and generators. No food truck operator shall make or cause
any unreasonable or excessive noise. No loud music or amplified announcements
or noise is permitted. In addition, all generators must operate at a level of
80 decibels or lower when measured from a distance of 15 feet. Initial
inspection by the fire department shall include generator compliance.
      (6)   Propane usage. Food trucks that utilize propane must comply with
all relevant requirements under law, including but not limited to the city’s
Fire Code (See Code of Ordinances, Section
10-38), and pass Fire Code inspection.
         a.   Propane canisters must be securely mounted to the food truck or
placed within a ventilated compartment;
         b.   A ventilated compartment must provide for the natural or
mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or
removing such air from, the location of the propane canister being used, in
conformity with the definition of “ventilation” found in Sec. 202 of IFC 2024;
and
         c.   Propane canister must not be stored or placed on the ground.
      (7)   Exhaust. All food trucks shall direct exhaust away from the service
side of the vehicle. Initial inspection by the fire department shall include
exhaust compliance.
      (8)   Nuisance prohibited. Except as otherwise stated in this article,
food truck operators shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 13 of the city’s Code of Ordinances regarding nuisances, including but
not limited to regulations regarding noise, smoke, and noxious odors.
      (9)   Traffic obstruction prohibited. No food truck operator shall
conduct business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay,
constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property
owner, or obstruct access to emergency vehicles.
      (10)   Public rights-of-way. Food truck operators shall operate in
compliance with all provisions of the city’s Code of Ordinances and Zoning
Ordinance that govern sidewalks and other public places, traffic, and motor
vehicles.
      (11)   Code compliance. Food truck operators shall be subject to all
applicable building, electrical, mechanical, and fire safety code requirements,
including any permit or inspection requirements deemed necessary by the
building official.
      (12)   Signs. Signage shall be placed on the food truck. Separate free-
standing signs are permitted in accordance with the city’s existing
encroachment regulations and sign ordinance (See Dearborn Code of Ordinances
Chapter 4, Article XII).
      (13)   Lights. All exterior lights more than 60 watts are subject to the
following regulations:
         a.   Lighting and/or illumination shall not create glare or
excessively illuminate the surrounding area;
         b.   Lighting and/or illumination that distracts motorists or creates
a traffic hazard for either vehicles or pedestrians is prohibited;
         c.   No flashing, blinking, or strobe lights are allowed when the food
truck is parked, in-service, or in motion within the city; and
         d.   All exterior lights shall be located and directed downward (below
the horizontal), and shall not be directly visible from or aimed at adjacent
streets, roads, or properties.
      (14)   Power supply. Power required for a food truck shall be self-
contained and self-provided. However, a food truck may request authorization
from the building official to utilize public utilities where available. No
power cable shall be extended on or across any city street or sidewalk except
in a safe, concealed manner designed to prevent tripping if reviewed and
approved by the building official or their designee.
      (15)   Proximity to fire hydrants. No food truck is allowed within 20
feet of a fire hydrant.
   (b)   Authorized locations to operate food trucks in the city; city park
food truck permit required.
      (1)   Public parks and park property. In addition to the licensing
requirements under this article, food truck operators must also obtain a
recreation food truck permit from the director of the department of recreation,
or their designee, before operating a food truck in designated locations as
identified below. Applicants must be licensed pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this article, and their license must remain in good standing at
all times they are in operation.
      (2)   Application process.
         a.   Before applying for a recreation food truck permit to operate at
a designated location, applicants must have a valid food truck license.
         b.   Applicants must file a complete application with the recreation
department on forms approved by the director of the department of recreation,
or their designee.
         c.   A fee determined by the director of the department of recreation
is due at the time of application. The fee shall be non-refundable except as
otherwise stated in this article.
         d.   Complete applications will be taken on a first-come, first-serve
basis.
      (3)   Rental fee. A non-refundable administrative rental fee determined
by the director of the department of recreation will be charged in addition to
the application fee under this subsection. Such fee will be based on the
duration that designated locations will be rented, with the following tiers:
         a.   Daily pass;
         b.   Weekly pass;
         c.   Weekend pass;
         d.   Monthly pass;
         e.   Season pass (no holidays); and
         f.   Premium pass (includes holidays and first priority for special
events).
      (4)   Designated locations. The director of the department of recreation
may designate areas at the following locations for the operation of food trucks
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article:
         a.   Lapeer Park.
         b.   Hemlock Park.
         c.   Ford Woods Park.
         d.   Ford Field Park.
         e.   Levagood Park.
         f.   Crowley Park.
         g.   Ten Eyck Park.
         h.   Ford Center for the Performing Arts.
         i.   Other city parks as designated by the recreation director.
      (5)   Grounds for revocation of designated location. The recreation
director shall issue a written notice to revoke the recreation food truck
permit if the food truck license has been revoked by the city clerk.
      (6)   Appeals for park locations. Any person denied a location in a
designated location under this subsection (b) may appeal same as follows:
         a.   A person wishing to appeal pursuant to this subsection must first
file a written statement of the grounds for appeal and the relief requested
with the recreation director. Such appeal shall be filed with the director
within 14 days of notice of denial. The appeal shall be decided by the director
or their designee without hearing and within 14 days of receiving the appeal,
based on review of the written statement, any supporting documents or materials
submitted by the appellant, and any other papers, materials, and documents
associated with the decision.
         b   The decision of the director or designee may be appealed to city
council by filing a written statement of the grounds for appeal and the relief
requested with the council office. Such appeal shall be filed with the council
office within 14 days of notice of denial by the recreation director.
      (7)   Notice of appeal hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the
city council shall provide the appellant with notice and an opportunity to be
heard. The city council shall serve notice upon the licensee by certified mail
not less than 14 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state:
         a.   The date, time and place of the hearing.
         b.   A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony,
and may be represented by an attorney.
         c.   The city council shall also notify the recreation director of the
date and time of the hearing and provide a complete copy of the appellant’s
written notice. The recreation director, or their designee, shall attend the
appeal hearing.
      (8)   Appeal hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the
city council and shall be open to the public. The city council shall, by
resolution, decide the appeal at the public hearing. The city council shall
only decide the following:
         a.   Whether to uphold or overturn the decision of the recreation
director;
         b   If the recreation director’s decision is upheld, the council’s
ruling shall be final;
         c.   If the recreation director’s decision is overturned, the council
shall then determine:
            (i)   Whether the appellant can have the park location they
originally applied for;
            (ii)   If that location is occupied by another food truck, whether
another location is available; or
            (iii)   If the appellant does not want another location whether to
refund the appellant’s application fee for a recreation food truck permit.
   (c)   Block parties. Food trucks may operate at block parties that receive a
valid permit under
Chapter 17 of the city’s Code of Ordinances, and must comply with all
requirements of this article, the the Code of Ordinances, and Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24; Ord. 25-1842, 5-20-25)
Sec. 12-256. - Suspension or revocation of license.
   Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of
the following reasons:
   (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license.
   (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting business.
   (3)   Conducting the business contrary to the conditions of the license,
this article, or applicable provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances or
Zoning Ordinance.
   (4)   Conducting the business of vending in such manner as to create a
public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (5)   Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude while holding a
vending license from the city.
   (6)   Intervention by the state department of health due to uncorrected
health or sanitation violations.
   Upon suspension or revocation, the city shall deliver written notice to the
license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action.
The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's place of business
or mailed to the license holder's last known address.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24)
Sec. 12-257.   Appeals.
   Persons whose licenses under this article have been suspended or revoked, or
whose application for a license has been denied, may appeal by filing a written
notice of appeal with the city council.
(Ord. No. 18-1613, 6-12-18; Ord. No. 22-1743, 5-24-22; Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-
24)
Sec. 12-258.   Enforcement.
   The provisions of the article shall be enforced by the director of economic
development and any deputies, agents, or inspectors designated by him, any
officer of the police department, and the city clerk or their designee.
(Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-24)
Sec. 12-259.   Other permits, licenses, or authorizations.
   A license or permit obtained under this article shall not relieve any food
truck of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit or license or
authorization required by any other ordinance, statute, or administrative rule.
(Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-24)
Sec. 12-260.   Severability.
   Should any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph, or section of this article be
held invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of the article shall
remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 23-1805, 1-9-24)
Secs. 12-261—12-265. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - SOLICITING AND CANVASSING
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 12-266—12-274. - Reserved.
Sec. 12-275. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city by protecting citizens from the possibility of crime
being committed by solicitors or canvassers or those posing as solicitors or
canvassers and by protecting the privacy rights of citizens in their homes.
(Ord. No. 88-416, § 1, 5-3-88)
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITING
Sec. 12-276. - Definition.
   For the purpose of this division, "soliciting" and "canvassing," as used in
this division, shall consist of any person, whether a resident of the city or
not, who by going from house to house solicits orders for merchandise of any
nature for future delivery; or orders for the installation or servicing of any
household equipment or appliances, including but not limited to, furnace or
boiler repair and maintenance, repair and servicing of washing machines,
incinerators, or the installation of storm windows and screens, awnings,
roofing and siding of buildings and the cleaning, painting or modernization of
buildings.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 2, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-277. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of soliciting
or canvassing without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this article. Such license shall be applied for and administered
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-278. - Application for license.
   Any person desiring a license under the provisions of this division must
make application to the city clerk on forms provided by him.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 4(a), 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-279. - License fees.
   (a)   No license shall be issued until the fee therefor shall have been paid
to the city clerk, as listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter. The annual fee to be paid by any firm, shall cover the
license cost of any and all of their agents, employees, distributors, dealers
or direct sales personnel. In cases where the distributors, dealers or direct
sales personnel act in an independent capacity in soliciting orders or in
selling for their own account, the firm whose products are being distributed or
sold may, at its option, elect to cover its distributors or direct sales
personnel by paying the annual charge, and nothing herein shall be construed as
establishing the relationship of employer and employee or principal and agent
between the person doing the distributing or selling and the company whose
products are being distributed or sold; provided, however, in all cases it will
be necessary for each individual subject to the provisions of this division to
make an individual application to the city clerk and secure an individual
license as herein provided. The annual license fee is for the purpose of
covering the cost of such licenses and does not waive the requirement that each
person engaged in soliciting or canvassing shall have his own individual
license.
   (b)   None of the license fees provided herein shall be so applied as to
occasion an unreasonable burden on interstate commerce. In any case where an
applicant engaged in interstate commerce believes the fee to constitute an
unreasonable burden on such commerce, he may apply to the city clerk for an
adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or
unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within
six months after payment of the required license fee. The applicant shall by
affidavit and supporting testimony show his business operations, the gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business and any other information that the
city clerk may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such
unreasonable burden on such commerce. The city clerk shall then conduct an
investigation comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like
nature and shall make a finding of fact from which he shall determine whether
the fee fixed by this division is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to
the applicant's business, and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an
amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the fee has already
been paid, the clerk shall order a re-fund of the amount over and above the fee
so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the city clerk shall have the power
to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales or any other method which will
assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses
of like nature; provided, however, that the amount assessed shall not exceed in
any case the fees prescribed by this division. Should the city clerk determine
the gross sales measure of the fee to be a fair standard, he may require the
applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's
business in the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn
statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor; provided,
however, that no additional fee shall be required during any one calendar year
if the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license fee
provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 4(b), 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-280. - Expiration of license.
   All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall
expire one year from application date. Licenses, other than annual licenses,
shall expire on the date specified in the license.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-281. - Display of license; identification of organization.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this division must be in the
possession of the licensee at all times and must be shown at the request of any
citizen or police officer of the city. All licensees must have the name and
address of their firm, partnership, corporation or association plainly lettered
on their business vehicles or equipment, with the exception of privately owned
passenger automobiles.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-282. - Prohibited hours of operation.
   A legally licensed solicitor or canvasser shall not solicit between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-283. - Reciprocal licensing.
   The city shall permit solicitors and canvassers legally licensed by other
governmental units within the county, or by the state, to engage in the
activities covered by this division upon registering with the city clerk;
provided, however, that no license issued by another governmental unit will be
recognized by the city unless such other governmental unit reciprocates in
recognizing the license issued by the city.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-284. - Orders.
   All orders taken by licensees under this division shall be in writing, in
duplicate, stating the name and address of both the solicitor or canvasser and
his employer, if applicable, the terms of the order, and description of the
goods, the amount of the down payment and one copy must be given to the
purchaser.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-285. - Access to premises restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass upon any premises
if requested by anyone in control of the premises not to do so, or if there is
placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a
sign bearing the words "No Soliciting," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No
Canvassing," "No Agents" or any similar notice indicating in any manner that
the occupants of such premises do not desire to have solicitors or canvassers
call upon them.
(Ord. No. 81-100, § 8, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-286—12-295. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITING
Sec. 12-296. - Definition.
   For the purpose of this division, "religious, political or charitable
soliciting" shall consist of any person or group, whether a resident of the
city or not, who, by going house to house without invitation, solicits money;
sells any merchandise for religious, political or charitable beliefs or
espouses charitable beliefs; and solicits a donation to further such beliefs.
(Ord. No. 88-416, § 2, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 04-1005, 6-15-04; Amend. of 5-25-07)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-297. - Hours of operation.
   A solicitor or a canvasser shall not solicit or canvass between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 88-416, § 7, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 04-1005, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 25-1838, 3-
18-25)
Sec. 12-298. - Access to premises restricted. 
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass for religious,
political, charitable or public interest reasons upon any premises if requested
by anyone in control of the premises not to do so, or if there is placed on
such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign
bearing the words "No Soliciting," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Canvassing,"
"No Agents" or any similar notice indicating, in any manner, that the occupants
of such premises do not desire to have solicitors or canvassers call upon them.
(Ord. No. 88-416, § 8, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 04-1005, 6-15-04)
Secs. 12-299—12-324. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sec. 12-325. - Investigation prior to license application.
   All applications for a license hereunder shall be referred to the chief of
police or their designee for investigation as to the reputation, character and
police record of the applicant and whether such person is suitable to be
entrusted with the sale of articles mentioned in section
12-326, hereof, and upon a return of a favorable report thereof to the city
clerk and the payment of license fee as stated in section
12-6 to the treasurer, the clerk shall thereupon issue such license.
   In determining the applicant's reputation, character, and police record, the
following shall be considered:
   (a)   The following shall be considered a disqualifying criminal act and
result in the denial of an application for a license hereunder:
      (1)   Any of the following misdemeanor or felony offenses under any of
the following statutes, as amended, for which less than seven years has elapsed
since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date:
         a.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter X, Arson and Burning;
         b.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XI, Assaults, except MCL 750.81(1)
and (2);
            1.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XVII, Bribery and Corruption;
         c.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXII, Compounding Offenses;
         d.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVA, Criminal Enterprises;
         e.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVIII, Disorderly Persons;
         f.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXI, Embezzlement;
          g.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIII, Explosives, Bombs, Harmful
Devices;
         h.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIV, Extortion;
         i.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIII, Frauds and Cheats;
         j.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIV, Gambling;
         k.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLV, Homicide;
         l.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLVIII, Indecency and Immorality;
         m.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LVIII, Mayhem;
         n.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVII, Prostitution;
         o.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVIIA, Human Trafficking;
         p.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVI, Sexual Conduct;
         q.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVIII, Robbery;
         r.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXXIII-A, Michigan Anti-Terrorism
Act;
         s.   MCL, 333, Part 74, Controlled Substances Offense and Penalties;
         t.   MCL § 205.27, Taxation-Prohibited Acts, including tax evasion;
      (2)   Selling, giving, or furnishing a tobacco product, vapor product, or
alternative nicotine product to a minor in violation of MCL 722.641;
      (3)   Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the
foregoing offenses; or
      (4)   Any offense enumerated in the City's Code of Ordinances which
substantially corresponds to one of the foregoing state offenses; or
      (5)   Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s)
been committed in Michigan, would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses.
   (b)   In addition to subsection (a) above, the following shall also be
considered disqualifying acts that shall result in the denial of an application
for a license hereunder:
      (1)   Code compliance. The subject premises lacks a current certificate
of occupancy or does not comply with applicable building, zoning, plumbing,
electrical, mechanical, health, or fire prevention codes.
       (2)   Unpaid fees. Relevant city departments have indicated that there
are unpaid fees or incurred violations under their purview related to the
subject premises.
      (3)   Taxes. The treasury division has denied a real and/or personal
property tax clearance pertaining to the subject premises.
(Ord. No. 81-59, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1775, 10-25-22)
Sec. 12-326. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish or give away, directly
or indirectly, cigarettes, cigars, tobaccos or the component parts thereof
without first obtaining a license.
(Ord. No. 81-59, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-327. - License application.
   Any person desiring to do any of the acts or things mentioned in section
12-326 shall make an application to the city clerk upon forms furnished by him,
setting forth the full name and place or places of business in which it is
proposed to carry on the business.
(Ord. No. 81-59, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-328. - Possession of tobacco products, vapor products, and alternative
nicotine products by minors.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 21 years to have
in his possession any cigars, cigarettes, papers, wrappers or tobacco, and any
person furnishing such minors with any of the articles mentioned in section
12-326 or this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article.
   (b)   A person shall not sell, give or furnish a tobacco product, vapor
product, or alternative nicotine product to a minor, including, but not limited
to, through a vending machine. A person who violates this subsection (b) or
subsection (f) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as follows:
      (1)   For a first offense, not more than $100.00.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent offense, not more than $500.00
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b) that the
defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have in force a
written policy to prevent the sale of tobacco products, vapor products, or
alternative nicotine products, as applicable under this section and Public Act
31 of 1915, to persons under 21 years of age and that the defendant
enforced and continues to enforce the policy. A defendant who proposes to offer
evidence of the affirmative defense described in this subsection shall file
notice of the defense, in writing, with the court and serve a copy of the
notice on the prosecuting attorney. The defendant shall serve the notice not
less than 14 days before the date set for trial.
   (d)   A prosecuting attorney who proposes to offer testimony to rebut the
affirmative defense described in subsection (c) shall file a notice of
rebuttal, in writing, with the court and serve a copy of the notice on the
defendant. The prosecuting attorney shall serve the notice not less than seven
days before the date set for trial and shall include in the notice the name and
address of each rebuttal witness.
   (e)   Subsection (b) does not apply to the handling or transportation of a
tobacco product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine product by a minor
under the terms of the minor's employment.
   (f)   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine product to an individual, a
person shall verify that the individual is at least 21 years of age by doing
one of the following:
      (1)   If the individual appears to be under 27 years of age, examining a
government-issued photographic identification that establishes that the
individual is at least 21 years of age.
      (2)   For sales made by the internet or other remote sales method,
performing an age verification through an independent, third-party age
verification service that compares information available from a commercially
available database, or aggregate of databases, that are regularly used by
government agencies and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to the personal information entered by the individual during the
ordering process that establishes that the individual is 21 years of age or
older.
   (g)   Minors and tobacco. Subject to subsection (l), a minor shall not do
any of the following:
      (1)   Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product.
      (2)   Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product.
      (3)   Use a tobacco product in a public place.
      (4)   Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of age that is
false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the purpose
of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or attempting to possess a
tobacco product.
   (h)   An individual who violates subsection (g) is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation. Pursuant to a
probation order, the court may also require an individual who violates
subsection (1) to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction
assessment program, if available. In addition, an individual who violates
subsection (g) is subject to the following:
      (1)   For the first violation, the court may order the individual to do 1
of the following:
         a.   Perform not more than 16 hours of community service.
         b.   Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment
program.
      (2)   For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health
promotion and risk reduction assessment program, the court may order the
individual to perform not more than 32 hours of community service.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation
in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, the court may
order the individual to perform not more than 48 hours of community service.
   (i)   Minors and vapor products or alternative nicotine products. subject to
subsection (l), a minor shall not do any of the following:
      (1)   Purchase or attempt to purchase a vapor product or alternative
nicotine product.
      (2)   Possess or attempt to possess a vapor product or alternative
nicotine product.
      (3)   Use a vapor product or alternative nicotine product in a public
place.
      (4)   Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of age that is
false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the purpose
of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or attempting to possess a
vapor product or alternative nicotine product.
   (j)   An individual who violates subsection (i) is responsible for a civil
infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as follows:
      (1)   For the first violation, the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $50.00. The court may order the
individual to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment
program, if available. In addition, the court may order the individual to
perform not more than 16 hours of community service.
      (2)   For a second violation, the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $50.00. The court may order the
individual to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment
program, if available. In addition, the court may order the individual to
perform not more than 32 hours of community service.
      (3)   If a violation of subsection (j)(1) occurs after two or more prior
judgments, the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than $50.00 for each violation. Pursuant to a probation order, the
court may also require the individual to participate in a health promotion and
risk reduction assessment program, if available. In addition, the court may
order the individual to perform not more than 48 hours of community service.
   (k)   An individual who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and
risk reduction assessment program under subsection (g) or (i) is responsible
for the costs of participating in the program.
   (l)   Subsections (g) and (i) do not apply to a minor participating in any
of the following:
      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a
tobacco product, a vapor product, or alternative nicotine product under the
direction of the minor's employer and with the prior approval of the local
prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement
action.
      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a
tobacco product, a vapor product, or alternative nicotine product under the
direction of the state or local police agency as part of an enforcement action,
unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of the tobacco
product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine product by the minor was not
under the direction of the state police or the local police agency and was not
part of the undercover operation.
      (3)   Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to purchase tobacco
products for the purpose of satisfying federal substance abuse block grant
youth tobacco access requirements, if the compliance checks are conducted under
the direction of a substance abuse disorder coordinating agency and with the
prior approval of the state or a local police agency.
   (m)   Subsections (g) and (i) do not apply to the handling or transportation
of a tobacco product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine product by a minor
under the terms of the minor's employment.
   (n)   This section does not prohibit an individual from being charged with,
convicted of, or sentenced for any other violation of law that arises out of
the violation of subsection (g) and (i).
   (o)   Definitions. the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in
this section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
      (1)   “Alternative nicotine product” means a noncombustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine
product does not include a tobacco product, a vapor product, food, or a product
regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration
under 21 USC 351 to 360fff-7.
      (2)   “Minor” means an individual who is less than 21 years of age.
      (3)   “Person who sells vapor products or alternative products at retail"
means a person whose ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part,
of the retail sale of vapor products or alternative nicotine products.
      (4)   “Person who sells tobacco products at retail” means a person whose
ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale
of tobacco products subject to state sales tax.
      (5)   “Public place” means a public street, sidewalk, or park or any area
open to the general public in a publicly owned or operated building or public
place of business.
      (6)   “Tobacco product” means a product that contains tobacco and is
intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, a cigarette,
noncigarette smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are defined
in section 2 of the tobacco products tax act, 1993 PA 327, MCL 205.422, and a
cigar.
      (7)   “Use a tobacco product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine
product” means to smoke, chew, such, inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco
product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine product.
      (8)   “Vapor product” means a noncombustible product that employs a
heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic,
chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce vapor from nicotine or any other substance, and the use or inhalation
of which simulates smoking. Vapor product includes an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or
device and a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine or other substance
in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include a product
regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration
under 21 USC 351 to 360fff-7. (Ord. No. 81-59, § 4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 19-1636,
1-29-19; Ord. No.19-1662, 9-24-19; Ord. No. 19-1669, 1-14- 20; Ord. No. 22-
1774, 10-25-22)
State law reference—MCL 722.641
Sec. 12-329. - Display of license.
   Every person procuring a license under this article shall obtain from the
city clerk a copy of this article and post it in a conspicuous place in his
place of business.
(Ord. No. 81-59, § 5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-330—12-350. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - USED AUTOMOBILE DEALERS
Sec. 12-351. - License required.
   No person shall engage in the business of keeping a secondhand electric or
motor-driven vehicle or used car store, place or lot within the city for buying
or selling secondhand electric or motor-driven vehicles, used cars or
accessories without a license from the city.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-352. - Issuance of license.
   The city clerk is authorized to issue a license to any person of good
character to engage in the business of keeping a secondhand automobile or used
car store, place or lot for the buying, taking in exchange or selling of
secondhand automobiles or used cars, upon payment into the city treasury the
sum that is as listed in Section
12-6 of this chapter. No license shall be issued unless the application is
accompanied by a certificate issued by the police department recommending the
issuance of such license and, in addition thereto, a certificate from the
department of building and safety stating that the location of the business
will not violate any of the terms of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-353. - Expiration of license.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one
year from the date of application. The applicant shall pay an annual renewal
fee in the same amount as the original application, as above provided.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-354. - Nontransferable.
   Licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable. Where the
licensee is a corporation, the transfer of the controlling interest in the
corporation shall be deemed a transfer of the business which will require the
issuing of a new license therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-355. - Licensed premises restricted.
   No person licensed under this article shall, by virtue of one license, keep
within the city more than one house, shop or place for the buying, receiving
and taking in exchange or selling secondhand automobiles or used cars and parts
and ac-cessories thereto of any description in any place other than his place
of business.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-356. - Record of purchases.
   Every person licensed under this article shall, at the place of business
named in such license, keep a book in which shall be written in ink at the time
of the purchase or sale of any secondhand or used automobile, or parts or
accessories, a description thereof, the name, age, address and personal
description of the person from whom such purchase was made or to whom such sale
is made; as well as the day and hour of such purchase or sale. Such book at all
times shall be open to the inspection of any authorized member of the police
department. No entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated, altered or
defaced.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-357. - Report to police.
   Every licensed dealer shall make out a report every day before 10:00 a.m. of
sales made and the cars received for sale or purchase on a blank form to be
furnished by the police department in accordance with the provisions of this
article; such report to give full details in accordance with this article, of
all transactions of the day previous and up to the time of making such report,
and such report shall be filed with the chief of police before 10:00 a.m. of
the next following business day.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-358. - Display of article.
   Every dealer licensed under this article shall post in a conspicuous place
in his place of business a copy of this article relating to the dealer's
license under the provision of this article, such copies to be furnished by the
police department.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-359. - Revocation.
   Any license issued under this division may be revoked by the mayor for cause
if the licensee shall violate this article or any other city ordinance or state
or federal laws, or if the zoning board of appeals shall fail to renew any
temporary certificate of compliance or occupancy previously granted to the
licensee.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-360. - Sunday sales prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying,
selling or exchanging new, used or secondhand motor vehicles, or offering to
buy, sell or exchange or participate in the negotiation thereof, or attempt to
buy, sell or exchange any motor vehicle or interest therein or of any written
instrument pertaining thereto in the city on the first day of the week,
commonly called Sunday; provided, however, that the provisions of this article
shall not be applicable to any person who conscientiously believes that the
seventh day of the week from sunset Friday to sunset Saturday should be
observed as the Sabbath and actually refrains from conducting or engaging in
the business of buying or selling or performing other secular business on that
day.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-361. - Barrier to be erected.
   Before a license will be issued covering any one house, shop or place which
will be used by a licensee under this article, the licensee shall construct or
cause to be constructed a barrier consisting of a solid masonry wall or curb,
or a steel or timber guardrail, not over 18 inches above the grade, as
established by the city, but of sufficient height to prevent motor vehicles
from being driven over them. Such barrier shall be maintained along the side or
sides of the parking area abutting one or more buildings owned by others, along
any abutting partition fence and along any part of the parking area which abuts
a public street or highway; provided, however, no such barrier shall be
required to be installed adjacent to a place where the curb has been cut and a
suitable concrete or other hard-surface approach to such area has been
installed.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 6-a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-362. - Motor vehicle parts recycling license.
   Any licensee under the provisions of this article who deals primarily in the
sale of motor vehicle parts obtained by dismantling distressed motor vehicles
on the licensed premises shall, in addition to the used motor vehicle license,
also hold a motor vehicle parts recycling license. A motor vehicle parts
recycling license is distinguished and differs from a junk dealer's license in
that the former contemplates and shall permit the storage of distressed motor
vehicles on a temporary basis only, during which time the vehicle is completely
restored or dismantled by the licensee with all components therefrom suitable
for use on a registered motor vehicle stored on the premises in an orderly
fashion for resale to the general public. All nonusable parts or residue of the
distressed motor vehicle shall be stored on the premises on a temporary basis
only and shall be sold and removed from the premises as soon as practical.
Application and issuance of a motor vehicle parts recycling license shall be
governed by section
12-327, except that an additional surety bond shall not be required, and the
fee to be paid in connection with the issuance of a motor vehicle parts
recycling license in a fixed place in the city shall be the sum as listed in
Section
12-6 of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-75, § 6-b, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22- 1724, 2-8-22)
Secs. 12-363—12-385. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - SECONDHAND JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-551, adopted Jan. 5, 1993, has been treated as
superseding the provisions of former art. XI, §§ 12-386—12-393, which pertained
to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 81-16, §§ 1—8, adopted
Feb. 17, 1981. Sections 1—9 of said Ord. No. 92-551 added a new art. XI, §§
12-386—
12-394, to read as herein set out.
State Law reference— Precious metal and gem dealer act, MCL 445.481 et seq.,
MSA 19.720(1) et seq.; secondhand watches, MCL 445.551 et seq., MSA 19.734 et
seq.
Sec. 12-386. - Definition.
   The term "secondhand dealer" as used in this article shall mean any person,
corporation or member or members of a co-partnership or firm whose principal
business is that of purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging and receiving
secondhand personal property of any kind or description.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 1, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-387. - License required.
   No person, corporation or firm shall engage in the business of buying or
selling any secondhand goods, secondhand jewelry, used silverware, or other
secondhand manufactured article composed wholly or in part of gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metal, nor shall any person engage in the business
of buying or selling gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal in the city
without having first procured a license from the city clerk for such purpose.
The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 2, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-388. - Separate license required for each place of business.
   No licensee under this article shall, by virtue of one license, maintain or
conduct more than one location for buying or selling the articles described in
12-387. A license shall be required where the activities or dealings described
in section
12-387 are carried on as an incident to an ordinary jewelry business or other
business.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 3, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-389. - Identification of seller; record to be kept by licensee.
   Every licensee under this article shall, at the time of each transaction of
any article described in section
12-387, require the buyer or seller of such article to produce a valid state
driver's license or equivalent photographic identification from which the
licensee shall record the name, driver's license number, age, address and
personal description of the customer. The licensee shall record this
information together with the signature of the customer, a detailed description
of the article purchased, the amount paid for each such article and the date
and hour of the transaction in a book which shall at all times be open to
inspection by any member of the police department. Such book shall be
substantially bound and of a size not less than 8½ by 11 inches in breadth and
in length. All entries in such book shall be in ink, legibly written and in the
English language. No entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated, altered
or defaced. Each entry shall be numbered consecutive commencing with the number
one and shall be initialed by the licensee. The record of transaction forms of
a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the general public.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 4, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-390. - Fingerprints of seller; to whom copies sent; nature of property
furnished to chief of police.
   At time same time any secondhand dealer shall acquire or purchase any
article of personal property, or other valuable thing, except new articles
purchased at wholesale from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers
for retail sales to customers, the dealer shall take in duplicate the legible
imprint of the right thumb of the person from whom such property was received,
or if that not be possible, of the left thumb or some other finger of such
person. Such fingerprint shall be taken under such rules and regulations
prescribed by the commissioner of the state police. One copy shall be forwarded
within 48 hours, together with a statement of the nature of the property
received, to the chief of police. The second copy shall be forwarded within 48
hours, together with a statement of the nature of the property received, to the
commission of the state police in East Lansing. This section shall not apply to
motor vehicles, old rags, waste paper, books, magazines, tapestries and antique
household furniture.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 5, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-391. - Daily report to police.
   Every licensee under this article shall prepare, in quadruplicate, every
business day before 12:00 noon, on a form to be provided by the Dearborn
Police, a legible and correct copy of the record required by the preceding
section containing the particulars of all purchases and sales the preceding
day, and shall forward this information within 48 hours to the chief of police
and to the commissioner of the state police in East Lansing. If the record of
the transaction form indicates that the customer resides outside the city, the
dealer shall also send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police
agency of the city, village or township in which the customer resides, or if
that city, village or township does not have a police agency, to the sheriff's
department of the county in which the customer resides as set forth on the
record of transaction.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 6, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-392. - Tags to be attached to purchased articles.
   Every licensee under this article shall, at the time of making any purchase,
attach a tag to each article purchased with a number written thereon to
correspond with the entry number recorded in the book described in section
12-389.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 7, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-393. - Certain purchases prohibited.
   No dealer shall purchase any article from a person under the age of 18 years
of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to
have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding
five years, whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the
agent of another.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 8, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-394. - Retention period of articles prior to disposal.
   Every licensee under this article shall retain, on the licensed premises,
each purchased article in its original condition for a period of time
immediately following the purchase. Jewelry, silverware and any type of
precious metals shall be retained by the dealer for nine calendar days after it
was received, without any form of alteration other than that required to make
an accurate appraisal of its value. All other secondhand articles shall be
retained for at least 15 days before disposing of them, in an accessible place
in the building where such articles are purchased and received. This section
shall not apply to old rags, waste paper and household goods except radios,
televisions, cameras, stereos, VCR's, record players and electrical appliances.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 9, 1-5-93)
Sec. 12-395. - Unlawful to permit unlicensed buying or selling on premises.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly
permit, on premises owned or operated by such person, firm or corporation, the
buying or selling of articles described in section
12-387 unless the persons so engaged in such activity shall first have procured
a license to do so in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 92-551, § 10, 1-5-93)
Secs. 12-396—12-415. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Sec. 12-416. - Definition.
   For purposes of this article, a transient merchant shall mean any person who
has not paid taxes in the city upon his stock of goods or fixtures, and who
engages in the business of buying or selling any goods, wares or merchandise,
including but not limited to merchandise composed of gold, silver, platinum or
other precious metal, in the city and, for the purpose of carrying on such
business, rents, purchases or occupies premises for exhibition, delivery,
storage or sale of such goods, on a temporary basis. For purposes of this
definition, "temporary" shall mean a period of time less than 90 days in any
one calendar year and shall apply to any merchant who does not maintain a
permanent place of business within the city. No transient merchant shall be
exempted from the provisions of this article by reason of associating himself
temporarily with any local business.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 4-21-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-417. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant to engage in business in the
city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk for such purpose.
The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 2, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-418. - Identification of seller; records.
   Every licensee under this article shall, at the time of purchase of any
article described in section
12-416, require the seller of such article to produce a valid state driver's
license or equivalent photographic identification from which the licensee shall
record the name, driver's license number, age, address and personal description
of the seller. The licensee shall record this information together with the
signature of the seller, a detailed description of the article purchased, the
amount paid for each such article and the date and hour of the purchase in a
book which shall at all times be open to inspection by any member of the police
department. Such book shall be substantially bound and of a size not less than
six inches in length and in breadth. All entries in such book shall be in ink,
legibly written and in the English language. No entry in such book shall be
erased, obliterated, altered or defaced. Each entry shall be numbered
consecutively commencing with the number one and shall be initialed by the
licensee.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 3, 4-21-81)
Sec. 12-419. - Daily report to police.
   Every licensee purchasing merchandise under this article shall prepare,
every business day before 12:00 noon, on a form to be provided by the police
department, a legible and correct copy of the record required by section
12-418 containing the particulars of all purchases the preceding day, and shall
make such record available to any member of the police department.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 4, 4-21-81)
Sec. 12-420. - Identification tags.
   Every licensee under this article shall, at the time of making any purchase,
attach a tag to each article purchased with a number written thereon to
correspond with the entry number recorded in the book described in section
12-418.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 5, 4-21-81)
Sec. 12-421. - Purchases from minors.
   No licensee under this article shall purchase any article from a person
under the age of 18 years of age.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 6, 4-21-81)
Sec. 12-422. - Retention period.
   Every licensee under this article shall retain, on the licensed premises,
each purchased article in its original condition for a period of time not less
than 96 hours, except for precious items as defined in state law which shall be
kept for nine days, immediately following the purchase.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 7, 4-21-81)
Sec. 12-423. - Record at termination of business.
   A licensee under this article who intends to engage in the business of
buying of articles described in section
12-416, in the city, shall be required to deliver to the chief of police or his
designated representative a complete record, as described in section
12-419, no later than 24 hours after such licensee has ceased doing business in
the city. Such licensee shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any purchased
articles until such record has been delivered to the chief or his
representative.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 8, 4-21-81)
Sec. 12-424. - Unlicensed purchases, sales.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the buying or selling of
articles described in section
12-416, unless the persons so engaged in such activity shall first have
procured a license to do so in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-20, § 9, 4-21-81)
Secs. 12-425—12-445. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. - GASOLINE STATIONS
Sec. 12-446. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Full service shall mean the availability of one or more gasoline dispensing
pumps from which an owner, employee or agent of a gasoline service station or
gasoline self service station will dispense gasoline or other motor vehicle
fuel directly into a customer's motor vehicle.
   Gasoline self service station shall mean a gasoline service station which
provides one or more gasoline dispensing pumps which customers are required to
operate themselves in order to fuel such customers' motor vehicles.
   Gasoline service station shall mean any building, structure, lot, premises
or parcel of land where gasoline, lubricating oil or other vehicle fuel are
sold to the public; provided, however, that where any such petroleum products
are sold in factory sealed containers, the seal of which is not broken and the
contents thereof not dispensed on the premises, such products shall not be
regarded as being sold from a gasoline service station and shall not be deemed
to be subject to the regulation of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 1, 6-2-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-447. - License required for stations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any gasoline service station
or self-service gasoline station without first having obtained a license to do
so in accordance with the provisions of this article. The license fee for such
stations shall be listed in section
12-6 under the business heading of "motor supply station," and the license
shall indicate whether the service station is authorized to engage in full
service and/or self-service activities. No additional self-service licenses
shall be issued without the prior approval of the city council. The licensee
shall comply with the applicable building, fire and weights and measures code
provisions.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 2, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-448. - License required for deliveries.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make deliveries by truck of gasoline
or other vehicle fuel governed by the provisions of this article within the
city without first having obtained a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 2, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 82-213, 6-15-82)
Sec. 12-449. - Application, inspection.
   Application for a self-service license shall be made to the city clerk who
shall immediately refer the application to the city council for approval/denial
of the operation of a self-service motor supply station at the location
requested. The city clerk shall also immediately refer the application to the
fire marshal, building and safety department and weights and measures division
to insure compliance with applicable codes. The city clerk shall issue a self-
service license only after approval by the city council and reports from the
administrative departments indicating compliance with applicable codes.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 2, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-450. - Smoking, fires prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light any fires while
operating any gasoline dispensing pump.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 3, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-451. - Unlawful to run engine; pump cover required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the engine of a motor vehicle
to run while such vehicle is being fueled from a gasoline dispensing pump. All
gasoline pumps shall be equipped with a cover on the nozzle designed to reduce
and minimize the escape of gas fumes when pumping gas or other motor fuel.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 4, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-452. - Signs.
   (a)   Every person who maintains a gasoline service station abutting or
adjacent to a street or highway, and advertises any grade of gasoline or other
motor fuel, shall post, or cause to be posted or displayed, maintain and keep
current at the station signs, which are clearly visible from all traffic lanes
in each direction on such street or highway, and each sign shall accurately
indicate thereon the actual price per gallon, including all taxes and minimum
and maximum limits, if any of the grade of gasoline and the method of service
which will be sold at such station to any one purchaser at any one time for use
in a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Whenever any gasoline service station has more than one method of
pricing, such as full service and self-service or full service and mini-
service, or any such combination, by any name, the islands or pumps where each
particular method of pricing is being used shall be identified as such: full
service, self-service, mini-service or any such name.
   (c)   No changes shall be made in the actual price per gallon including all
taxes and minimum and maximum limits, if any, at which each grade of gasoline
or other motor fuel is to be sold, without such change or changes being first
shown on such posted sign. Posted prices shall be identical to pump prices.
   (d)   Each sign posted pursuant to the requirements of this section shall
not be inconsistent with the provisions of the sign ordinance.
   (e)   Each and all letters, words, figures and numerals used on any such
sign shall be uniform in size and clearly visible.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 5, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 82-213, 6-15-82)
Sec. 12-453. - Flammable liquids regulations; MIOSHA; fire blanket.
   (a)   Every gasoline service station and gasoline self-service station shall
comply with all applicable provisions of the Michigan Flammable Liquids
Regulations Promulgated by Authority of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of 1941,
as amended, specifically but not limited to Rule 110 of such regulations, as
well as any applicable standards promulgated under the Michigan Occupational
and Safety Hazards Act.
   (b)   Every gasoline service station and gasoline self-service station shall
be equipped with at least one fire blanket installed at a location or locations
to be designated by the fire chief or his authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 6, 6-2-81)
Sec. 12-454. - Emergency controls.
   Every gasoline self-service station shall install approved emergency
controls at a location no more than 100 feet from a dispenser. The attendant or
supervisor shall remain within arms length of the emergency controls during the
dispensing of a Class I liquid. All dispenser-metered computations shall be
legible from the emergency controls position, or duplicate readings shall be
provided by approved equipment installed at the emergency controls position.
(Ord. No. 81-26, § 6, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 82-213, 6-15-82)
Sec. 12-455. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-1083, adopted June 12, 2006, repealed §
12-455 in its entirety. Former §
12-455 pertained to Air and derived from Ord. No. 81-26, § 7, adopted June 2,
1981.
Secs. 12-456—12-475. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Crimes relating to public exhibitions and entertainments,
MCL 750.463 et seq., MSA 28.718 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 12-476. - License required.
   No person shall exhibit or maintain in the city any circus, menagerie, play,
game or theatrical exhibit; or give any concert, vocal or instrumental,
lecture, sermon, speech or debate; or exhibit any natural or artificial
curiosity or give a show of any kind for which pay is demanded, received or
collected until a license therefor has been obtained from the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-477. - Exceptions.
   This article shall not extend to any exhibition by the pupils of any private
or public school; to any musical entertainment given by the members and for the
benefit of any resident musical society; to any exhibition of painting,
engraving, sculpture or fine art, executed by a citizen of the city; to any
concert or musical entertainment, fair, festival or lecture for the benefit of
any church or benevolent object; to any game of cricket, lacrosse, football; to
any exhibit of archery; or to any race, contest of military exhibition given or
managed by any resident association, club or company.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-478. - Application for licenses.
   Applications for licenses shall be filed with the city clerk for
presentation to the council. Applications shall set forth the full name of the
applicant and of every person interested in the issue of the license applied
for, together with the business and residence addresses of such persons. If the
applicant shall be a corporation, this provision shall apply to the officers
and directors of such corporation only. Such application shall also set forth
the place or places where it is proposed to establish, maintain or operate the
amusement for which a license is asked and the number of amusements to be so
established, maintained or operated.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-479. - Council consideration.
   The city clerk shall keep a record of all applications and the action taken
thereon by the council in a book to be provided for the purpose by the council,
and shall present all applications at the next meeting of the council after
they shall have been filed with him. If the council, upon examination of the
matter, shall deem the issuing of a license consistent with the safety and good
government of the city and the welfare of its inhabitants, the clerk may be
directed to issue the license upon the payment of the fee or fees provided for
in section
12-480.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-480. - License fee.
   Before any license shall be issued under the terms of this article, the
applicant or applicants shall pay to the city treasurer a license fee for
establishing, maintaining or operating such exhibitions or entertainments, as
prescribed in section
12-6 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-481. - Disorderly conduct.
   No person or company receiving a license under this article shall permit any
disorderly conduct or the use of any immoral, profane, or indecent language, or
permit such place of amusement or exhibition to become and be a place of resort
of thieves, prostitutes or other disorderly persons.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-482. - Street carnivals restricted.
   No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted in the city any so-called
"street carnival," unless the same is composed of local talent and operated by
local fraternities, groups or clubs. In no event shall any street carnival be
permitted to operate within the limits of the city unless a petition requesting
the same is first filed with the city clerk, signed by at least 51 percent of
the people living within a radius of 500 feet of the location proposed to be
used for such street carnival. The word "people" in this article is defined to
mean any person of the age of 21 years and upwards.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-483. - Permit required.
   No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted in the city any
entertainment or amusement whether the same is sponsored, operated by or
conducted under the auspices of local fraternities, religious groups, societies
or clubs or composed of local talent, unless application is made to and a
permit therefor obtained from the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 9.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-484. - Application for permit.
   Before any permit shall be issued by the council for the conduct of any
entertainment or amusement, an application shall be made which shall fully and
completely give the following information, which shall be sworn to by an
authorized person as true and correct in every detail:
      (1)   A sketch shall be prepared and submitted showing the proposed
premises to be occupied; the lay-out of the carnival or amusements with respect
to location of amusements, concessions and devices; and space or spaces to be
occupied by the public and operators of such amusements and devices; all fire
extinguisher locations, type and size of fire escapes and exits and entrances,
all of which shall be approved by the chief of fire department before such
entertainment is opened for public admission. Failure to maintain fire exits
and extinguishers in a safe and workable condition at all times will be
sufficient grounds for the chief of the fire department to close such amusement
or entertainment.
      (2)   The name and description of the operation and conduct of the game,
device or amusement in such entertainment or amusement shall be specifically
enumerated in detail, together with the number, type, or variation of such
games, devices or amusements, as hereinbefore defined, and the prizes, gifts,
or rewards, if any, to be distributed.
      (3)   The percentage of profits and division of cost of operating such
carnival, where the same is conducted by persons skilled in the conduct of such
entertainments or amusements, or operating the same for hire or a percentage of
profits thereof, shall be given with the names and addresses of such persons.
      (4)   Each applicant for a permit, at least 30 days prior to the issuance
of such permit, as herein provided for, shall submit a full and complete list
of all towns, cities and villages, together with the names and addresses of any
person under whose auspices such carnival and/or amusement was sponsored and
operated during the period of two years next preceding the date of making such
application.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 9.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-485. - Approval of sanitary facilities.
   Where food and/or beverages of any description are to be dispensed in
conjunction with the operation of such entertainment or amusement, the
approval, in writing, of the department of health shall be obtained as to the
proposed sanitary facilities to be furnished in the dispensing and handling of
all such foods or beverages.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 9.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-486. - Approval of electrical fixtures and wiring.
   Before and at any time during the operation of any enterprise or undertaking
coming under this article, all electrical fixtures and wiring, where
temporarily installed for the particular amusement or entertainment, shall be
inspected and approved by the electrical inspector, and if found improper, the
same shall be remedied forthwith. Failure to so comply shall cause a revocation
of such license.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 9.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-487. - Authority of commission of safety.
   All amusements coming under this article shall be at all times subject to
the inspection and proper control of the commission of safety and shall comply
with any orders issued by the commission of safety intended to protect life and
property from fire hazards.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-488. - Expiration of license.
   All annual licenses granted under this division shall expire on the first
Tuesday in May after the date of their issuance.
(Ord. No. 81-56, § 11, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-489—12-500. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Sec. 12-501. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and welfare as it is necessary to regulate amusement devices, as
the use and placement of such devices in the city is increasing in a manner
which will, absent regulation, have an adverse impact on the city.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 1, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-502. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Amusement device shall mean any machine or contrivance which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or the payment of a price, may
be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether operated by hand,
electricity or any other form of power. It shall include such devices as marble
machines, pinball machines, skill ball machines, mechanical grab machines,
coin-operated bowling alleys, shuffleboard game machines or devices, whether
played with discs, weights, pucks or balls, mechanical guns, coin-operated
motion picture machines, any so-called claw, crane or digger machine,
electronic video devices or any other games, devices, operations or
transactions similar thereto, under whatever name they may be indicted, which,
when operated, do not deliver as a result of the application of an element of
chance, any money or property, or by the operation of which a person may not be
entitled to receive as a result of the application of an element of chance, any
money or property. It shall not include any machine or mechanical device
designed or manufactured primarily for use at a race track in connection with
pari-mutuel betting and shall not include billiard or pool tables.
   Distributor shall mean any person who owns or has control of any amusement
device and who contracts or permits any such amusement device to be installed
or operated in other than his own place of business.
   Exhibitor shall mean any person who operates a business establishment and
displays for public patronage or keeps for operation therein, either as lessee,
bailee, owner or otherwise, three or more amusement devices.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 2, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 06-1109, 12-4-06)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-503. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, or
to carry on, in the city, any of the business activities of an exhibitor or
distributor without first having obtained a license in conformance with the
regulations set forth in this division. It shall be further unlawful for any
exhibitor to operate, or cause to be operated, any amusement device without
obtaining a license for each such device.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 3, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-504. - Application for license.
   Each person desiring to exhibit or distribute any amusement device shall
first make application to the city clerk for a license therefor. Such
applications shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Generally: 
         a.   The name and address of the applicant, if an individual,
including the street and number, together with the date and place of birth; if
a copartnership, the names and addresses including street and number, of such
copartners and their respective dates and places of birth; if a corporation or
voluntary association, the names and addresses, including street and number, of
the several officers and resident agent thereof, and their respective dates and
places of birth.
         b.   Kind of license being applied for, whether as exhibitor or
distributor, or for one or more amusement devices.
         c.   List any prior convictions for violations of any ordinances or
statutes of any kind by the applicant, if an individual, by any of the
copartners of a copartnership, or by the officers, if a corporation, setting
forth the name of the court, the charge, and the date of conviction, if any.
         d.   The fingerprints of the applicant and if the applicant is a
copartnership, corporation or association, the application shall be accompanied
by the fingerprints of the officers of such copartnership, corporation or
association.
         e.   Application shall be sworn to by the person signing it.
         f.   If the person signing the application does so in a representative
capacity, indicate what that capacity is.
      (2)   Distributor. In addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of
this section, a person applying for a distributor license shall provide the
address, including street and number, from which the applicant's business is
conducted, and type of business, whether rentals or sales of amusement devices,
or both.
      (3)   Exhibitor. In addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of
this section, a person applying for an exhibitor's license shall provide:
         a.   Each location where an amusement device is to be displayed or
operated and the type of business conducted at such location.
         b.   The total number of amusement devices.
         c.   A statement whether the devices are owned by applicant, rented or
being purchased on contract. If rented, the name of the owner shall be shown,
or if being purchased on contract or owned, the name and address of seller.
         d.   A floor plan drawing of the location showing all exits and the
proposed location of each amusement device.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 4(a—c), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-505. - Minimum age of applicant.
   No license shall be issued under this division to any applicant unless the
applicant is 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 4(d), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-506. - Approval of application.
   Every application for license required by this division shall be referred by
the city clerk to the departments hereinafter set forth. No license shall be
issued by the city clerk until each such department investigation and approval
has been received.
      (1)   Police department. The police department shall cause an
investigation to be made as to the character of the applicant, the officers of
the club, society or corporation, the persons who are to have general
management of the business and of the type of amusement devices to be used. The
applicant shall be rejected if the police department shall find any of the
persons named in the applications not of good moral character, as defined in
section
12-4 of this chapter; that any of such persons have previously been connected
with any amusement device operation where the license has been revoked; where
any of the provisions of this division or any other city ordinance with
reference to amusement devices have been violated, or if the premises in which
the amusement devices are to be operated do not conform in every way with the
regulations, ordinances and rules applicable thereto. No application shall be
approved until the types of amusement devices to be used are approved by the
police department.
      (2)   Fire department. The fire department shall cause an investigation
to be made of the premises where an amusement device is to be operated to
determine whether or not such premises and any electrical equipment proposed to
be used therein comply with all of the fire codes, ordinances and rules and
regulations of the city, and the application shall be rejected if the fire
department shall find any existing violation or threat of a probable future
violation of any such code, ordinance, rule or regulation.
      (3)   Building and safety department. The building and safety department
shall cause an investigation to be made of the premises where an amusement
device is to be operated to determine whether or not the building involved
meets all of the requirements of the building code and other applicable city
ordinances, whether or not the proposed use is a permissible one under the
provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, whether or not the off-street
parking requirements of the zoning ordinance and other applicable city
ordinances are met, and the application shall be rejected if the building
department shall find that the proposed use violates any of the provisions of
the building code, the zoning ordinance or any other applicable city ordinance.
      (4)   Treasurer. A certificate indicating that all personal property
taxes levied and assessed against the applicant for licenses have been paid in
full.
      (5)   In addition to the requirements of subsections (1) through (4) of
this section, the city clerk shall refer any application for an amusement
device to the city council. Such referral shall take place only after receipt
of all reports pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) of this section. In
granting or denying the application, the council shall consider the following:
         a.   Will the proposed use alter the surrounding business area or its
environment?
         b.   Will the proposed use adversely affect the quiet enjoyment of the
property in the immediate area?
         c.   Will the proposed use adversely affect traffic conditions so as
to create a nuisance?
         d.   Will the proposed use create a safety hazard for individuals in
the surrounding area?
         e.   Will the proposed use be in violation of any city ordinance?
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 5, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 82-234, 6-15-82)
Sec. 12-507. - License fees.
   The annual license fee for an exhibitor or distributor shall be as
prescribed by section
12-6, as amended. In addition there shall be an annual fee for each amusement
device operated or caused to be operated by any exhibitor, as prescribed by
section
12-6, as amended. No license shall be issued until the proper fee has been paid
to the city.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 6, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-508. - Display.
   Every license granted under this division shall be displayed at all times by
the licensee in a conspicuous place in the premises. Every device required to
be licensed under this division shall contain thereon legible identifying data
showing the name and address of the distributor if the device is not owned by
the exhibitor.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 7, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-509. - Nontransferable.
   Any license issued under this division shall not be transferable.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 7, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-510. - Expiration of license.
   All licenses granted under the provisions of this division shall expire on
December 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 7, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-511. - Enforcing officers; inspection.
   The police department, the department of building and safety and/or other
city departments for the purpose of enforcing this division or any other
ordinance relating to the health, safety and welfare of the public shall have
the right to enter the place of business of any licensee under this division at
any reasonable hour for the purpose of making an inspection and survey of the
premises and the equipment therein. It shall be unlawful for any person to
resist or attempt to prevent any of the above named officers or employees from
carrying out the purposes herein set forth.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 8, 3-16-82; Ord. No. 06-1109, 12-4-06)
Sec. 12-512. - Automatic revocation of license.
   If any licensee, owner or agent, servant or employee thereof, is convicted
of a violation of this division, the license of the amusement device, exhibitor
or distributor on or about which the violation occurred shall be automatically
revoked forthwith. Any license so revoked shall not be reissued to the same
person for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 9, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-513. - Gambling devices.
   Nothing in this division shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(a), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-514. - Giving of prizes, awards, etc.; gambling prohibited.
   No person by himself, another or otherwise, shall give any prize, award,
merchandise, gift or anything of value to any player or any operator of any
such amusement device or to any contestant for any score made on such device,
or by any reason of the playing of such amusement device; provided that
trophies and scholarships may be awarded to players or teams for league or
tournament play. No form of gambling shall be permitted in connection with the
operation of any amusement device.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(b), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-515. - Hours of operation.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated in the city any amusement
device between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the official time of the
city.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(c), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-516. - Use of devices by minors.
   No person shall permit any amusement device regulated by this division to be
played, in any commercial establishment, by any minor under the age of 16
years, except when such minor shall be accompanied by his parent or legal
guardian.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(c), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-517. - Conduct on premises.
   (a)   No person, licensee, owner or operator of any amusement device or any
servant, agent or employee of a licensee or owner of an amusement device shall
permit upon the premises housing an amusement device:
      (1)   Any indecent, illegal or profane language, or indecent, illegal or
disorderly conduct, or to become a resort for disorderly persons of any type.
      (2)   Gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling
paraphernalia on the premises.
      (3)   Intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises.
      (4)   The possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises, nor
shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way with any place where
alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed or given away. This prohibition
shall not apply while a state liquor control commission license is in effect at
the licensed premises.
      (5)   The possession or use of any drug, narcotic or controlled
substance, including marijuana on the premises.
      (6)   Noise or music to emanate from the licensed premises which is
disturbing to the surrounding areas.
      (7)   Acceptance or receipt of anything of value other than cash as
consideration for the use or operation of any amusement device on the licensed
premises.
   (b)   Any licensee, owner or servant, agent or employee thereof shall
presumptively be deemed to have permitted the conduct enumerated above if it
occurs on the premises housing an amusement device.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(d), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-518. - Supervision of use of devices.
   No amusement device shall be operated, caused to be operated or played
unless a person 21 years of age or older is present and in control of the
premises.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(e), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-519. - Security required.
   (a)   In addition to the regulations set forth in sections
12-513 through
12-518, a location consisting of ten or more, but less than 20 amusement
devices shall not be open for business between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 2:00
a.m. on weekdays and all hours of operation of Saturday, Sunday and holidays
without an adult supervisor, 21 years of age or older, present on the premises.
This supervision is in addition to the one required by section
12-518.
   (b)   If the location consists of 20 or more amusement devices, then a
licensed security guard shall be employed, and on the premises, in addition to
the two adult supervisors, during the hours mentioned in subsection (a) of this
section. An additional licensed security guard and adult supervisor shall be
required for each additional increment of 15 amusement devices over 20.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 10(f), 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-520. - Confiscation of unlawful devices.
   Any machine, apparatus, contrivance or device, which shall have been made
use of in violation of the terms of this division, may be seized and destroyed
in compliance with the terms and provisions of the statutes of the state
relating to gambling devices; provided, however, the owner may reclaim such
device upon payment of any fees owing plus $50.00 for cost of confiscation.
However, property taken for violation of gambling laws may not be returned to
the owner except by court order.
(Ord. No. 82-212, § 11, 3-16-82)
Sec. 12-521. - Reserved.
Editor's note— The provisions of §
12-521, which pertained to location restrictions, has been deleted as being
superseded by the provisions of the zoning ordinance, which is on file in the
offices of the city.
Secs. 12-522—12-530. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - BOWLING ALLEYS, POOL HALLS
Sec. 12-531. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Billiard room shall mean a room or rooms wherein the several games are
played on a table known as a billiard or pool table, surrounded by an elastic
ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, with balls which are driven by a cue
and which shall include all forms of the game known as carom billiards, pocket
billiards, three cushion billiards and English billiards, as well as all other
games played on a billiard table, and shall include the games known as 15-ball
pool, eight-ball pool, bottle pool, pea-pool and all other games played on a
so-called pool table and all games played on a so-called pigeon-hole table.
   Room containing bowling alleys shall mean a place or room where any of the
several games are played on a wooden surface or alley where balls are thrown or
rolled by hand along a lane towards wooden pins, and shall include all forms of
the game known as ten pins, nine pins, duck pins or any other game played with
wooden pins and balls rolled in lanes.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 2, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-532. - Enforcement.
   (a)   The health officer or his authorized representative shall enforce the
provisions of this division which relate to the public health, and the police
department shall enforce all other provisions of this division, except those
expressly assigned to some other department to enforce. The department of
public works shall enforce all the ordinances of the city involving such
licensed premises, which it is authorized to enforce.
   (b)   All officers or employees of the city who are charged with the
enforcement of this division shall at all reasonable times have access to every
part of the premises licensed under this division.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-533. - License required.
   No person shall open or cause to be opened, or conduct, maintain, establish
or operate any commercial billiard room, or room containing bowling alleys
within the city, without first having obtained a license therefor; provided,
however, that this division shall not apply to or control private residences,
schools, churches, fraternal societies or municipal institutions.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-534. - Application for license.
   (a)   Each person desiring to open or maintain a commercial billiard room or
room containing bowling alleys shall first make application for a license to
carry on such activity. Such application shall be filed with the city clerk,
and, upon the filing thereof the applicant shall pay an annual license fee, as
prescribed in section
12-6. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be referred to the police
department, department of health, and the department of building and safety for
investigation and report.
   (b)   The application for the license shall contain the full name and
residence address of the applicant, if he is a single owner; or if a
copartnership, the names and residence addresses of all of the copartners; or
if a society, club, firm, association or corporation, the full names and
residence addresses of all of the principal officers of such applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the application shall further show the state in
which such corporation was organized. If the applicant is a society, club,
firm, or copartnership, association or corporation, the application shall
further designate the name and residence address of its manager or the person
who will be in charge of such billiard room or room containing bowling alleys.
   (c)   Before the police department will issue a license for a commercial
billiard room, the applicant, if an individual owner; all of the copartners, if
a copartnership; or all of the principal officers, including the manager, if
the applicant is a society, club, firm, association, copartnership or
corporation, shall submit and file their individual fingerprints with the
police department.
   (d)   The application shall further set forth:
      (1)   The street address where such commercial billiard room or room
containing bowling alleys is to be conducted, indicating whether such room is
in the basement, the ground floor, or the number of the floor above the ground
level, the number of rooms to be used, and the approximate floor area of such
room or rooms.
      (2)   The age of the applicant, if an individual, and the respective ages
of the copartners, if a copartnership, or of the officers and manager, if a
society, club, firm, association or corporation.
      (3)   Whether the applicant, owners or officers, including the manager,
are citizens of the United States or have declared their intention to become
citizens.
      (4)   Whether the applicant, if an individual, or if a copartnership, the
copartners, or if a society, club, firm, association or corporation, the
principal officers, including the manager, has ever been engaged in operating a
billiard room or room containing bowling alleys; and if so, when, where and how
long in each place within the last five years prior to filing such application;
and whether or not the applicant or any of its officers or manager has ever had
a license to operate a billiard room or room containing bowling alleys
suspended or revoked; and if so, when, where and who had such experience.
      (5)   Whether the applicant, if an individual, or the copartners, if a
copartnership, or any officers of the abovenamed groups, including the manager,
has ever been convicted of violating any ordinance of the city or of any other
city in the United States, or convicted of violating any law of the state or
any other state in the United States, or of any law of the United States of
America; and if so, when, what law and where.
      (6)   The name of the owner of the premises in which such commercial
billiard room or room containing bowling alleys is located, and the residence
address of such owner.
      (7)   The application shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual,
or by all of the copartners, if a copartnership, or by all of the officers, if
the applicant is a society, club, firm, association or corporation, together
with the signatures of the manager thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-535. - Investigation of applicant.
   (a)   The city clerk, upon receipt of the application and petition for a
license required by this division, shall refer them to the police department,
department of building and safety, the department of health, the fire
department, and the treasurer for investigation of the facts therein set forth.
If any of such departments upon investigation find that any of the facts
therein set forth have been misrepresented, falsified or only partially set
forth where a more detailed statement should have been made in order to give a
full and complete answer to the questions in such application, the application
shall be denied forthwith.
   (b)   The department of health shall also make an investigation of the
premises proposed to be licensed as to the cleanliness and suitability thereof
for the use requested by the applicant, and, if such premises comply with all
of the provisions of the several ordinances of the city, the laws of the state
and of the United States, relative to public health and are otherwise suitable,
the department of health shall approve such application for the issuance of a
license.
   (c)   The department of building and safety in its investigation shall
determine if all of the city ordinances enforced by its department are being
complied with before it shall approve such application.
   (d)   If such departments shall find all of the facts in such application to
be correct and the questions completely answered, and shall find that the
applicant or the officers and manager of such applicant are persons of good
moral character and are complying with all of the laws and ordinances of the
city, the state and of the United States, such departments shall approve the
issuing of such license and shall forward such approval to the city clerk, who
will issue such license; provided, however, that no license or renewal thereof
shall be issued to any person under this division unless and until a
certificate has been obtained from the city treasurer to the effect that all
personal property taxes levied and assessed against such applicant for license
have been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-536. - Location restricted.
   No license to operate a commercial billiard room shall be issued for a
location within 500 feet of any church or school, and no license to operate a
commercial bowling alley shall be issued for a location within 300 feet of a
church or school.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-537. - Periodic inspection.
   It shall be the duty of the police department, the department of building
and safety and the department of health, together with their authorized
officers and employees, to visit any and all commercial billiard rooms and
rooms containing bowling alleys as frequently as may be necessary for the
purpose of investigating such premises to determine that all of the provisions
of city ordinances, the state and national laws are complied with.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-538. - Nontransferable.
   Each license issued under this division shall not be transferable.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-539. - Display.
   Every license issued under this division shall be conspicuously displayed at
all times by the licensee inside and near the front entrance of such premises.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-540. - Expiration.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall expire one
year from application unless sooner terminated by operation of law.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-541. - Renewal.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed upon
filing the application and paying the license fee as specified in section
12-6 for the original license.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-542. - Hours of operation.
   (a)   No licensee shall operate or cause to be operated in the city any
commercial billiard room or any room where billiard tables are kept, between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except on the day preceding a legal
holiday when the prohibited hours shall be between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. No
licensee shall operate or cause to be operated in the city any room containing
bowling alleys between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. No licensee shall
harbor or permit any person, except regular employees who are performing the
necessary work within the premises, to be or remain in any such licensed room
or place any day of the week or times during which such licensed premises are
prohibited from operation.
   (b)   The foregoing hours shall apply to the operations licensed under this
division, even though a restaurant, licensed beverage place, cafe or other
place of business might be operating in conjunction with such licensed billiard
room or room containing bowling alleys or might be located in the same building
with such licensed billiard room or room containing bowling alleys.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-543. - Presence of minors.
   No person shall be permitted to play billiards in any commercial billiard
parlor, or to be or remain in such parlor for any purpose whatsoever, if he is
under the age of 14 years, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. It shall
be unlawful for any person to misrepresent himself or herself to have reached
the age of 14 years in order to obtain admittance to such commercial billiard
parlor. It is hereby made the duty of all proprietors, owners, managers,
licensees or anyone connected with the licensed business of operating or
maintaining any commercial billiard parlor to ascertain the correct age of any
person subject to regulation by this section. A violation by a licensee of this
requirement shall be the basis for a suspension and revocation of his license.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-544. - Certain games prohibited.
   No dice shall be thrown, no pea ball or shake ball shall be used, and no
cards, raffles or other games of chance or other form of gambling shall be
permitted in any licensed billiard room or room containing bowling alleys in
the city, or in any room in which billiard tables are located, or at any cigar
stand or any other place in which any business licensed under this division is
carried on, whether or not such room is divided by a partition.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-545. - Prizes, rewards restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for any checks to be given which can be redeemed for
merchandise or cash; provided, however, such prohibition shall not be construed
to prevent the giving of cash or merchandise as prizes to billiard players or
to bowlers in tournament, league or any other competitive play.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-546. - Obstruction, access.
   (a)   No screens or other obstructions shall be placed in the doors or
windows of any licensed billiard room or room containing bowling alleys, but
all such doors and windows must at all times be kept free and clear of screens
or other obstructions so as to permit an unobstructed view into such billiard
room or bowling alley from the street.
   (b)   Both front and rear doors of all rooms where the operations licensed
under this division are carried on shall be kept unlocked at all times while
such licensed operations are being carried on.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-547. - Certain persons prohibited.
   After a warning given by any member of the police department, it shall be
unlawful for a licensee under this division to allow or permit any known or
reputed gambler, racketeer, narcotic addict, hoodlum, police character or
habitual drunkard to frequent or loiter in the licensed premises.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-548. - Use of rooms restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for the licensee to use or occupy any other room or
space in any building for the purpose of carrying on the commercial billiard or
bowling alley business, except that room or space specified in the application
for license.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-549. - Suspension and revocation.
   (a)   The license authorized to be issued under this division may be
suspended by the chief of police, the director of the department of public
works, or by the health officer for falsifying as to, or misrepresenting, any
statements made in the application therefor, or for concealing any facts by
failing to answer fully any questions in the application, or for violating any
of the provisions of this division or any other ordinances of the city or any
laws of the state or of the United States of America. If such license is
suspended, the license and evidence thereof shall be surrendered by the
licensee and shall be held by the suspending officer until the final
disposition is made of such suspension.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the licensee or anyone working in his behalf
to operate or conduct any business governed by this division in the billiard
room or room containing bowling alleys while such suspension continues to
exist.
   (c)   In connection with the notice of suspension, a statement in writing
shall be prepared by the suspending officer, setting forth specifically the
charges or grounds for which the license was suspended and the facts on which
such suspension is based, and such statement shall be served on the licensee or
the person in charge of the licensed premises at the same time the notice of
suspension is served.
   (d)   Immediately upon such suspension, the suspending officer shall give a
notice in writing to the licensee or to any person in charge of the licensee's
business at the address designated in the license that a hearing will be held
before the city council at such time and place stated in the notice not less
than three days and not more than ten days from the date of such suspension, at
which time the cause of such suspension shall be investigated by the council to
determine if the basis for the suspension exists. If the council finds that the
cause of suspension is established by the facts, the license shall be revoked
forthwith, but if the cause of suspension is not established by the evidence
submitted, the license shall be reinstated.
   (e)   If a license issued under this division is revoked, such person and
all persons officially connected with such license shall be ineligible to
obtain another billiard room and bowling alley license in the city for a period
of three years from the date of such revocation.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner or part owner,
whose license issued under this division has been suspended or revoked, to
operate or work in a billiard room or bowling alley during the period of
suspension or revocation or when such person is ineligible to obtain a license.
(Ord. No. 81-79, § 10, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-550—12-560. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
Sec. 12-561. - Definition.
   For the purpose of this division, the words "carnival" or "circus" shall
mean a transient outdoor show or exhibition in which or in connection with
which are conducted or permitted games of chance or skill, wherein goods are
given or awarded to persons paying a consideration for a chance or opportunity
to win or secure the same as a prize or award, or where concession stands or
amusement stands are operated or maintained and/or ferris wheels, merry-go-
rounds and other similar mechanical amusement rides are operated and/or live
performances are staged by people or animals.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 2, 4-20-82)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-562. - License required.
   No person shall establish, sponsor, operate or conduct a carnival or circus
within the boundaries of the city without obtaining a license in accord with
the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 1, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-563. - Application.
   The prospective licensee under this division shall submit a written
statement indicating that he desires to operate a carnival or circus within the
city, the proposed location, a brief description of the scope of activities,
the number of days involved in the proposed carnival or circus activities and
the name, address and phone number of the applicant. Such written statement
together with the required license fee, grounds cleanup deposit and proof of
insurance shall constitute the application for a license to establish and
operate a carnival or circus within the city.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 3, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-564. - License fee.
   The license fee for the operation of a carnival or circus within the city
shall be established by section
12-6.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 4, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-565. - Liability insurance.
   The applicant for a license under this division shall be required to provide
proof of having procured a liability insurance policy in an amount not less
than $1,000,000.00 covering the proposed activities and naming the city as
being an insured party under such policy.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 5, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-566. - Grounds cleanup deposit.
   The applicant for a license under this division shall be required to deposit
the sum of $1,000.00 for purposes of insuring the proper cleanup of the area
set aside for purposes of conducting the carnival or circus. No portion of such
deposit shall be returned to the applicant until the director of public works
certifies that the licensee has properly cleaned up and cleared the area in
which the carnival or circus was conducted.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 6, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-567. - Waiver of fee, deposit.
   The city council may waive the license fee and/or the grounds cleanup
deposit required by this division upon a request for such a waiver by the
applicant and after consideration of the following factors:
      (1)   The nonprofit or charitable status of the applicant.
      (2)   The availability of a locally designated representative to insure
property cleanup.
      (3)   Proof of satisfactory performance of cleanup activities by the
applicant in previous years.
      (4)   Whatever is determined to be in the best interests of the city.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 7, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-568. - Issuance; term.
   The license to operate a carnival or circus within the city may only be
issued pursuant to a majority vote of the city council, after a hearing at
which it shall be the burden of the prospective licensee to show that the
operation of the proposed carnival or circus will not unduly disrupt the
surrounding neighborhood in any manner. Any license issued for purposes of
conducting a carnival or circus shall be valid for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 3, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-569. - Awards and prizes.
   No awards, prizes, money or property of any nature shall be delivered
directly or indirectly to any person at a carnival or circus unless in strict
conformity with the requirements of state law.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 8, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-570. - Security guard required.
   A carnival or circus shall not be open for business without a licensed
security guard on the premises.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 9, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-571. - Hours of operation.
   No carnival or circus shall be open for business between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 9, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-572. - Approval of sanitary facilities.
   Where food and/or beverages of any description are to be dispensed in
conjunction with the operation of a carnival or circus, the approval of the
department of health shall be obtained as to the proposed facilities to be
furnished in the dispensing and handling of all such foods or beverages.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 10, 4-20-82)
Sec. 12-573. - Approval of electrical fixtures and wiring.
   Before and at any time during the operation of a carnival or circus, all
electrical fixtures and wiring, where temporarily installed shall be inspected
and approved by the electrical inspector of the department of building and
safety, and if found improper, the same shall be remedied forthwith. Failure to
so comply shall cause a revocation of such license.
(Ord. No. 82-227, § 11, 4-20-82)
Secs. 12-574—12-585. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - DRIVE-IN THEATERS
Sec. 12-586. - Definitions.
   For the purposes of this division, the phrase "drive-in theater" shall mean
an open-air theater operated in an established location with or without cover
or roof, displaying or showing moving pictures or giving theatrical
performances for the general public who view the screen or stage while seated
in automobiles or other vehicles. It shall not mean a moving picture theater
established in an enclosed building where seats are provided for the patrons
thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 11-1331, 6-20-11)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-587. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a drive-in theater in the
city without first having obtained a license therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-588. - Application.
   Application for a license required by this division shall be made to the
clerk and shall be made in the name of the person owning or having a part
interest in the drive-in theater to be licensed. It shall also show the
residence addresses of all such owners. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall state the names and residence addresses of the officers and
resident agent of the corporation. Each application shall set forth the
location where the applicant proposes to operate a drive-in theater or where
such theater is being operated. It shall also state the name and residence
address of the manager or person in charge of such theater and shall give the
number of cars which such proposed theater is designed to accommodate.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-589. - Investigation.
   (a)   The application for a license required by this division to operate a
drive-in theater shall be referred to the police department, fire department,
department of building and safety, and department of health of the city for an
investigation and report.
   (b)   The police department shall investigate the reputation of the
applicant and its officers, especially with reference to their record of
possible law and ordinance violation. As a condition precedent to the annual
recommending of a license by the police department, the applicant, if an
individual, or if a copartnership, all of the copartners, or if a corporation,
all of the officers and the resident agent thereof, shall file their respective
fingerprints with the police department of the city.
   (c)   The department of building and safety shall investigate as to zoning
compliance and character of the district proposed to be used for the outdoor
theater, and shall see that all ordinances and laws applicable to such business
are enforced which such department is authorized to enforce.
   (d)   The department of health shall investigate as to the sanitary
facilities and health conditions at the location of the proposed or existing
theater and shall enforce all laws and ordinances applicable to such business
which it is authorized to enforce.
   (e)   The fire department shall investigate the need for safety and fire
prevention equipment and the existence of any possible fire hazards, and shall
enforce all laws and ordinances applicable to such business which it is
authorized to enforce.
   (f)   The various departments shall make their reports resulting from such
investigations, together with their recommendations and file the same with the
clerk. No department of the city shall recommend the issuing of a license if
any law or ordinance of the city is being violated by the applicant or if the
applicant is permitting a nuisance to exist on the premises or any conditions
to exist which endanger or are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals
or welfare.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-590. - Action by council.
   The clerk shall submit the application for a license under this division
with the recommendations of the various departments to the city council at its
next regular meeting for the purpose of approving or disapproving the issuance
of such license. If the council approves the issuance of such license, the
clerk shall issue a license. The council shall consider the several
recommendations of the various departments and shall have the power to approve
the issuance of a license contrary to the recommendation of any department.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-591. - Fees.
   Upon the filing of the application for license under this division, the
license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 6, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 11-1331, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-
8-22)
Sec. 12-592. - Display.
   All licenses issued under this division shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the drive-in theater for which it is issued.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-593. - Nontransferable.
   Each license issued under this division shall cover but one drive-in theater
and shall not be transferable.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-594. - Expiration of license.
   All licenses granted under the provisions of this division shall expire at
12:00 midnight following the first Tuesday of April of each year.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-595. - Requirements for operation.
   No drive-in theater shall be maintained or operated in violation of the
following requirements, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or
manager of any drive-in theater or its agents, servants, or employees to
violate or permit violation of any such requirements:
      (1)   Loitering shall not be permitted in or about the entrance to or
exits from any drive-in theater.
      (2)   Quiet and good order shall be maintained upon the premises where
any drive-in theater is operated.
      (3)   No obscene or illegally suggestive advertising, pictures, or
writings shall be permitted on the premises of any drive-in theater, and no
picture or other form of advertising shall be permitted which does not
accurately describe the theatrical performance or moving picture entertainment
being advertised or which misleads or misinforms the public as to the nature of
the picture or entertainment to be exhibited.
      (4)   No drive-in theater licensee shall permit any show, exhibition or
entertainment to remain open to the public between the hours of 3:30 a.m. and
12:00 noon daily.
      (5)   Any children under the age of 14 years admitted to any drive-in
theater shall be accompanied by and in direct personal charge of his parent or
other responsible person.
      (6)   No owner, operator or employee of any drive-in theater shall
maintain, operate or carry on any lottery, game of chance, game of skill, bank
night, screeno, luck-o-grams or any other games of similar nature or engage in
any similar device or plan in connection with the operation of any drive-in
theater.
      (7)   Adequate provision shall be made for sanitary needs of patrons, as
determined by the department of public works, the department of health and all
pertinent laws and ordinances.
      (8)   The parking and driving areas shall be so treated to minimize the
creation of dust either by chemical treatment or hard-surfacing.
      (9)   The operator, owner or manager of a drive-in theater shall furnish
the necessary employees for adequate policing of the drive-in theater so as to
maintain order within the theater and avoid confusion in the movement of cars
in and out thereof.
      (10)   There shall be exits available to public streets or other public
ways from at least two points at all times; provided, however, that the
entrance may be regarded as one of the available exits if one lane of the
entrance is kept clear of parked vehicles at all times. Means of access shall
be made available at all times for fire apparatus, ambulances, or other
emergency vehicles. Drives shall be channelized and limited to not more than
four lanes.
      (11)   Exits and aisles and passageways leading to them shall be kept
adequately lighted at all times when open to the public. Artificial lights
shall be provided whenever natural light is inadequate.
      (12)   Fire extinguishing equipment shall be furnished in such kinds and
amounts and in such locations as may be directed by the city fire marshal and
applicable regulations, ordinances and laws.
      (13)   The electrical system and equipment shall be isolated from the
public by proper elevation or concealed under the ground surface, and all
electrical fuses, contact points, outlets and switches shall be enclosed and
safeguarded by devices and equipment approved by the department of building and
safety works and the fire department. Cables in the ground traversed by the
public shall be placed in trenches or conduits or protected by approved covers.
All electrical installations shall conform to the requirements of the National
Electrical Code and the ordinances of the city.
      (14)   The operator of any drive-in theater shall provide a wall or fence
of adequate height to separate the patrons and cars in attendance in such
theater from surrounding property. The fence shall be of substantial
construction made of wood, metal or masonry and erected solely upon property
used for the drive-in theater purposes in accordance with the requirements
specified by the city engineer and the department of public works, but it shall
not be treated as a partition or line fence. The outside of such fence, as far
as possible, shall be landscaped with suitable plants and shrubbery to preserve
harmony with the appearance of the surrounding property.
      (15)   Individual loud speakers for each car shall be provided. No
central loud speaker or public address system shall be permitted to be used
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except for emergency announcements
of impending danger such as fire, storm or similar dangers.
      (16)   Any sale of soft drinks, confections or other articles of
merchandise shall be governed by the laws and ordinances pertaining to the sale
of such merchandise and shall require the same license or licenses as if the
sales were conducted elsewhere.
      (17)   It shall be unlawful for any patron of such drive-in theater or
for any licensee under this division to permit or allow any such patron to have
in his possession or drink any alcoholic beverage or beverages on the licensed
premises.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-596. - Suspension and revocation of license.
   (a)   No license issued under this division shall be revoked except for
cause upon sworn proof of charges filed with the clerk by any person in the
several departments of the city above designated who are authorized to enforce
the provisions of this division or to approve the issuance of a license,
specifying with reasonable detail any of the following facts which facts are
hereby declared to be grounds for suspending any such license; facts showing
that the applicant for a license made one or more fraudulent statements or
misrepresentations or concealed material information in the application for
license; facts showing that such licensee has violated or permitted a violation
of this division which injuriously affects the public health, the public
safety, public morals, or the public welfare; that this division has been
violated in connection with operations for which the licensee was responsible
and of which the licensee was aware, or, in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, should have been aware that such violation has occurred; that
licensee has been convicted of any crime which was perpetrated on or in
connection with the licensed premises; or that licensee has carried on or
permitted to be carried on any unlawful or illegal act or acts on or in
connection therewith.
   (b)   Upon the filing of such charges, the person making such charges shall
forthwith suspend the license involved and shall give to such licensee a notice
of such suspension together with a copy of the charges specifying the facts on
which the suspension was made. At the same time such copy of the charges is
given to the licensee or his agent in charge of the premises, an order shall be
served upon such licensee or such agent signed by the director of the
department making the charges, directing such licensee to appear before the
council at a date and place therein specified, which date shall not occur more
than three days from the day of such suspension to show cause why the license
suspended should not be permanently revoked. Upon the filing of such charges
with the clerk, the person making such charges is hereby authorized and
empowered in connection with the suspension of a license to remove and take
into his possession the license or certificate or certificates of such licensee
given to the licensee at the time the license was issued, and to hold them
until the council has determined whether such license should be revoked as
herein provided.
   (c)   The council is hereby empowered and authorized to investigate the
charges set forth in the notice of suspension; subpoena, swear and examine
witnesses and receive other competent evidence in connection therewith, offered
either by the person making the charges or by the licensee; or the council, on
its own motion may make such investigation of the facts as it deems necessary.
The licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel. The decision of
the council shall be final and binding as to all questions of fact. If the
council shall find as the result of such investigation that the licensee failed
or refused to show cause, or has not shown sufficient cause why his license
should not be revoked, or if the council finds that such suspension was for a
violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this division, or that
any facts have been shown which constitute grounds for suspending a license
under this division, the council may order such license permanently revoked or
revoked for such period of time as the council deems necessary; but if the
council shall find the charges on which the license was suspended are not
sustained by the proofs, the license shall be reinstated by the council.
   (d)   In the event of any permanent revocation, the former licensee shall be
ineligible to receive any license under this division for a period of two years
thereafter.
   (e)   The council is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations to
carry out the powers and duties imposed upon it by this division as it may deem
necessary.
   (f)   The clerk shall act as clerk to the council in connection with any
proceedings instituted in connection with the suspension or revocation of any
license.
(Ord. No. 81-81, § 9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-597—12-615. - Reserved.
   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 17-1577 deleted Div. 6, §§ 12-600—12-609 in its
entirety. Former Div. 6 pertained to dancers and entertainers and derived from
Ord. No. 07-1126, adopted May 7, 2007, Ord. No. 5039, adopted October 16, 2007,
and Ord. No. 07-1144, adopted Nov. 19, 2007.
ARTICLE XV. - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS[5] 
Footnotes:
--- (5) ---
State Law reference— Food laws, MCL 289.81 et seq., MSA 12.871 et seq.; food
service sanitation, MCL 333.12901 et seq., MSA 14.15(12901) et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 12-616. - Sanitation code adopted.
   The statute known as Michigan's Food Service Sanitation Statute, Act No. 368
of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.12901, et seq.; MSA 14.15
(12901) et seq.), as amended, is hereby adopted as the food service sanitation
code of the city for the regulation of food and food handlers; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the above
and hereby referred to, are adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter.
Secs. 12-617—12-700. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI. - MECHANICAL EXCAVATING AND GRADING
Sec. 12-701. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Business of mechanical excavating and grading shall mean and include any
person who shall furnish for hire the use of mechanical excavating or grading
equipment in the city, whether such person be the owner or the lessee of such
equipment.
   Mechanical excavating and grading equipment shall mean and include steam
shovels, power shovels, drag lines, bulldozers, digging and trenching machines,
scrapers, loaders or any other similar equipment used for excavating, digging
or grading purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-702. - License required, exceptions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or carry on the
business of mechanical excavating and grading in the city without first having
obtained a license therefor.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
any steam shovel, power shovel, dragline, digging or trenching machine,
bulldozer, scraper, loader or other similar equipment used for the digging of
excavations or trenches or for the lifting or lowering of loads incidental to
such enterprise, in the city, unless a license has been first obtained for each
piece of such equipment used or to be used for any of such purposes; provided,
however, that an owner of land, or one having rights of ownership therein or
use thereof, who uses his own mechanical excavating or grading equipment on
such land, shall not be required to obtain a license for such equipment;
provided, however, that if the person engaged in the mechanical excavating and
grading business is the lessee of such equipment and lessor or owner of such
equipment has obtained a license therefor in the city, it shall not be
necessary for such lessee to obtain another license for such leased equipment;
provided further, that if any piece of such equipment is being used by any
person under contract with this city, the City of Detroit, the Board of Wayne
County Road Commissioners, the state highway department or the United States
government, or if any of such equipment is owned or operated by this city, the
City of Detroit, the Board of Wayne County Road Commissioners, the state
highway department or the United States government, and if any of such
equipment is actually working in or upon the public highways or streets or
public places or rights-of-way in the city, any and all of such equipment thus
being used shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article; on
condition, however, that the contractor owning or using such equipment, or the
City of Detroit, the Board of Wayne County Road Commissioners, the state
highway department or the United States government, if using their own
equipment, shall furnish to this city insurance certificates in amounts of
coverage satisfactory to the city engineer; provided further, that in lieu of
such insurance certificates, the City of Detroit, the Board of Wayne County
Road Commissioners, the state highway department or the United States
government may file with the city engineer a written statement signed by an
authorized agent agreeing to save the city harmless from any and all claims for
injuries or damages arising out of or incidental to any construction work being
carried on in the city streets.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-703. - Application for license.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of mechanical excavating and
grading in the city with any of the mechanical excavating or grading equipment
required by this article to be licensed shall file a written application for
the necessary license or licenses with the city clerk. Such application shall
contain the name of the applicant and state whether the owner is an individual,
co partnership, assumed name, association, trust estate or corporation; the
residence address of the individual owner or owners or the individuals who are
officers, if a corporation, or persons acting in a fiduciary capacity in
connection with such business; the business address of such person; the type of
equipment such applicant proposes to use; the serial numbers and manufacturer
of each item of such equipment proposed to be licensed; and shall contain a
sworn statement of such facts. The application shall further contain an
agreement that, if granted a license, such applicant will fully comply with and
observe all statutes and ordinances of the city and all reasonable rules and
regulations of the department pertaining to or involving such equipment.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1041, 6-6-05)
Sec. 12-704. - License fees.
   The annual license fee or renewal thereof for engaging in the business of
mechanical excavating and grading shall be as prescribed by section
12-6 on or before the time the license or renewal thereof is issued. The annual
license fee for each piece of mechanical excavating or grading equipment or
renewal thereof governed by this article shall be as prescribed by section
12-6.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-705. - Issuance of license.
   Any license required by this article shall be issued by the city clerk upon
the filing with the city clerk of the evidence of insurance coverage required
by this article.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1041, 6-6-05)
Sec. 12-706. - Insurance required.
   Every person licensed under the provisions of this article to carry on a
mechanical excavating and grading business in the city, prior to the time of
the issuance of a license therefor, shall file with the city clerk a
satisfactory certificate that insurance has been issued by a responsible
insurance carrier to such prospective licensee for the period of such license
in the amount of $20,000.00 to $40,000.00 public liability and $25,000.00
property damage, insuring the city and all persons who might be in the vicinity
or who own property in the vicinity where such mechanical excavating and
grading equipment is being moved or used, against injury or damage to persons
or property, either private or public, by reason of the moving or using of such
equipment; provided, however, that all persons who carry on a mechanical
excavating and grading business in the city who are employed by any general
contractor with the city, which general contractor has furnished public
liability and property damage insurance in amounts required by the provision of
such contract, shall be licensed as required under this article, but shall not
be required to furnish insurance coverage set forth in this section during the
time they are so employed by such general contractor in the city, it being
hereby determined that the license issued for such employment shall be deemed
to be a temporary license which will terminate at the end of such employment
unless insurance coverage in the amounts and for the purposes above specified
shall have been filed with the city clerk prior to the termination of such
employment.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-707. - License tag.
   The city shall provide a metal tag for each piece of licensed equipment
which the applicant shall display prominently and continuously on each piece of
equipment so licensed, and which tag shall have impressed or painted thereon
the words "City of Dearborn," the license number and the date such license
expires. Such license decal shall not be transferable.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-708. - Expiration of license.
   All licenses issued under this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight
following December 31 of each year, unless otherwise terminated according to
law.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-709. - Permit and fee.
   (a)   Any person owning mechanical or excavating equipment covered by this
article and using such equipment in connection with his own premises, who does
not engage in the business of mechanical excavating and grading within the
meaning of this article, shall be granted permission to transport such
equipment over the streets of the city to such owner's premises when and where
required for use, upon the payment of a permit fee of $1.00 for each piece of
such equipment each time it is transported.
   (b)   The application for such permit shall be made and filed with the
director and shall state the time and place where such equipment is to be moved
in order that proper inspection may be made by the division to insure that no
damage is caused to any street surfaces, curbs, sidewalks, trees, water mains,
sewers, utilities or other public property.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-710. - Moving equipment on streets.
   Any person licensed under the provisions of this article shall, in each
instance when any such mechanical excavating or grading equipment is to be
moved to any location in the city, apply to the division at least 24 hours in
advance of movement of such equipment in order that an inspector from the city
shall be on hand to determine that no damage or injury results to any street
surface, curbs, sidewalks, trees, water mains, sewers, public utilities or any
public property from the transporting of such equipment.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-711. - Suspension or revocation of license—Procedures.
   (a)   Any license issued under this article may be revoked for cause upon
proof of charges filed with the city clerk, specifying with reasonable detail
the facts showing:
      (1)   Carelessness or negligence in the performance of the licensee's
duties in connection with his work.
      (2)   That such licensee has violated or permitted a violation of this
article in connection with work for which the licensee was responsible and to
which the licensee was aware, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should
have been aware, that such violation had occurred.
      (3)   Intoxication of the operator of any licensed mechanical excavating
or grading equipment while on duty.
      (4)   Incompetency of any such equipment operator.
      (5)   Failure to keep the licensed mechanical equipment in good operating
condition.
      (6)   Falsifying any material fact in the application for license.
      (7)   Any other reason not listed above which will tend to endanger human
life, property or the public safety.
   (b)   Upon the filing of such charges, the city clerk shall forthwith
suspend the license involved, and shall give the licensee holding such license
notice of a hearing upon such charges, which hearing shall be held before a
committee consisting of the mayor, the president of the council and the
director of the building and safety department, or their designee, in not less
than ten days after the date of such notice, unless an earlier date is agreed
upon in writing by the licensees affected. Such notice shall be by personal
service or registered mail, shall state the time and place of such hearing and
shall contain a copy of the charges. If such charges are sustained in the
judgment of the committee, the license in question shall be immediately
revoked, and the city clerk shall notify the licensee in writing of its
revocation, but if such charges are not sustained, such license shall be
reestablished and the suspension lifted.
   (c)   If the license of any person governed by the provisions of this
article is revoked for cause, such person shall not be eligible to obtain a
similar license from the city for a period of at least one year after such
revocation.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 10, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 05-1041, 6-6-05)
Sec. 12-712. - Same—Continued operation prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of mechanical
excavating and grading when and during the time his license is suspended,
revoked or otherwise terminated.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-713. - Excavations.
   (a)   Any person digging an excavation shall provide shoring, sheathing and
other necessary precautions to maintain all public sidewalks, curbs and
pavements, as well as all earth, trees and nature objects on adjoining private
land in place during excavation. He shall also provide substantial railings, at
least four feet high, around such excavation at any point where the public
might be endangered by the absence of such guards.
   (b)   Excavations shall not be made in streets, alleys or other public
property, or extending into any public property, without a permit from the
department. All such excavations shall be backfilled with suitable material,
well tamped in place, and all sidewalks, pavements and other objects, both
natural and artificial, replaced by the excavator in as good a condition as
they were in originally. All public sidewalks and pavements shall be replaced
under the supervision of an inspector of the department, and all fill used
under public sidewalks and pavements shall be cinders, gravel, broken brick or
other material approved by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-714. - Drainage.
   In the construction of basements and cellars, excavations shall be kept well
drained, and, before walls are constructed above the foundations, tile drains
shall be installed and connected to a public sewer or, in case no such sewer is
available, to a sump pit provided with an automatic sump pump designed to
remove the water from the premises.
(Ord. No. 81-74, § 13, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-715—12-735. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII. - HOTELS, ROOMINGHOUSES AND LODGINGHOUSES AND BEDS AND BREAKFASTS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 12-736—12-745. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - HOTELS, ROOMINGHOUSES, LODGINGHOUSES
AND BEDS AND BREAKFASTS
Sec. 12-746. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Cellar shall mean a story of a building partly below the adjoining grade,
but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor is greater
than the vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling. If the vertical
distance from the grade to the ceiling is over five feet, such story shall be
rated as a first story.
   Dwelling shall mean any building, or part thereof, occupied in whole or in
part, as the home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more persons, either
continuously, permanently, temporarily or transiently, except that a hotel may
consist of two or more dwellings.
   Family unit shall be deemed to include one or more persons whether related
by consanguinity or affinity.
   Hotel shall mean a dwelling, or part thereof, occupied as the more or less
temporary abiding place of individuals in which the rooms are usually occupied
singly for hire, and in which rooms no provision for cooking is made, and in
which building there are 50 or more sleeping rooms for hire; provided, however,
that a hotel as herein defined may include and have one or more separate
cottages equipped with sleeping rooms for hire which are on land adjacent to
the site of the principal dwelling, and are in common ownership and under one
management with the principal dwelling.
   Lodginghouse shall mean a dwelling, or part thereof, occupied as the more or
less temporary abiding place of individuals in which the rooms are usually
occupied singly for hire, in which no provision for cooking is made, and in
which there are less than 50 and more than five sleeping rooms for hire.
   Multiple dwelling shall mean a building constructed and used, or capable of
being used, by persons who live therein as separate family units, which
building will accommodate five or more family units, and the rooms of which are
so arranged that each group designed to be occupied by one family unit will
have cooking accommodations and toilet and sleeping facilities. This class
includes motels, tenement houses, flats, apartment houses, apartment hotels,
bachelor apartments, studio apartments, duplex apartments, kitchenette
apartments and all other dwellings similarly occupied whether or not
specifically designated herein.
   Roominghouse shall mean any dwelling occupied as a home or family unit where
a certain room or rooms, in excess of those used by the members of the
immediate family, are or can be leased or rented to and occupied by five or
more persons outside of the family, and without any attempt to provide therein
or therewith cooking or kitchen accommodations for persons occupying such room
or rooms.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-747. - Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer, the chief of police, the fire
chief, the director of building and safety and their respective subordinates to
enforce the provisions of this article. Refusal by the licensee, his agent,
servant or employee to permit any of the city officials above mentioned, or
their respective subordinates, to examine and inspect the licensed premises
shall be cause for revocation of or failure to approve the license.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-748. - License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or manage or cause to be used
any dwelling or part thereof in the city as a multiple dwelling, hotel,
lodginghouse or roominghouse, or any combination thereof, without first having
obtained a license for each such building as herein provided.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-749. - Manager's license required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or manage or cause to be used
any dwelling or part thereof in the city as a multiple dwelling, hotel,
lodginghouse or roominghouse, or any combination thereof without first having
obtained a manager's license therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-750. - Kind of license determined by cubic space used.
   Any person operating, managing or causing to be used any dwelling or part
thereof for one or a combination of the uses coming under this article shall
procure a license for the use occupying the greater amount of cubic space in
such dwelling. No person shall operate, manage or cause to be used any dwelling
or part thereof where a total of five or more persons occupy or can occupy such
rooms or suites or groups of rooms, without first procuring a license for such
use.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-751. - Application for license.
   (a)   The application for a license of a dwelling shall be made by the
owner, operator or manager in writing to the clerk upon a form provided for
that purpose. It shall give all such information as shall be deemed necessary,
including the name and address of the applicant; his interest, if any, in the
dwelling to be licensed and the location thereof; the name and address of the
owner of record of such dwelling; if owner is a partnership, the name and
addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the
officers thereof, as well as the name and address of resident agent; the number
of rooms or suites available for renting, indicating the size of rooms, number
of beds, bathrooms, shower stalls, lavatories and toilets on each floor, and
shall state whether the rooms are free from rats, mice, bedbugs, roaches, lice
or other vermin or rodents.
   (b)   The application for a manager's license, as herein referred to, shall
be made in writing to the clerk by the person seeking the license upon a form
provided for that purpose. The application shall set forth all such information
as shall be deemed necessary, including the name and address of the applicant;
his financial interest, if any, in the licensed premises where he will work,
showing the address of such premises; if the applicant is not self-employed,
the applicant shall show the name and address of the prospective employer, and
shall state the names and addresses where such applicant has worked as a
manager of a hotel, lodginghouse, or roominghouse during the past five years.
Such application shall also set forth a description of the applicant, such as
the age, sex, height, complexion, color of hair, color of eyes, weight; marital
status, whether single, married or divorced; race; place of birth; length of
time he has resided in the city, if he is a resident; and whether applicant is
a citizen of the United States, and how citizenship was obtained.
   (c)   Such application shall state whether or not the applicant has ever
been convicted of violating any laws or ordinances of any city, state or
county, and, if so, it should state the place of such conviction, the nature of
offense and sentence.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-752. - Investigation of applicant; fee; fingerprints; report; issuance.
   (a)   After filing such application with the clerk, the clerk shall refer
the application for the use of a dwelling through the treasurer, weights and
measures to the health officer, chief of police, fire chief and the department
of building and safety, and the application for a manager's license the clerk
shall refer through the treasurer, weights and measures to the chief of police
for investigation, each of whom shall make a written report and recommendation
through the department of licenses, weights and measures to the clerk within a
reasonable time.
   (b)   As a part of the process of investigating each applicant under the
provisions of this section, such applicant shall submit his fingerprints to the
police department in the discretion of such department for its investigation
thereof. If an application for a dwelling license as herein referred to is
made, the police department in its discretion may require all owners of such
premises and principal officers of any corporation to file their fingerprints
with the police department, as a condition precedent to approving such license;
provided, however, that if the fingerprints of any such person are on file, in
the discretion of the police department, it will not be necessary to file
duplicate fingerprints of such person. No license shall be issued to any person
under the provisions of this division who has been convicted of a felony,
except that the chief of police may approve the issuance of a license when it
shall be apparent that such applicant is at the present time a law-abiding
citizen. The police department is hereby authorized to establish such
additional rules and regulations governing the issuance of a manager's license,
not inconsistent herewith, as may be necessary and reasonable.
   (c)   If each of the officials is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable
person to engage in such business; that the granting of such license will not
be detrimental to the interests of the public; that all of the provisions of
this division and the other ordinances of the city and the applicable
provisions of the Housing Law of Michigan, so-called, have been or are being
complied with; that the granting of such license will not be in violation of
any statute, or any ordinance, rules or regulations of the city; that the
building in which it is proposed to conduct such business is in a safe and
sanitary condition; that it complies with the building, plumbing and electrical
codes of the city; and contains such safeguards against fires as are required
by law, the city clerk shall issue the respective license applied for;
provided, however, the applicant before receiving such license shall pay to the
city treasurer the fees, as prescribed by section
12-6.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-753. - Contents, display of license.
   (a)   Each license issued under this division shall designate the particular
kind of license issued, and the street address in the city where such business
shall be conducted. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to engage in such
business at any place other than that designated in such license, and if a
licensed manager shall change his place of operation or employment in the city,
he shall immediately notify the police department of such change, who shall
record such change on his manager's license. Such license shall be subject to
all terms and provisions of this division and all other ordinances of the city,
the charter of the city, and the laws of the state and of the United States.
The license of premises shall be always conspicuously displayed on the licensed
premises.
   (b)   Every manager licensed under this division shall be given a license by
the city clerk at the time of issuance thereof, certifying that such person has
been licensed as a manager under this division in the city at the address
stated. Such license shall be carried upon the person of the licensee at all
times while such person is acting as a manager of licensed premises under this
article.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-754. - Nontransferable.
   No license issued under this division shall be assignable or transferable,
and one license shall issue for only one establishment. No person except the
licensee, directly or indirectly, shall do business or be permitted to do
business under such license.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-755. - Expiration.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one
year from date of application, unless sooner revoked or terminated in
accordance with law.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 6a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-756. - Renewal of licenses.
   (a)   All licenses issued under this article shall expire annually on the
first day of February unless otherwise suspended or revoked. On or before
January 2, the city clerk shall send a notice reminding license holders of the
impending expiration date.
   (b)   All licenses issued under this article shall be renewed by filing an
annual written application with the City Clerk on a form furnished by the
Clerk. The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's full true name and any other names used by the
applicant in the preceding seven years. If the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity, then all persons
with an influential interest in the entity shall be deemed an applicant and
shall provide the information required by this article. Each applicant must
sign the application, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted;
      (2)   Current business address or another mailing address of the
applicant;
      (3)   Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a
copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document
issued by a governmental agency;
      (4)   The business name, location, zoning classification, legal
description, parcel identification number, mailing address and phone number;
      (5)   The name and business address of the designated local agent who is
responsible to supervise the premises and activities and who is authorized to
receive service of process;
      (6)   A statement of the status of monies owed to the city including, but
not limited to, water bills, real property taxes, personal property taxes, and
miscellaneous fees; and
      (7)   A statement as to whether any business in which an applicant has
had an influential interest has, in the previous seven years, and at the time
during which the applicant had the influential interest:
         a.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance, as defined by
the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.3801; or
         b.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking; or
         c.   Been subject to foreclosure proceedings; or
         d.   Been subject to Nuisance Abatement Board proceedings in
accordance with Article IA of
Chapter 13 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances.
   The information provided pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (7) of this
subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 18-1624, 8-21-18)
Sec. 12-756A. - Issuance of license.
   (a)   Application review. Upon the filing of a completed application, the
city clerk shall forward a copy to the following departments: Department of
Law, Police Department, Fire Department, Department of Economic and Community
Development, Treasury Division of the Finance Department, Water Division of the
Department of Public Works, Property Maintenance and Development Services, and
any other department, to review the application for compliance with the
requirements of this article and all other applicable ordinances and codes.
   (b)   The city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, or issue to the
applicant a written notice to deny the application. The city clerk shall issue
a license unless:
      (1)   Information. An applicant has failed to provide information as
required by this article, or has falsely answered a question or a request for
information on the application form;
      (2)   Fee. The license application fee required by this article has not
been paid;
      (3)   Code compliance. The subject premises lacks a current certificate
of occupancy or does not comply with applicable building, zoning, plumbing,
mechanical, electrical, health, or fire prevention codes;
      (4)   Unpaid fees. Relevant city departments have indicated that there
are unpaid fees or incurred violations under their purview related to the
subject premises (e.g., nuisance abatement fees);
      (5)   Taxes. The Treasury Division has denied a real and/or personal
property tax clearance pertaining to the subject premises;
      (6)   Ownership/lease. The applicant does not own the premises for which
a license is sought or does not have a lease for the full period for which the
license is sought;
      (7)   Negative police contact.  The Police Department indicates that a
disproportionate amount of police contact is required by the business due to
unlawful activities.
   (c)   License contents; posting; possession. The license, if granted, shall
state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, the
address of the business. The business license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the business so that it may be read at any
time.
(Ord. No. 18-1624, 8-21-18)
Sec. 12-757. - Application of housing law.
   The premises licensed under this division shall at all times be occupied and
maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Housing Law of
Michigan.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-758. - Zoning ordinance compliance.
   No license shall be issued under this division for any use which would be in
violation of the terms of the zoning ordinance of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-759. - Bunk beds prohibited.
   No beds or bunks in any premises licensed under this division shall be
placed one above the other.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-760. - Occupancy restricted.
   No licensee under this division shall harbor, accommodate or permit more
persons to use the licensed premises than the number of persons who can be
regularly accommodated in and normally occupy the beds enumerated in his
license application; provided, however, that the occupying of the same bed by
two or more persons in succession in any 24-hour period shall not be allowed or
tolerated unless clean linen is furnished for each such occupancy.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-761. - Sleeping areas, places restricted.
   No person shall be permitted to sleep, lodge or dwell in the cellar of any
premises licensed under this division. No person shall be permitted to sleep
elsewhere than in a bed.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-762. - Cleanliness.
   All premises licensed under this division shall at all times be kept
thoroughly clean and free from all dirt, vermin, garbage and rubbish. The
interior walls and ceilings of every licensed dwelling shall be thoroughly
washed, cleaned or painted at least once a year.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-763. - Maintenance of cooking facilities.
   It shall be unlawful for any person occupying for hire one or more rooms in
a hotel, lodginghouse or roominghouse in the city to provide and maintain
therein facilities and provisions, or either of them, for cooking or the
preparation of meals. It shall be unlawful for any licensed manager to allow or
permit any such person occupying one or more rooms for hire in a hotel,
lodginghouse or roominghouse in the city to provide and maintain therein
facilities and provisions, or either of them, for cooking or the preparation of
meals.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 11a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-764. - Furnishing of linens, towels.
   Where, under the terms of any rental agreement or lease, it is the express
or implied duty of the licensee under this division to furnish linens, such
licensee shall provide all beds with regulation sheets and pillowcases, and all
sheets and pillowcases shall be laundered at least once each week and shall be
provided clean and laundered for each new patron. Such licensee shall also
provide individual towels, and no common towels shall be permitted.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-765. - Heating of premises.
   It shall be the duty of every licensee of premises coming under this
division to furnish and maintain proper heat temperatures in such licensed
premises from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year so that
the occupants thereof may secure, without undue restriction of ventilation, a
minimum temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit at 6:30 a.m., 65 degrees at 7:00
a.m. and 68 degrees at 8:30 a.m. and thereafter until 10:30 p.m., averaged
throughout the licensed premises. Written notice of complaint concerning lack
of heat in such licensed premises shall first be given to the owner of such
licensed premises by registered mail before a violation of this section shall
be deemed to exist. The provisions of this section shall not apply in any
instance where the occupant of any licensed premises has expressly agreed with
the licensee as a part of the rental contract or lease that such occupant shall
furnish heat.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-766. - Guest register required.
   (a)   No person shall be allowed to rent accommodations without providing
suitable identification at the time of registration, a copy of which shall be
retained with the record of registration. As used herein, suitable
identification shall mean a government issued photo identification card such as
a driver's license.
   (b)   The true name of all persons occupying rented accommodations shall be
listed on the register at the time of registration. Any person who remains in a
room after midnight shall be presumed to be an occupant.
   (c)   If it is determined that a registration was incomplete or inaccurate,
the rental agreement shall be terminated and all persons occupying the room for
which such incomplete or inaccurate registration was provided shall be evicted.
   (d)   Occupancy by a person who has engaged in illegal activity during a
past period of occupancy on the premises shall be prohibited. For the purposes
of this section, notification from the police department that an arrest for
illegal activity has been made during a period of occupancy shall create a
presumption that illegal activity has occurred; the presumption may be refuted
by evidence that charges were subsequently dismissed.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 14, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 18- 1625, 8-21-18)
Sec. 12-767. - Illegal activities prohibited, report.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any illegal act or
occupation to be carried on upon the licensed premises. Any illegal act or
occupation occurring on such premises which shall come to the knowledge of the
licensee, his agents, servants or employees shall be immediately reported by
the licensee to the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-768. - Infectious disease.
   It shall be the duty of every licensee under this division to report
immediately to the health officer of the city any infectious disease upon the
premises.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-769. - Manager to be on duty; report of fires.
   It shall be the duty of the licensee of each hotel, lodginghouse and
roominghouse to have upon such premises at all times an adult person, who may
be a licensed manager, who shall be the manager thereof and shall be charged
with the duty of immediately reporting all fires occurring on such premises to
the fire department. In hotels and lodginghouses such person shall be at the
place of registration. In roominghouses such persons shall be available at all
times. Any person in a hotel, lodginghouse or roominghouse discovering a fire
therein shall immediately notify the manager, and if for any reason the manager
is not immediately available, the discoverer of such fire shall promptly report
the same to the fire department. Failure on the part of the licensee to have
such a person on duty and failure to report such fires, as herein required,
shall be a violation of this division and subject the offender to all of the
penalties herein provided.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-770. - Unlawful to set fires.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in smoking or attempting to light or to
smoke a cigarette, cigar, pipe or tobacco in any form for which lighters or
matches are used, or in the use of flammable liquids, to smoke in bed, while
lying down, or to set fire to, or cause to be burned or partially burned, any
bedding, furniture, curtain, drape, household furniture or furnishings in any
hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse or light housekeeping rooms, or to set fire
to the licensed dwelling.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-771. - Notices regarding fire to be posted.
   The licensee of each hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse and light
housekeeping room shall post and maintain, in a conspicuous place in the lobby,
and in each rented or rentable room thereof, a plainly printed notice advising
as to the provisions of this division relating to fire.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-772. - Vermin control.
   (a)   Any licensee under this division having notice or knowledge that his
licensed premises contain bed bugs, roaches, rats, mice or other vermin, shall
report such fact to the health officer within 48 hours.
   (b)   Such licensee shall cause such bed bugs, roaches, rats, mice or other
vermin, as the case may be, to be exterminated by fumigation or other effective
means approved by the health officer within five days from the date upon which
the licensee first had notice or knowledge of their existence upon the licensed
premises, and, upon his failure to do so, such license may be immediately
revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-773. - Furnishings to be kept clean and in repair.
   Where, under the terms of any rental agreement or lease, it is the implied
or express duty of the licensee to furnish mattresses, sheets, pillows and
cases, comforters and quilts, or any of them, for such premises, such licensee
shall maintain such furnishings in clean condition and in good repair.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-774. - Suspension and revocation of license—Procedures.
   (a)   No license shall be revoked except for cause upon proof of charges
filed with the city council by any of the appointing authorities in the several
departments authorized by this division to enforce the provisions thereof and
to approve the issuance of a license, specifying with reasonable detail any
facts which are hereby declared to be grounds for suspending any such license:
      (1)   That such licensee has violated or permitted a violation of this
division, or any ordinances or the charter of the city, or any laws of the
state, or of the United States in connection with the operation of the licensed
premises or in the conduct of the licensee as manager.
      (2)   That the licensee has been convicted of any crime which was
perpetrated on, or in connection with, the licensed premises.
      (3)   That the licensee has carried on, or permitted to be carried on,
either individually or with the aid and assistance of others, any unlawful or
illegal act or acts on, or in connection with, such licensed premises.
      (4)   That the applicant for a license has made any false statements in
such application which were relied upon by any official of the city in
connection with the issuance of such license.
   (b)   Upon the filing of such charges, the appointing authority in the
department preferring such charges shall forthwith suspend the license
involved, and shall give to such licensee a notice of such suspension, together
with a copy of the charges, specifying the facts on which the suspension was
made. At the same time such copy of the charges is given to the licensee, or
his agent in charge of the premises, an order shall be served upon such
licensee, or agent, filed by the person preferring such charges, directing such
licensee to appear before the council at a date and place therein specified,
which date shall not occur more than ten days from the day of such suspension,
to show cause why the license suspended should not be permanently revoked.
   (c)   Upon the filing of such charges with the city council, the official of
the city preferring such charges is hereby authorized and empowered in
connection with the suspension of license to remove and take into his
possession the license, or certificate or certificates of such license, and
hold them until the council has determined whether such license should be
revoked as hereinafter provided.
   (d)   The council is hereby empowered and authorized to investigate the
charges set forth in the notice of suspension; subpoena, swear and examine
witnesses, and receive or produce other evidence in connection therewith,
either by the person making the charges, or the licensee; or the council, on
its own motion, may make such investigation of the facts as it deems necessary.
The licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel. The decision of
the council shall be final and binding as to the questions of fact.
   (e)   If the council shall find as a result of such investigation that the
licensee failed or refused to show cause, has not shown sufficient cause why
his license should not be revoked, or if the council finds that such suspension
was for a violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this division,
or that any facts have been shown which constitute grounds for suspending a
license under this division, the council may order such license permanently
revoked, or revoked for such period of time as the council deems necessary. If
the council shall find the charges on which the license was revoked are not
sustained by the proofs, the license shall be reinstated by the council.
   (f)   In the event of any revocation, the former licensee shall be
ineligible to receive any license by this division for a period of two years
thereafter, and no license shall be issued during such period for the
conducting of any business required to be licensed under this division.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-775. - Same—Conduct of business.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business or activity
required by the provisions of this division to have a license when a license
has been suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-776. - Fees not to be refunded.
   Any and all monies paid as fees for licenses issued or to be issued under
this division shall be retained by the city treasurer, and no refund shall be
made if such license is not granted, or if it has been granted and is later
revoked or terminated.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 25, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-777. - Personal property taxes paid.
   No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any person under this
division unless and until a certificate has been obtained from the city
treasurer to the effect that all personal property taxes levied and assessed
against such applicant for license has been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 23, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-778. - Inspection of licensed premises.
   (a)   The appointing authorities in the several departments of the city,
authorized to enforce the provisions of this division, their respective
deputies, or any authorized agents, or employees in the several departments
whose approval must first be obtained before any license shall be issued under
this division, or any authorized inspector or investigator in the city whose
duty it is to enforce the license laws and ordinances of the city, is hereby
authorized and empowered to inspect the premises licensed under this division
at any reasonable hour of the day or night for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this division and determining that any and all provisions of all
ordinances, codes and rules and regulations of the city pertaining thereto are
being complied with.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or attempt to prevent,
or to interfere with anyone herein authorized to make an investigation or
inspection, as above provided.
(Ord. No. 81-84, § 26, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-779—12-820.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES
Sec. 12-821. - License required.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 39 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1961 (MCL 442.211 et seq., MSA 19.401(1) et seq.), as amended, a license issued
by the city clerk shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to
sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of
the following kinds:
      (1)   Going-out-of-business sale.
      (2)   Removal-of-business sale.
      (3)   Sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or otherwise.
Sec. 12-822. - Application requirements.
   A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a
written application to the city clerk setting forth and containing the
following information:
      (1)   The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the
object of the sale.
      (2)   A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
      (3)   The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
      (4)   The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be
conducted.
      (5)   A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby
and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; if the application is for a
going-out-of-business or removal sale, it shall also contain a statement that
the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be
conducted upon termination of the sale.
      (6)   A full and complete inventory of the goods that are to be sold,
which inventory shall:
         a.   Itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information
concerning each item, including the brand name, if any, to clearly identify it.
         b.   List separately any goods which were purchased during a 60-day
period immediately prior to the date of making application for the license.
         c.   Show the cost price of each item in the inventory together with
the name and address of the seller of the items to the applicant, the date of
purchase, the date of delivery of each item to the applicant and the total
value of the inventory at cost.
      (7)   The name and address of the person who will be in charge and
responsible for the conduct of the sale.
Sec. 12-823. - License fee.
   Any applicant for a license under this article shall submit to the city
clerk with his application a license fee, as prescribed in section
12-6.
Sec. 12-824. - Issuance; denial.
   (a)   A license shall be issued under this article on the following terms:
      (1)   The license shall authorize the sale described in the application
for a period of not more than 30 days from the start of such sale; the license
may be renewed not more than twice for a period of time not to exceed 30 days
for each renewal, upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the
inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have been added to
the inventory. The application for renewal shall contain a new inventory
conforming to the requirements hereof.
      (2)   The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in
the application at the location named therein.
      (3)   The license shall authorize only the sale of goods and merchandise
described in the inventory attached to the application; no person shall order
any goods for the purpose of selling and disposing of the same under any sale
authorized by this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock
within 60 days prior to the filing of the application pursuant to this article
shall be presumptive evidence that the purchases and additions were in
contemplation of the sale authorized by this article.
      (4)   Any license provided for in this article shall not be assignable or
transferable.
   (b)   No license shall be issued under this article to any person:
      (1)   To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a person in whose
goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or title thereto
within six months prior to the time of making application for such a license.
      (2)   To conduct a sale, other than sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke,
or otherwise on the same premises within one year from the conclusion of a
prior sale of the nature covered by this act.
   (c)   Subdivisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
person who acquired right or title in goods as an heir, devisee or legatee or
pursuant to a court order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 12-825. - Display.
   A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in the sales room where the goods are to be sold; provided,
however, the copy of the inventory attached to such application need not show
the purchase price of such goods; a duplicate copy of the license shall be
attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted. Any
advertisement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously show
the license number and the date of expiration.
Sec. 12-826. - Prohibited sales.
   (a)   No goods shall be sold on the premises at or during a sale authorized
under this article, except in conformance with the requirements hereof.
   (b)   No goods shall be sold or offered for sale excepting the goods
described in and inventoried in the original application.
   (c)   No goods shall be sold or offered for sale which were purchased in
contemplation of such sale.
Sec. 12-827. - Violations void license.
   Any violation of this article shall void any license issued to conduct a
sale under this article, in addition to any other penalty imposed by this Code.
Secs. 12-828—12-850. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIX. - MOTORBUSES
Sec. 12-851. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Highway shall mean and refer to any and all streets, avenues, boulevards,
public alleys, thoroughfares, public places or highways in the city.
   Highway maintenance and repair fee shall mean that charge which is made by
the city to compensate it for the services rendered by the city which are in
part used and enjoyed by any licensee covered by this article, and shall
include the expenses incurred by the city for maintaining and repairing the
pavements and the highway surfaces traversed by any vehicles of the licensee,
removing snow from such highway surfaces, installing and maintaining adequate
drainage for such highways, lighting and cleaning such highways, and furnishing
and maintaining traffic controls along such highways through mechanical
equipment or police officers.
   Motorbus shall mean any motor propelled vehicle that is operated as a common
carrier of passengers for hire over a fixed or established route in the city,
but shall not include streetcars or motorbuses engaged in interstate commerce.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-852. - License required.
   No person, as owner or otherwise, shall operate or cause to be operated one
or more motorbuses on the highways of the city without first obtaining a
license therefor from the city clerk. The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-853. - Compliance required.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated one or more motorbuses upon
the highways of the city without first complying with the terms and provisions
of this article, and the failure to operate any motorbus in compliance with the
provisions of this article may be cause for the revocation of such license.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-854. - Application for license.
   (a)   An application, either original or renewal, to operate one or more
motorbuses on the city highways, shall set forth:
      (1)   The factory serial number of the buses to be operated.
      (2)   The owner's identifying number printed on the outside of each bus
to be licensed.
      (3)   The number of buses the applicant desires to operate.
      (4)   The proposed route or routes on the city highways.
      (5)   The proposed motorbus schedule.
      (6)   The proposed schedule of fares.
      (7)   The proposed loading stations.
   (b)   Such application shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-855. - Investigation, approvals required.
   The clerk shall refer each application for a license required by this
article to the chief of police and the director of building and safety for
their investigation and recommendation in connection therewith. The route or
routes over which the applicant desires to operate motorbuses shall be strictly
adhered to by the applicant, if and when such route is approved by the city
council. Any route and schedule which the applicant proposes to operate within
the corporate limits of the city must be approved by the city council. Any
changes or revisions to the route or schedule must also be approved by the city
council.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-856. - Issuance of license.
   (a)   The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue a motorbus license or a
renewal thereof to any person as a common carrier in the city upon the approval
of the application therefor by the chief of police and the director of building
and safety, but before such license is issued, or renewed, the proposed route
or routes and schedule shall have been approved by the city council; provided,
however, that any applicant for license which has not qualified for and has not
received a permit from the state public service commission may qualify for a
motorbus license to permit the operation of one or more motorbuses within the
city by complying with the provisions of this article.
   (b)   Any licensee under the provisions of this article, as a condition to
the continuing of such license in force, shall operate the number of motorbuses
set forth in any such approved schedule as a minimum of service upon the routes
approved and described in the application for the license.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-857. - Insurance required.
   (a)   The applicant for a license under this article shall file with the
city clerk a certified copy of the contract of insurance filed with the state
public service commission, with public liability coverage in the amount of
$500,000.00 for each bus.
   (b)   If more than ten motorbuses are operated by the applicant or licensee,
a certified copy of a blanket policy of insurance covering all motorbus
equipment used in the city by the applicant or licensee may be filed in the
following amounts:
      (1)   Public liability coverage of at least $500,000.00.
      (2)   Property damage coverage of at least $100,000.00.
   (c)   If the licensee is a transportation system owned and operated by a
municipality other than the city, it will not be necessary for such licensee to
file the copies of the insurance contract indicating coverage, as above set
forth, but the requirements of this section for insurance will be complied with
if such municipally owned transportation system will file with the clerk an
indemnity agreement where such transportation system agrees to pay and satisfy
any and all legal claims which might arise in connection with the operation of
its transportation facilities in the city.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-858. - Highway maintenance and repair fee.
   Before any license shall be issued under this article, the applicant shall
pay in advance to the city treasurer an annual highway maintenance and repair
fee for each bus to be operated on the highways of the city. Such bus license
fee rate will hereafter be the flat rate of $35.00 per bus for each bus up to
and including 300 buses. There will be no charge imposed as a bus license fee
on any buses in excess of 300 buses per applicant.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-859. - Requirements for vehicles.
   All vehicles which may be operated pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall comply with the following general requirements:
      (1)   Each vehicle shall be maintained in good and safe repair and shall
be subject to inspection by the police department or any inspector in the city
authorized to make such inspection at such reasonable times as may be
necessary.
      (2)   Each vehicle shall be propelled by power generated or contained
within the vehicle itself, or by storage battery, but no power shall be used
which will in its generation or use produce smoke or noxious odors sufficient,
in the opinion of the city council, or its authorized representatives, to
constitute a nuisance.
      (3)   All parts of each vehicle shall be so constructed that excessive
quantities of oil or grease cannot drop on the roadway.
      (4)   All parts of every vehicle shall be so constructed that no undue
noise or vibration shall result from the operation thereof.
      (5)   Every vehicle shall be operated in such manner at all times so as
to comply with all laws and ordinances and the traffic rules and regulations of
the city.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-860. - Identification of vehicles.
   (a)   Every vehicle shall have attached on the outside and in the rear
thereof a license decal furnished by the city clerk showing in legible print
the words, "City of Dearborn, License No. (showing number) Expires (date of
expiration)." Such plate shall be mounted and kept in a conspicuous position on
the vehicle to which it is assigned, and shall not be transferable during the
license year for which it was issued; provided, however, that in the case of
those licensees which propose to and do operate in the city a number of buses
in any license year in excess of 300, it will not be necessary for such
licensee to have attached on each of its buses the license decal above referred
to, but it will be a sufficient compliance with this provision if the rates
herein specified for 300 buses are paid and the license has been issued.
   (b)   As soon as a license number and license decal have been issued to any
licensee under this article, a record thereof shall be given to the department
of licenses, weights and measures in the city, which record shall show the name
of the licensee, the license number of the year in question and the owner's
identifying number on the bus for which such license plate was issued.
   (c)   The name of the owner of every motorbus licensed under this article
shall be printed in plainly legible letters in at least two places on the
outside of every such bus, together with the owner's identifying number
thereon.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-861. - Expiration.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire at 12:
00 midnight following the first Tuesday in May of each calendar year, which
date shall be deemed the termination of the license year, unless revoked sooner
as provided in section
12-863.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-862. - Passenger stops.
   Any motorbus licensed under this article may stop to take on or discharge
passengers at such street intersections or bus stops on such route or routes,
as indicated in the traffic rule and regulations promulgated by the chief of
police and approved by the city council, unless temporarily changed by the
chief of police in accordance with the traffic ordinance.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-863. - Revocation, suspension of license.
   (a)   Any license issued under this article may be revoked for cause by the
city council after a hearing thereon before the council; provided, however,
that if any licensee under the provisions of this article shall fail or for any
reason be unable to furnish or provide transportation in accordance with the
provisions of this article and its approved routes and schedules for a period
of one week, without the written consent and approval of the city council, the
license issued to such licensee shall be automatically terminated and canceled
without the necessity for any proceedings involving the revocation thereof.
   (b)   The proceedings for the revocation of any license may be filed with
the council by the chief of police, the director of building and safety, the
city controller, or by the city council, on its own motion, in the form of a
complaint setting forth a brief and concise statement of the facts forming the
basis of such revocation. A copy of such complaint shall be served or caused to
be served upon such licensee forthwith by the city clerk, either personally, or
by registered mail with a return receipt requested, and in connection therewith
a notice of hearing before the city council shall be given, which hearing date
shall be not less than five days nor more than ten days from the date such
complaint is served on the licensee, such notice to set forth the time and
place of hearing on such complaint. At the time of the hearing, the facts
constituting the basis of such complaint shall be presented to the council, and
any evidence in opposition thereto may be presented by the licensee, and the
council shall make its determination as to whether the license should be
revoked. All questions of fact determined by the council shall be final.
(Ord. No. 81-68, § 4, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-864—12-885. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XX. - TAXICABS AND OTHER MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Sec. 12-886. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
[For the purposes of this article, the following vehicles shall be known as
motor vehicles for hire, with the exception of taxicabs.]
   Fleet shall mean 11 or more commercial vehicles used for the transportation
of passengers for hire whether owned or leased by an individual, company, or
corporation operating under one name.
   Limousine shall mean a self-propelled motor vehicle used in the carrying of
passengers and the baggage of the passengers for hire with a seating capacity
of 8 passengers or fewer, including the driver. Limousine does not include a
commercial vehicle. Limousine also does not include a vehicle operated by any
of the following:
      (1)   A county, city, township, or village as provided by law, or other
authority incorporated under 1963 PA 55, MCL 124.351 to 124.359.
      (2)   An authority incorporated under the metropolitan transportation
authorities act of 1967, 1967 PA 204, MCL 124.401 to 124.426, or that operates
a transportation service pursuant to an interlocal agreement under the urban
cooperation act of 1967, 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to 124.512.
      (3)   Operating under a contract entered into under 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 8,
MCL 124.531 to 124.536, or 1951 PA 35, MCL 124.1 to 124.13.
      (4)   An authority incorporated under the public transportation authority
act, 1986 PA 196, MCL 124.451 to 124.479, or a nonprofit corporation organized
under the nonprofit corporation act, 1982 PA 162, MCL 450.2101 to 450.3192,
that provides transportation services.
      (5)   An authority financing public improvements to transportation
systems under the revenue bond act of 1933, 1933 PA 94, MCL 141.101 to 141.140.
      (6)   A person that is only operating limousines to provide the
transportation of passengers for funerals.
      (7)   An employer that is only using the vehicle, or on whose behalf the
vehicle is being used, to transport its employees to and from their place of
employment.
   Limousine carrier shall mean a person who, either directly or through any
device, dispatch system, or arrangement, holds himself or herself out to the
public as willing to transport passengers for hire by limousine.
   Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Act shall mean Act 300 of the Public Acts
of 1974, being sections 257.1301 and 257.1340 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
   Taxicab means a motor vehicle with a seating capacity of 8 passengers or
fewer, including the driver, that is equipped with a roof light and taximeter,
and that carries passengers for a fee usually determined by the distance
traveled. Taxicab does not include a commercial vehicle.
   Taxicab carrier means a person who, either directly or through any device,
dispatch system, or arrangement, holds himself or herself out to the public as
willing to transport passengers for hire by taxicab.
   Taxicab driver means an individual who uses a taxicab to provide
transportation services to potential passengers.
   Taximeter shall mean a mechanical, electronic, or digital instrument or
device by which the charge for hire is mechanically calculated and upon which
such charge shall be indicated by means of figures.
   Transportation network company means a person operating in this state that
uses a digital network to connect transportation network company riders to
transportation network company drivers who provide transportation network
company prearranged rides. Transportation network company does not include a
taxi service, transportation service arranged through a transportation broker,
ridesharing arrangement, or transportation service using fixed routes at
regular intervals.
   Transportation network company digital network means an online-enabled
application, website, or system offered or utilized by a transportation network
company that enables the prearrangement of rides with transportation network
company drivers.
   Transportation network company driver means an individual who satisfies all
of the following:
      (1)   Receives connections to potential passengers and related services
from a transportation network company in exchange for payment of a fee to the
transportation network company.
      (2)   Uses a personal vehicle to offer or provide transportation network
company prearranged rides to transportation network company riders upon
connection through a digital network controlled by a transportation network
company in return for compensation or payment of a fee.
   Transportation network company prearranged ride means the provision of
transportation by a transportation network company driver to a transportation
network company rider, beginning when a transportation network company driver
accepts a ride requested by a transportation network company rider through a
digital network controlled by a transportation network company, continuing
while the transportation network company driver transports the requesting
transportation network company rider, and ending when the last requesting
transportation network company rider departs from the personal vehicle.
Transportation network company prearranged ride does not include a shared-
expense carpooling or vanpooling arrangement or transportation provided using a
taxicab, limousine, or other vehicle.
   Transportation network company rider means an individual who uses a
transportation network company's digital network to connect with a
transportation network company driver who provides a transportation network
company prearranged ride to the transportation network company rider in the
transportation network company driver's personal vehicle between points chosen
by the transportation network company rider.
(Ord. No. 91-55, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 95-637, 5-16-95; Ord. 19-1658, 9-10-19)
State Law reference—Similar provisions, MCL 257.2102
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-887. - Signage, emblem, or department of licensing and regulatory
affairs registration number.
   (a)   Subject to subsection (b), a vehicle subject to this Article shall
display a consistent and distinctive signage or emblem at all times while the
vehicle is being used to provide transportation services or while the vehicle
is being used by a transportation network company driver for a transportation
network company prearranged ride or while the transportation network company
driver is available to receive a transportation request. Subject to subsection
(b), a vehicle subject to this Article may also display a department of
licensing and regulatory affairs registration number. The signage, emblem, or
department of licensing and regulatory affairs registration numbers shall
satisfy both of the following:
      (1)   The signage, emblem, or department of licensing and regulatory
affairs registration number shall be color-contrasted to be visible during
daylight hours from a distance of at least 50 feet.
      (2)   The signage, emblem, or department of licensing and regulatory
affairs registration numbers shall sufficiently identify the limousine carrier,
taxicab carrier, transportation network company, or dispatch system provider
with which the vehicle is affiliated.
   (b)   If a limousine carrier, taxicab carrier, or transportation network
company is providing services in association with a dispatch system provider,
the limousine carrier, taxicab carrier, or transportation network company shall
display its signage or emblem or the signage or emblem of the dispatch system
provider. If a limousine carrier, taxicab carrier, or transportation network
company displays the signage or emblem of a dispatch system provider as
provided in this subsection, it shall also display its department of licensing
and regulatory affairs registration number.
   (c)   If a limousine carrier, taxicab carrier, or transportation network
company displays a department of licensing and regulatory affairs registration
number, the 10-digit registration number shall be displayed with the "#" symbol
prior to the registration number and shall use numbers and symbols that are at
least 1-1/2 inches in height.
   (d)   A person who operates or permits to be operated a limousine, taxicab,
or transportation network vehicle in violation of this section is responsible
for a civil infraction.
   (e)    The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. 19-1658, 9-10-19; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
State law reference - Similar provisions, MCL 257.2111 and MCL 257.2115
Sec. 12-888. - Automobile insurance coverage for transportation network company
driver or transportation network company on driver's behalf.
   (a)   A transportation network company driver, or a transportation network
company on a transportation network company on a transportation network company
driver's behalf, shall maintain primary automobile insurance on a personal
vehicle that recognizes that the transportation network company driver uses the
vehicle as a transportation network company driver or otherwise uses a vehicle
to transport passengers for compensation and covers the transportation network
company driver while he or she is engaged in a transportation network company
prearranged ride.
   (b)   During the time that a transportation network company driver is logged
on to the transportation network company's digital network and is available to
received transportation requests but is not engaged in a transportation network
company prearranged ride, all of the following types of automobile insurance
are required:
      (1)   Residual third party automobile liability insurance as required
under section 3101 of the insurance code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL 500.3101, in
the amount of at least $50,000.00 per person for death or bodily injury,
$100,000.00 per incident for death or bodily injury, and $25,000.00 for
property damage.
       (2)   Personal protection insurance and property protection insurance in
the amounts and of the types of coverage required by chapter 31 of the
insurance code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL 500.3101 to 500.3179.
   (c)   During the time that a transportation network company driver is
engaged in a transportation network company prearranged ride, all of the
following types of automobile insurance are required:
      (1)   Residual third party automobile liability insurance with a minimum
combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for all bodily injury or property
damage.
      (2)   Personal protection insurance and property protection insurance in
the amounts and of the types of coverage required by chapter 31 of the
insurance code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL 500.3101 to 500.3179.
   (d)   The requirements of subsections (b) and (c) may be satisfied by
automobile insurance maintained by a transportation network company driver or a
transportation network company, or a combination of both.
   (e)   If the insurance required by subsection (b) and (c) lapses or does not
provide the required coverage, insurance maintained by a transportation network
company shall provide the coverage required by this section, beginning with the
first $1.00 of a claim, and the transportation network company's insurer shall
defend the claim.
   (f)   Coverage provided under an automobile insurance policy maintained by a
transportation network company shall not be dependent upon a personal
automobile insurer denying the claim first and shall not require a personal
automobile insurer to deny the claim first.
   (g)   All of the following apply to the automobile insurance described in
subsections (b) and (c):
      (1)   It may be placed with an insurer licensed under chapter 4 of the
insurance code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL 500.402 to 500.480, or, if the
insurance is maintained by a transportation network company, an eligible
unauthorized insurer under chapter 19 of the insurance code of 1956, 1956 PA
218, MCL 500.1901 to 500.1955.
      (2)   The insurance policy satisfies the financial responsibility
requirements described in chapter V of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300,
MCL 257.501 to 257.532.
   (h)   A transportation network company driver shall carry proof of the
insurance required under subsections (b) and (c) with him or her at all times
during his or her use of a personal vehicle in connection with a transportation
network company's digital network. The transportation network company driver
may provide proof of insurance by a paper or electronic copy of the certificate
of insurance. If an accident occurs during the time that a transportation
network company driver is using a personal vehicle in connection with a
transportation network company's digital network, he or she shall provide all
of the following information upon request to directly interested parties,
automobile insurers, and investigating law enforcement officers as required
under section 328 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.328:
      (1)   Insurance coverage information.
      (2)   Whether he or she was logged on to the transportation network
company's digital network or on a transportation network company prearranged
ride at the time of the accident.
      (3)   A person who operates or permits to be operated a transportation
network vehicle in violation of this subsection (h) is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (i)   If a transportation network company's insurer makes a payment for a
claim covered under comprehensive coverage or collision coverage, the
transportation network company's insurer shall issue the payment directly to
the business repairing the vehicle or jointly to the owner of the vehicle and
the primary lienholder on the vehicle.
   (j)   A transportation network company shall disclose all of the following
information in writing to a transportation network company driver before that
transportation network company driver may accept a request for a transportation
network company prearranged ride on that transportation network company's
digital network:
      (1)   The insurance coverage, including the types of coverage and limits
for each type of coverage, that the transportation network company provides
while the transportation network company driver uses a personal vehicle in
connection with the transportation network company's digital network.
      (2)   That, depending on the terms of the policy, the transportation
network company driver's personal automobile insurance policy might not provide
coverage while the transportation network company driver is logged on to the
transportation network company's digital network or is engaged in a prearranged
ride.
(Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-10-19)
State law reference - MCL 257.2123
 Sec. 12-889. - Driver's license-Required.
   No person shall drive or operate any taxicab, limousine, transportation
network vehicle, or other motor vehicle for hire upon any street, highway or
public way, including public parking lots in the city, unless such person has
been, and is at the time of such driving or operating, licensed in full force
and effect as an operator or chauffeur under the provisions of the state
vehicle code or by some other constituted authority, in accordance with MCL
257.301 and
Chapter 18, Section
18-189 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-10-19)
State law reference - MCL 257.301
Sec. 12-900. - Unlicensed operation.
   It shall be unlawful to permit, and it shall be unlawful for any unlicensed
driver or any driver whose license has been suspended or revoked to operate,
any taxicab, limousine, or transportation network company vehicle, or other
motor vehicle for hire in the city while such suspension or revocation exists.
A person who operates or permits to be operated a limousine, taxicab, or
transportation network vehicle in violation of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a term of jail for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500.00 or both in accordance with
Chapter 18, Section
18-199 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 81-55, § 22, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-10-19)
State law reference - MCL 257.904
Sec. 12-901. - Payment of taxi fares in advance.
   Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the
legal fare in advance and may refuse employment until so prepaid, but no driver
of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or
persons upon request anywhere in the city, unless previously engaged or unable
to do so.
(Ord. No. 81-55, § 26, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-10-19)
Sec. 12-902. - Disputes as to fares.
   All disputes as to the lawful rate of fare shall, upon the request of the
driver or passenger of the vehicle, be determined by a police officer. Failure
to comply with such determination shall subject the offending party to a charge
of disorderly conduct. This provision shall be mandatory, and a police officer
must render such service.
(Ord. No. 81-55, § 27, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 02-923, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-
10-19)
Sec. 12-903. - Acceptance of transportation request.
   A transportation network company driver shall not accept a request for
transportation unless the request is accepted through the transportation
network company's digital network. A transportation network company driver who
violates this subsection shall be responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-10-10)
Sec. 12-904. - Nondiscrimination and accommodation.
   (a)   A limousine carrier, taxicab carrier, and transportation network
company shall adopt a policy of nondiscrimination with respect to passengers
and potential passengers and shall notify limousine drivers, taxicab drivers,
and transportation network company drivers of the policy adopted under this
subsection.
    (b)   A limousine driver, taxicab driver, and transportation network
company drivers hall comply with all applicable laws regarding
nondiscrimination against a passenger or potential passenger.
   (c)   A limousine driver, taxicab driver, and transportation network company
drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding accommodation of
service animals.
   (d)   A limousine carrier, taxicab carrier, and transportation network
company shall not impose an additional charge for providing services to a
passenger with a physical disability because of his or her disability.
   (e)   A carrier, company, or driver that violates this subsection shall be
responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 19-1658, 9-10-19)
Secs. 12-905-12-950. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XXI. - PUBLIC MOVING VANS
Sec. 12-951. - Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, a "public moving van" shall mean every
vehicle used for the conveyance of household furniture from place to place for
hire.
(Ord. No. 81-58, § 1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-952. - License required.
   No person shall keep for hire any public moving van without a license to do
so.
(Ord. No. 81-58, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-953. - License fee, issuance; insurance; number plate.
   The city clerk is hereby authorized to grant licenses to any person to
operate a public moving van upon paying the per-vehicle application fee, as
listed iin Section
12-6 of this Chapter, to the city treasury and after the applicant has
furnished satisfactory proof to the city clerk that he carries cargo insurance
of $500,000.00 for each vehicle engaged in the business, public liability
insurance in an amount not less than $500,000.00 and property damage insurance
in an amount not less than $100,000.00. Upon payment of such fee and the
posting of required insurance, the clerk shall deliver to the applicant a
number plate for each vehicle. All licenses shall expire on December 1 of each
year.
(Ord. No. 81-58, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 11-1324, 5-16-11; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-
8-22)
Sec. 12-954. - Display of plate; records.
   Every person licensed under this article shall cause the number plate to be
posted in a conspicuous place upon the moving van, and shall keep a record of
the place from and the place to which the household goods of any person is
moved.
(Ord. No. 81-58, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-955. - Weekly report.
   On Monday of each week, the owner of each moving van used to move household
goods within the city, or to or from the city during the previous week, shall
file with the police department a statement showing the name of each person who
employed him to move household furniture, the place from and the place to which
such furniture was moved.
(Ord. No. 81-58, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-956. - Covering, pads required.
   All public moving vans shall be covered and equipped with standard furniture
moving pads.
(Ord. No. 81-58, § 1, 11-4-81)
ARTICLE XXII. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[6] 
Footnotes:
--- (6) ---
State Law reference— Weights and measures, MCL 290.601 et seq., MSA 12.1081(1)
et seq.
Sec. 12-971. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Assistant shall mean an assistant to the supervisor.
   Barrel, when used in connection with fermented liquor, shall mean a unit of
31 gallons.
   Commodity in package form shall mean a commodity put up or packaged in any
manner in advance of sale in units suitable for either wholesale or retail
sale, exclusive, however, of an auxiliary shipping container enclosing packages
that individually conform to the requirements of this division. An individual
item or lot of any commodity not in package form, but on which there is marked
a selling price based on an established price per unit of weight or of measure,
shall be construed to be commodity in package form.
   Consumer package or package of consumer commodity shall mean a commodity in
package form that is customarily produced or distributed for sale through
retail sales agencies or instrumentalities for consumption by individuals, or
use by individuals for the purposes of personal care or in the performance of
services ordinarily rendered in or about the household or in connection with
personal possessions, and which usually is consumed or expended in the course
of such consumption or use.
   Cord, when used in connection with wood intended for fuel purposes or
pulpwood, shall mean the amount of wood that is contained in a space of 128
cubic feet when the wood is ranked and well stowed.
   Inspector shall mean a city inspector of weights and measures.
   Nonconsumer package or package of nonconsumer commodity shall mean any
commodity in package form other than a consumer package, and particularly a
package designed solely for industrial or institutional use or for wholesale
distribution only.
   Sell or sale shall mean barter and exchange.
   Supervisor shall mean the sealer of weights and measures for the city.
   Ton shall mean a unit of 2,000 pounds avoirdupois weight.
   Weight, in connection with any commodity, shall mean net weight.
   Weights and measures shall mean weights and measures of every kind,
instruments and devices for weighing and measuring, and any appliances and
accessories associated with any or all such instruments and devices, except
that the term shall not be construed to include meters for the measurement of
electricity, gas (natural or manufactured) or water or devices to measure the
usage of communications services when the same are operated in a public utility
system. Such devices or any appliances or accessories associated therewith, are
excluded from this division.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 3, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 12-972. - Sealer authorized.
   There shall be in the city a sealer known as the supervisor of weights and
measures, and such assistants as he may require who shall possess such powers
and perform such duties as are provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-973. - Abbreviations.
   The following abbreviations, and none other, may be employed in the quantity
statement on a package of commodity. Periods and plural forms are optional.
Normally, neither periods nor plural forms are used.
avoirdupois      avdp
cubic            cu
Cubic centimeter cc
feet or foot     ft
fluid            fl
gallon           gal
gram             g
inch             in
kilogram         kg
liquid           liq
microgram        mcg
milligram        mg
milliliter       ml
ounce            oz
pint             pt
pound            lb
quart            qt
square           sq
weight           wt
yard             yd
 
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 24, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-974. - Ambiguous terms.
   When the term "ounce" is employed in a declaration of liquid quantity, the
declaration shall identify the particular meaning of the term by use of the
term "fluid," however, this distinction may be omitted when, by association of
terms, the proper meaning is obvious; for example, one pint, four ounces. When
the declaration of quantity is in terms of the dry pint or dry quart, the
declaration shall include the word "dry."
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 25, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-975. - Systems and definitions recognized.
   The system of weights and measures in customary use in the United States and
the metric system of weights and measures are jointly recognized, and one or
the other of these systems shall be used for all commercial purposes in this
city. The definitions of basic units of weight and measure, the tables of
weight and measure, and weights and measures equivalents, as published by the
National Bureau of Standards, are recognized and shall govern weighing and
measuring equipment and transactions in this city.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-976. - City standards; verification; custody; enforcement; records.
   (a)   Weights and measures in conformity with the standards of the United
States, as have been supplied to the city by the federal government or
otherwise obtained by the city for use as city standards, when the same have
been certified as being satisfactory for use as such by the state department of
agriculture, shall be the city standards of weights and measures. The city
standards shall be tested for accuracy by the state department of agriculture
at least once every five years. The supervisor shall have custody of the city
standards and shall maintain such standards in good order and take all
necessary precaution for their safekeeping.
   (b)   The supervisor shall keep an accurate record of all his official acts,
shall enforce the provisions of this division and he shall have general
supervision over the weights and measures offered for sale, sold or in use in
this city.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-977. - Specifications, tolerances and regulations; correct apparatus;
incorrect apparatus.
   The specifications, tolerances and regulations for commercial weighing and
measuring devices, together with amendments thereto, as recommended by the
National Bureau of Standards and published in National Bureau of Standards
Handbook 44 and supplements thereto, or in any publication revising or
superseding Handbook 44, shall be the specifications, tolerances and
regulations for commercial weighing and measuring devices of this city, except
as specifically modified, amended or rejected by a regulation issued by the
state department of agriculture. For the purposes of this division, apparatus
shall be deemed to be "correct" when it conforms to all applicable requirements
promulgated as specified in this section; other apparatus shall be deemed to be
"incorrect."
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-978. - Inspecting and testing of weights and measures.
   (a)   The supervisor may inspect, and test to ascertain if they are correct,
all weights and measures kept, offered or exposed for sale. He shall inspect,
and test to ascertain if they are correct, all weights and measures
commercially used in:
      (1)   Determining the weight, measurement or count of commodities or
things sold or offered or exposed for sale on the basis of weight or of measure
or count.
      (2)   Computing the basic charge or payment for services rendered on the
basis of weight or of measure or count.
   (b)   The supervisor shall inspect and test all weights and measures
enumerated in this division whenever any measure or measures are installed,
renewed or altered in any specified stand, store, conveyance, or establishment
or whenever a request to examine any particular measure or measures is filed
with his office.
   (c)   Fees.
      (1)   A fee shall be charged to the owner of a scale, weights, measure,
or weighing or measuring device for its inspection when:
         a.   The inspection is a regular inspection;
         b.   The inspection is a reinspection of a device that has been tested
and found incorrect; and
         c.   The inspection is performed at the request of the owner.
      (2)   Inspection fees shall be established by the police department and
approved by the chief of police; fees shall be based on costs connected with
the inspections and shall be reviewed on an annual basis.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-665, 4-2-96)
Sec. 12-979. - Investigation of complaints.
   The supervisor shall investigate complaints made to him concerning
violations of the provisions of this division and shall, upon his own
initiative, conduct such investigations as he deems advisable to develop
information on prevailing procedures in commercial quantity determination and
on possible violations of the provisions of this division and to promote the
general objective of accuracy in the determination and representation of
quantity in commercial transactions.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-980. - Weight, measurement, inspection of packages of commodities,
sampling procedures.
   The supervisor, as often as he deems advisable, shall weigh, measure or
inspect packages or amounts of commodities offered or exposed for sale, sold or
in the process of delivery, to determine whether they contain the amounts
represented and whether they be offered or exposed for sale, or sold in
accordance with law. When such packages or amounts of commodities are found not
to contain the amounts represented, or are found to be kept, or offered or
exposed for sale in violation of law, the supervisor may order their sale
discontinued and may so mark or tag them as to show them to be illegal. The
supervisor may employ recognized sampling procedures under which the compliance
of a given lot of packages will be determined on the basis of the result
obtained on a sample selected from a representative of such lot.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-981. - Stop-use orders, stop-removal orders, removal orders.
   The supervisor may issue stop-use orders, stop-removal orders or removal
orders with respect to weights and measures being or susceptible of being
commercially used. He may issue stop-removal orders or removal orders with
respect to packages or amounts of commodities kept, offered or exposed for
sale, sold or in process of delivery, whenever in the course of his enforcement
of the provisions of this division he deems it necessary or expedient to issue
such orders. No person shall use, remove from the premises specified, or fail
to remove from the premises specified any weight, measure, package or amount of
commodity contrary to the terms of any order issued pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-982. - Approval, rejection, condemnation, confiscation; enforcement,
seizure.
   The supervisor shall approve for use and seal or mark with appropriate
devices such weights and measures as he finds upon inspection or test to be
"correct," as defined in section
12-977. He shall reject or condemn and seal or mark as "rejected" or
"condemned" such weights and measures as he finds upon inspection or test to be
"incorrect," as defined in section
12-977. Sealing or marking shall not be required with respect to weights and
measures of such character or size that such sealing or marking would be
inappropriate, impractical or damaging to the apparatus in question. The
supervisor shall reject or condemn and may seize and destroy weights and
measures found to be incorrect. Weights and measures that have been rejected or
condemned and ordered corrected or disposed of may be confiscated and may be
destroyed by the supervisor, if not corrected as required by, or if disposed of
contrary to the requirements of section
12-984. The supervisor may seize for use as evidence without formal warrant
incorrect or unsealed weights and measures or amounts or packages of
commodities found to be used, retained, offered or exposed for sale, or sold in
violation of law. In the performance of his official duties, he may enter and
go into or upon without formal warrant any structure or premises.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-983. - Delegated powers of inspectors.
   The powers and duties given to and imposed upon the supervisor by this
division are hereby given to and imposed upon his assistants and inspectors
when acting under the instructions and at the direction of the supervisor.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-984. - Rejected or condemned weights and measures; disposition.
   Weights and measures that have been rejected or condemned and ordered
corrected or disposed of under the authority of the supervisor shall remain
subject to the control of the supervisor until such time as suitable repair or
disposition thereof has been made pursuant to this section. The owners of such
rejected or condemned weights and measures shall cause the same to be made
correct within a specified period authorized by the supervisor, or may dispose
of the same but only in such manner as is specifically authorized by the
supervisor.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-985. - Commodities, liquid, nonliquid, measurement; exceptions.
   (a)   Commodities in liquid form shall be sold only by liquid measure or by
weight, and commodities not in liquid form shall be sold only by weight,
measure, or by count. However, liquid commodities may be sold by weight and
nonliquid commodities may be sold by count only if such methods give accurate
information as to the quantity of commodity sold. This section shall not apply
to:
      (1)   Commodities sold for immediate consumption on the premises where
sold.
      (2)   Vegetables sold by the head or bunch.
      (3)   Commodities in containers standardized by a law of this state or by
federal law.
      (4)   Commodities in package form when there exists a general consumer
usage to express the quantity in some other manner.
   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the supervisor to assure that
amounts of commodities sold are determined in accordance with good commercial
practice and are so determined and represented as to be accurate and
informative to all parties in interest.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-986. - Package labels—Contents; allowable variations.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any commodity in
package form kept for the purpose of sale, or offered or exposed for sale,
shall bear on the outside of the package such definite, plain, legible and
conspicuous declarations of:
      (1)   The identity of the commodity in the package by its common or usual
name, description, or generic term, unless the same can easily be identified
through the wrapper or container.
      (2)   The net quantity of the contents in terms of weight, measure or
count, but the term "when packed" or any words of similar import, or any term
qualifying a unit of weight, measure or count, such as "jumbo," "giant," "full"
or the like, that tend to exaggerate the amount of commodity in a package,
shall not be used.
      (3)   The name and address of the manufacturer, packer or distributor in
the case of any package kept, offered or exposed for sale, or sold any place
other than on the premises where packed.
   (b)   The supervisor shall permit reasonable variations which may include
variations below the declared weight or measure caused by ordinary and
customary exposure to conditions that normally occur in good distribution
practice and that unavoidably result in decreased weight or measure. Such
allowable variations shall provide for exemptions for small packages and for
commodities put up in variable weights or sizes for sale intact and either
customarily not sold as individual units or customarily weighed or measured at
time of sale to the consumer.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-987. - Same—Random weights, measures or counts, additional
declarations.
   In addition to the declarations required by section
12-986, any commodity in package form, which package is one of a lot containing
random weights, measures or counts of the same commodity and bears the total
selling price of the package, shall bear on the outside of the package a plain
and conspicuous declaration of the price per single unit of weight, measure or
count.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-988. - Packages—Misleading wrappers.
   Any commodity in package form shall not be so wrapped, nor shall it be in a
container so made, formed or filled as to mislead the purchaser as to the
quantity of the contents of the package.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-989. - Same—Advertisement, declaration of quantity.
   Whenever a commodity in package form is advertised in any manner and the
retail price of the package is stated in the advertisement, there shall be
closely and conspicuously associated with such statement of price a declaration
of the basic quantity of contents of the package as is required by law or
regulation to appear on the package, except that this section shall not apply
to products for agricultural or horticultural use where the custom is to state
the number of objects or amount of area which can be treated per package unit
and the number or area is so stated. Where the law or regulation requires the
declaration of net quantity to appear on the package in terms of more than one
unit of weight or measure, only the smallest unit of weight or measure need be
stated in the advertisement. In connection with the declaration the qualifying
term "when packaged" or any other words of similar import, or any term
qualifying a unit of weight, measure or count, for example, "jumbo," "giant,"
"full" and the like that tends to exaggerate the amount of commodity in the
package, shall not be used.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-990. - Commodities; sale by weight, net weight.
   When any commodity is sold on the basis of weight, the net weight of the
commodity shall be employed and all contracts concerning commodities shall be
so construed.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-991. - Meat, meat products, poultry and seafood sold by weight; food
combination sold by weight, quantity representation by total weight of product
or combination.
   Except for immediate consumption on the premises where sold, or as one of
several elements comprising a ready-to-eat meal sold as a unit for consumption
elsewhere than on the premises where sold, all meat, meat products, poultry,
whole or parts, and all seafood except shellfish, offered or exposed for sale,
or sold, as food shall be offered or exposed for sale and sold by weight. When
meat, poultry or seafood is combined with or associated with some other food
element or elements to form either a distinctive food product or a food
combination, such food product or combination shall be offered or exposed for
sale and sold by weight, and the quantity representation may be the total
weight of the product or combination, and a quantity representation need not be
made for each of the several elements of the product or combination.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-992. - Commodity or service; sale by weight, measure or count;
misrepresentation; display of price including fraction of a cent.
   Whenever any commodity or service is sold, or is offered, exposed or
advertised for sale, by weight, measure or count, the price shall not be
misrepresented, nor shall the price be represented in any manner calculated or
tending to mislead or deceive an actual or prospective purchaser. Whenever an
advertised, posted or labeled price per unit of weight, measure or count
includes a fraction of a cent, all elements of the fraction shall be
prominently displayed, and the numeral or numerals expressing the fraction
shall be immediately adjacent to, of the same general design and style as, and
at least one-half the height and width of the numerals representing the whole
cents.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-993. - Truckloads of commodities.
   (a)   A delivery of any produce, coal, coke, sand, gravel or any other
commodity, product or merchandise sold in bulk form by weight, measure or count
in truckload or partial truckload quantity shall be accompanied by duplicate
delivery tickets, which shall clearly state, in ink or other indelible
substance, the name and address of the vendor, the name and address of the
purchaser, identity of merchandise being delivered and the net quantity of the
delivery. The gross weight and tare weight from which the net weight is
computed, each shall be expressed in pounds. One of these tickets shall be
retained by the vendor, and the other shall be delivered to the purchaser at
the time of delivery.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to a delivery where the weight, measure
or count is to be determined at the time of delivery. The person determining
the weight, measure or count shall furnish to the vendor or to the purchaser a
delivery ticket containing the information required by this section.
   (c)   This section shall not apply when weight, measure or count is
determined by a governmental unit or agency.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-994. - Quantitative terms.
   A declaration of quantity shall conform to the standards enumerated in the
regulations promulgated by the state director of weights and measures in
accordance with the applicable state law.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 23, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-995. - Obstruction of enforcement officers.
   Any person who shall hinder or obstruct in any way the supervisor of weights
and measures, any assistant or inspector in the performance of his official
duties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 26, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-996. - Impersonation of officers.
   Any person who shall impersonate in any way the supervisor, any assistant or
inspector by the use of his seal or a counterfeit, or in any other manner,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 27, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-997. - Prohibited acts.
   A person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, or as the servant or
agent of another person, performs any of the following acts is guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be punished as prescribed in section
1-9 of this Code.
      (1)   Use or have in possession for the purpose of using for any
commercial purpose specified in section 2-148, sell, offer, or expose for sale
or hire, or have in possession for the purpose of selling or hiring, an
incorrect weight or measure or any device or instrument used or calculated to
falsify any weight or measure.
      (2)   Use or have in possession for current use in the buying or selling
of any commodity or thing, or for hire or award, or in the computation of any
basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure
or in the determination of weight and measure when a charge is made for the
determination, a weight or measure that has not been tested and sealed by the
supervisor, unless:
         a.   Written notice has been given to the supervisor to the effect
that the weight or measure is available for examination, or is due for
reexamination;
         b.   Unless permission to use the weight or measure has been received
from the supervisor; or
         c.   Unless the weight or measure has been exempted from sealing or
testing requirements under section 2-152.
      (3)   Dispose of a rejected or condemned weight or measure in a manner
contrary to the provisions of this division.
      (4)   Remove from a weight or measure, contrary to the provisions of this
division, a tag, seal or mark placed thereon by the supervisor.
      (5)   Sell, or offer or expose for sale, less than the quantity he
represents of a commodity, thing or service.
      (6)   Take more than the quantity he represents of a commodity, thing or
service when, as buyer, he furnishes the weight or measure by means of which
the amount of the commodity, thing or service is determined.
      (7)   Advertise, or offer or expose for sale, or sell a commodity, thing
or service in a condition or manner contrary to law.
      (8)   Use in retail trade, except in the preparation of packages put up
in advance of sale and of medical prescriptions, a weight or measure that is
not so positioned that its indications may be accurately read and the weighing
or measuring operation observed from some position which may reasonably be
occupied by a customer.
      (9)   Violate a provision of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 28, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-998. - Sale or repair of measure by supervisor.
   It shall be unlawful for the supervisor or his assistants or inspectors to
act as agents for or sell any measure or measures, to have any pecuniary
interest in connection with same or to charge or receive any article of value
for repairing any measure or measures.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 29, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-999. - Injunction.
   The supervisor is authorized to apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for, and such court upon hearing and for cause shown may grant, a temporary or
permanent injunction restraining any person from violating any provisions of
this division.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 30, 11-4-81)
Sec. 12-1000. - Proof of existence of weight, measure or device; presumption.
   Proof of the existence of a weight, measure or a weighing or measuring
device in or about any building, enclosure, stand or vehicle in which or from
which it is shown that buying or selling is commonly carried on, in the absence
of conclusive evidence to the contrary, shall be presumptive proof of the
regular use of such weight, measure or weighing or measuring device for
commercial purposes and of such use by the person in charge of such building,
enclosure, stand or vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-118, § 31, 11-4-81)
Secs. 12-1001—12-1019. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XXIII. - VALET PARKING
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 12-1020. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Badge means an emblem or device identifying an individual as being an
employee of a valet parking service, or business.
   Parking means allowing a vehicle, whether occupied by a person or not, to
stand upon private property, or upon a public place or street, except when
obeying traffic signals, directions or regulations.
   Pick-up and drop-off point means a designated location where a valet parking
attendant shall take possession of a motor vehicle and drive such motor vehicle
to an area to be parked and to which such vehicle shall be returned to the
owner or driver thereof.
   Revocation means the termination of a valet parking license, which shall not
be eligible to be renewed or restored.
   Standing means the stopping of a motor vehicle other than for the purpose of
and while actually receiving or discharging passengers.
   Suspension means the temporary withdrawal of a valet parking license for a
set period of time.
   Valet parking attendant means an employee of a valet parking service who
operates, drives and parks motor vehicles in the course of his employment.
   Valet parking service means a person or persons, or a business that provides
motor vehicle pick-up and drop-off services for the purpose of temporarily
parking such vehicles.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1021. - Service requirements.
   The valet parking service shall:
      (1)   Provide sufficient personnel to handle all requests for valet
parking promptly and to prevent motor vehicle congestion at pick-up and drop-
off points.
      (2)   Procure and maintain the following minimum insurance coverage
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Workers' compensation insurance. Workers' compensation insurance
including employers' liability coverage, in accordance with all applicable
state statutes.
         b.   General liability insurance. General liability insurance with
limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence; or commercial
general liability insurance endorsed to provide the equivalent of this
coverage.
         c.   Garage keepers legal liability insurance. Garage keepers
liability insurance with limits of liability of not less than $100,000 per
occurrence; or commercial general liability insurance endorsed to provide the
equivalent of this coverage.
         d.   Additional insured. Garage liability insurance and garage keepers
legal liability insurance, as described above, shall name the city as
additional insured for all activities connected with the valet parking service
and shall include an endorsement stating the following as "additional insured":
the city, all elected and appointed officials, all employees and volunteers,
all boards, commissions, and/or authorities and their board members, including
employees and volunteers thereof. This coverage shall be primary to the
additional insureds, and not contributing with any other insurance or similar
protection available to the additional insureds, whether said other available
coverage be primary, contributing or excess.
         e.   Cancellation notice. Thirty days' advance written notice of
insurance cancellation, nonrenewal, reduction and/or material change in
coverage must be provided to the city. Notice of cancellation, material change
or reduction must be attached to the certificate of insurance, or otherwise
evidenced as in effect under the policy listed.
         f.   Proof of insurance coverage. The following certificates and
policies shall be provided to the city:
      1.   Two copies of certificate of insurance for workers' compensation
insurance;
      2.   Two copies of certificate of insurance for general liability
insurance;
      3.   Two copies of certificate of insurance for garage keepers legal
liability insurance;
      4.   If so requested, certified copies of all policies mentioned above
will be furnished.
         g.   Expiration. If any of the above coverages expire, renewal
certificates and/or policies must be provided to the city at least ten days
prior to the expiration date.
         h.   Acceptability of insurance company. All coverages shall be with
insurance carriers licensed to do business in the state. All coverages shall be
with carriers acceptable to the city.
      (3)   Hire and retain as valet parking attendants only personnel 18 years
of age or older, with valid state driver's licenses and not more than six
pointes on their driving records as a result of moving traffic violations;
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1022. - Attendant requirements.
   The valet parking attendant shall:
      (1)   Be subject to all state and city traffic laws applicable to motor
vehicles;
      (2)   Be 18 years of age or older;
      (3)   Possess a valid state driver's license with no more than six points
on his driving record as a result of moving traffic violations.
      (4)   Not operate during those days and times of day nor operate upon
those streets, alleys or other public ways, or places prohibited by regulations
promulgated by the police chief;
      (5)   Present upon request an identification badge with a photograph of
the attendant and the number of the valet parking service's license.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1023. - Shelter.
   No valet parking service or attendant shall erect or maintain any form of
shelter in the public right-of-way for the use of attendants or patrons of the
service.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1024. - Key boxes.
   No parking service or attendant shall erect or maintain a key box or other
device for the storage of keys to motor vehicles on or attached to city
property.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1025. - Parking areas.
      (1)   All vehicles parked by an attendant shall be legally parked in
conformance with city code and ordinances.
      (2)   No attendant shall park a vehicle on a residential street at any
time, unless otherwise approved in writing by an official from the police
department.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1026. - Signs.
   A valet parking service may place one sign at the pick-up and drop-off point
subject to the approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1027. - Duties of the police chief.
      (1)   The police chief shall from time to time designate areas as pick-up
and drop-off points. All licenses shall stop only at such designated areas to
pick-up and drop-off vehicles.
      (2)   The police chief shall from time to time set operating times for
valet parking services that are most acceptable in terms of the public health,
safety and welfare.
      (3)   The police chief shall make such other rules and regulations he
deems necessary for the safety and efficient operation of valet parking
services and for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   The police chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
article.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1028. - Public right-of-way.
   No valet parking service or attendant shall interfere with the free flow of
traffic; congest, block, or otherwise interfere with a public right-of-way; or
cause vehicles to block or interfere with the use of metered parking spaces
unless approved in writing by the chair of the parking advisory commission and
the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 09-1221, 4-27-09)
Secs. 12-1029—12-1034. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
Sec. 12-1035. - Required.
      (1)   A business(s) or other establishment(s), or person(s), seeking
ongoing valet parking services, shall obtain a valet parking license in the
name of the business(s), establishments(s) or persons(s), in accordance with
this article. The business(s), establishment(s) or person(s) shall then employ
the valet parking service of their choice. The business(s), establishments(s)
or person(s) shall then submit the required information related to the valet
parking service for review by the city.
      (2)   Upon the valet parking service being approved by the city, the
business(s), establishment(s) or person(s) submitting an application for a
valet parking service license shall be allowed to offer valet parking pursuant
to the terms and conditions detailed upon the license issued by the city.
      (3)   No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall operate,
conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in the valet parking
service business upon the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places
unless the owner holds a current valid license for a valet parking service
pursuant to this division.
      (4)   The requirements of this article shall not apply to one-time
events, or single events, that may occur in the business district of the city
from time to time, nor to one-time events, or single events that may occur,
from time to time, in single family residential zoned areas of the city. The
police chief, or his designee, shall be responsible for determining whether or
not an event is considered a "one-time" or a "single" event, as those terms
apply to this article.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1036. - Application.
   (1)   Application for valet parking service licenses under this division
shall be made upon such forms prescribed by the city, including payment of a
licensing fee, as listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter. The license shall not be issued until payment is made to
the treasurer.
   (2)   The business(s), establishment(s) or person(s) seeking valet parking
service shall file the application.
   (3)   The application for valet parking service shall be reviewed by the
appropriate departments within the city, including, but not limited to the
police department and the building and safety department.
   (4)   The applicant for valet parking service shall pay any application fees
levied as a result of review of the application by the city. The application
fee is solely for purposes of city review of the application.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-1037. - Investigation.
      (1)   The application shall be referred to the police chief, who shall
have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the
background of the applicant. Based upon such investigation, the police chief
shall approve or deny the license application. In making his determination, the
police chief shall consider:
         a.   The proposed location of the pick-up and drop-off point of the
valet parking service or services;
         b.   The traffic patterns in the area;
         c.   The availability of parking in the area;
         d.   The proposed parking area for motor vehicles parked by the valet
parking service or services;
         e.   The proposed location of signs; and
         f.   Whether such person has previously operated in this city or state
or in another city or state under a valet parking license or permit and has had
such license or permit revoked or suspended; and the reasons therefore.
      (2)   Upon approval of the application for valet parking services, the
business(s), establishments(s) or person(s), shall refer the name of the valet
parking service company to the police chief who shall have a reasonable time in
which to investigate the valet parking service company and the background of
its attendants/employees. Based upon such investigation, the police chief shall
approve or deny the valet parking service company. In making his determination
hereunder, the police chief shall consider whether that company has met the
requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1038. - Denial, appeal.
   If the police chief, pursuant to this division, denies an applicant's choice
of a valet parking service provider, the applicant may appeal on behalf of the
valet parking service provider, to the city council in writing, stating reasons
why the license should be granted. The city council may grant or deny the
license after a public hearing, and such decision shall be final. The city
council may elect on its own motion to review any determination of the police
chief granting or denying a license.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1039. - Transfer.
   A license issued under the provisions of this division shall not be
transferable.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1040. - Expiration.
   Each license issued under the provisions of this division shall expire at
12:00 midnight on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1041. - Renewal.
   Annual renewal of any license under this division shall require conformance
with all of the requirements of this article. Application for renewal of
licenses authorized under this division may be made 30 days before the
expiration date.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1042. - Revocation and suspension.
      (1)   Police chief's authority to suspend. The chief of police or his
designee may order any license issued under this division suspended for any
period of time, up to and including one year, when a licensee fails to comply
and to maintain compliance with, or violates any application, provision,
standard or requirement of this article, or any regulation promulgated under
this article, or any other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
   The chief of police or his designee may also order any license issued under
this division suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days upon the city
receiving a compliant about the conduct and behavior of a parking attendant, or
the service rendered by such attendant. The purpose of the 30-day suspension is
so that the police chief may investigate the nature and severity of the
complaint. Upon the conclusion of the investigation, the chief of police or his
designee, at his sole discretion, may take the appropriate action upon the
license as determined by the facts of the investigation.
      (2)   Automatic suspension. Upon receipt of a ten-day notice of
cancellation from the licensee's insurance carrier as required in section
12-1021, a license shall be automatically suspended as of the date set forth in
such notice as the date of cancellation unless, prior to such date, the
licensee presents new proof of insurance to the clerk.
      (3)   Revocation. If a licensee has been suspended two or more times
previously, the chief of police or his designee may order its license revoked
if the licensee again fails to comply and to maintain compliance with, or
violates any application, provision, standard or requirement of this article,
or any regulation promulgated under this article, or any other applicable laws.
      (4)   Notice of suspension or revocation. Notice of suspension or
revocation shall be given to the licensee by first class mail.
      (5)   Appeal of suspension or revocation. Upon written request of the
licensee, a hearing to appeal such suspension or revocation shall be held
before the city council. Upon receipt of a written appeal the council shall set
a hearing date within a reasonable period. Notice of such hearing shall be
given in writing by first class mail to the appellant at least three days prior
to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds for the
suspension or revocation of the license and shall state the time and place
where such hearing shall be held.
      (6)   Reapplication after suspension. After the termination of the
designated period of suspension, a former licensee may seek any person,
persons, business or businesses to file an application on its behalf, so as to
reapply for a new license. Before a new license is issued to a former licensee,
the former licensee shall be required to meet all of the qualifications and pay
all fees set forth in this division.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Sec. 12-1043. - Agreement to authorize operation on public right-of-ways.
   The city may enter into a license agreement with licensed valet parking
services for the purpose of allowing the service to operate on designated areas
of the public right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 06-1082, 6-12-06)
Secs. 12-1044—12-1099. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XXIV. - TREE REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT
Sec. 12-1100. - Purpose.
   Recognizing the city's status as a Tree City USA, the purpose of this
article is to establish policies, regulations and standards necessary to ensure
that the city will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban
forest.
   However, nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to impose any
liability upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of
any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant on his
property or under his control in such condition as to prevent it from
constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street,
park, boulevard, alley or public place within the city.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09)
Sec. 12-1101. - Definitions.
   Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter in inches of the tree
measured at four feet above the existing grade. (Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord.
No. 24-1823, 9-24-24)
Sec. 12-1102. - Responsibility of enforcement.
   Compliance with this article shall be enforced by the Mayor, the Police
Department, the Department of Economic Development, the Department of Public
Works, ordinance enforcement officers, and other enforcement officers as the
Mayor may designate.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 24-1823, 9-24-24)9)
Sec. 12-1103. - Removal of trees by third-party contractor; licensing of tree
removal contractors; permit required.
   (a)   Required. The removal of any tree with a DBH of 12 inches or greater
by a contractor, for hire, on any property without first obtaining a tree
removal license shall be prohibited. A permit is also required subject to
section 12-1104.
   (b)   Application. Applications for a tree removal license shall be filed
with the City Clerk and shall include the following information:
   (1)   The name of the corporation, partnership, LLC or individual, the
address, trade name, and telephone number; and
   (2)   If the applicant is a partnership or LLC, the name, address and phone
number of each member; and
   (3)   If the applicant is incorporated, the date and state of incorporation
and the registered agent upon whom service of process is authorized to be made.
   (c)   License fee. The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
   (d)   Insurance. As a condition of the issuance of a tree removal license,
the applicant shall procure and maintain general liability insurance with
limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, or
commercial general liability insurance endorsed to provide the equivalent of
this coverage.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2- 8-22; Ord. No. 24-1823, 9-24-
24)
Sec. 12-1104. - Tree removal by property owner; permit required; review
standards by zoning district.
   (a)   Required. The removal or relocation of any tree with a DBH of 12
inches or greater on any property without first obtaining a tree removal permit
shall be prohibited. A property owner may remove a tree located on their
property subject to all applicable requirements of this article, including but
not limited to the permit requirement of this section.
   (b)   Fee. A non-refundable fee of $125.00 shall be due at the time a permit
application is submitted.
   (c)   Application. Permits shall be obtained by submitting a tree removal
permit application in a form provided by the Department of Economic
Development, which will include the following information:
   (1)   The owner and/or occupant of the land on which the tree is located.
   (2)   A description of each tree to be removed, including diseased or
damaged trees, and the location thereof.
   (d)   Review procedures. The Department of Economic Development shall review
the applications for tree removal permits and may impose such conditions on the
manner and extent of the proposed activity as are necessary to ensure that the
activity or use will be conducted in such a manner as will cause the least
possible damage, encroachment or interference with natural resources and
natural processes within the affected area.
   (e)   Review standards. The following standards shall be used to review the
applications for tree removal permits:
   (1)   In residential zoning districts, the tree has a DBH of 16 inches or
greater.
   (2)   In commercial and industrial zoning districts, an application for tree
removal will be reviewed to determine if the tree has a DBH of 16 inches or
greater, and shall be subject to the applicable regulations in the zoning
ordinance, including but not limited to site plan review regulations.
   (3)   The removal of trees within the affected area shall be limited to
instances:
      a.   Where necessary for the location of a structure or site improvement
and when a reasonable and prudent alternative location for such structure or
improvement can be demonstrated to create an undue hardship.
   (f)   The stumps of trees shall be removed to six inches below the surface
of the ground. The removal of the stump shall take place within 90 days of the
removal of the tree.
   (g)   Appeals. Appeal of denial of a tree removal permit shall be brought
before the director of the Department of Economic Development, who shall have
authority to approve, reverse or modify such recommendations based upon the
facts set forth in this article. Appeal shall be made within 21 days of the
denial of the tree removal permit.
   (h)   Liability and safety standards.
   (1)   A property owner that removes a tree from their property without the
use of a third-party contractor shall be strictly liable for any damage caused
by the removal.
   (2)   A property owner that removes a tree from their property shall do so
in a manner that ensures the safety of people and property, including any
nearby and/or neighboring private or public property.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 16-1561, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 24-1823, 9-24-
24)
Sec. 12-1105. - Emergency action.
   A person may remove a tree 16 inches in DBH or greater without a permit if
there is an emergency caused by the tree being in a hazardous or dangerous
condition requiring immediate action for the safety of structures or human
life. In such event, the Department of Economic Development shall be notified
at the earliest opportunity in order to confirm the emergency situation. If the
Department of Economic Development determines that the situation was not an
emergency requiring immediate action, the person removing the tree shall be
subject to the penalties outlined in section 12-1107.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 24-1823, 9-24-24)
Sec. 12-1106. - Replacement of trees.
   Tree replacement shall be done in accordance with the following: If the
replacement trees are of at least two inches in DBH, but less than three inches
in DBH, the permit grantee shall be given credit for replacing one tree.
   (a)   Replacement tree standards. All replacement trees shall:
   (1)   Comply with the standards for landscape materials, section
5.04 of the zoning ordinance of the city.
   (2)   Be located on the same parcel of land on which the activity is to be
conducted, unless tree relocation or replacement is not possible on the same
property on which the activity is to be conducted.
   (b)   Tree replacement by the city. Subject to the provisions of chapter 17,
article VI of the code of ordinances, the city may replace and replant any tree
removed from private property with a tree along and within the boundary lines
of streets and public places within the city, and in front of or adjacent to
lots or parcels abutting upon streets and public places subject to the
following:
   (1)   The owner of the property directly adjacent to the curb strip will
have the option of selecting the species/type of tree(s) to be planted on the
curb strip from the city’s tree replacement inventory subject to availability.
   (2)   The owner of the property directly adjacent to the curb strip may
request that a tree not be planted in the curb strip by completing a form
approved by the city and submitting it to the Director of the Department of
Public Works, or their designee, before a tree is planted. If a tree is planted
before the request is received, the tree may be removed and replanted at a
different location eligible under this subsection at the property owner’s
expense.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 24-1823, 9-24-24)
Sec. 12-1107. - Violations, penalties.
   (a)   A violation of this article shall be considered a civil infraction
punishable by a civil fine of $250.00, plus costs imposed by the court.
   (b)   For each tree removed in violation of this article, a separate penalty
may be invoked.
   (c)   Increased fines shall be imposed for repeat violations of this article
by a person, partnership, corporation or association as follows:
   (1)   As used in this section, “repeat violation” means a violation
committed within six (6) months of an admission or determination of
responsibility for a violation of this article occurring upon the same
property.
   (2)   The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine of
$500.00 plus costs imposed by the court.
   (d)   A third violation committed by the same person, partnership,
corporation or association within a twelve (12)-month period shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in jail, a fine of up to $500.00, or
both.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 24-1823, 9-24-24)
Sec. 12-1108. - Injunctive relief.
   Any activity conducted in violation of this article is declared to be a
nuisance per se, and the city may commence a civil suit for an order abating or
enjoining the violation.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09)
Sec. 12-1109. - Stop-work order.
   The city may issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, permits or inspections until the sections of this article,
including any conditions attached to a tree removal permit, have been fully
met. Failure to obey a stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this
article.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09)
Sec. 12-1110. - Savings clause.
   Should any word, phrase, paragraph or section of this article be declared to
be unconstitutional or illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining portions of this article shall remain unaffected.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09)
Sec. 12-1111. - Repeal.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are
hereby repealed.
(Ord. No. 09-1204, 2-2-09)
Secs. 12-1112—12-1199. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XXV. - SMOKING LOUNGES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 12-1200. - Purpose.
   On May 1, 2010, the State of Michigan implemented Public Act 188 of 2009
which bans tobacco smoking in all public places and worksites including, but
not limited to, bars, restaurants, hospitals, hotels, shopping malls, and
bowling alleys.
   The purpose of this article is to recognize the harm caused by smoking
tobacco and non-tobacco products (including secondhand smoke), the state's
mandate to move toward a totally smoke free environment, and the potential for
negative impact on commercial development as a result of an area saturated with
smoking lounges.
   It is also a purpose of this article to recognize that smoking lounges are
frequently a gathering place for younger members of the population resulting in
underage smoking of tobacco and non-tobacco products, after hours activities,
etc., that not only negatively impact the health and well-being of our youth,
but negatively impact surrounding businesses and adjacent residential areas as
well.
   This article is designed to establish reasonable, objective, and uniform
regulations to minimize the potential for adverse community impact relating to
these establishments.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1201. - Definitions.
   For purposes of this article, the words, terms, and phrases shall be defined
as follows:
   Cigar shall mean any roll of tobacco weighing three or more pounds per
1,000, which roll has a wrapper or cover consisting of tobacco.
   Disqualifying criminal act shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   Any of the following misdemeanor or felony offenses under any of
the following statutes, as amended, for which less than seven years elapsed
since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date:
         a.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter X, Arson and Burning;
         b.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XI, Assaults, except MCL 750.81(1)
and (2);
         c.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XVII, Bribery and Corruption;
         d.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXII, Compounding Offenses;
         e.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVA, Criminal Enterprises;
         f.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVIII, Disorderly Persons;
         g.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXI, Embezzlement;
         h.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIII, Explosives, Bombs, Harmful
Devices;
         i.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIV, Extortion;
         j.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIII, Frauds and Cheats;
         k.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIV, Gambling;
         l.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLV, Homicide;
         m.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLVIII, Indecency and Immorality;
         n.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LVIII, Mayhem;
         o.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVII, Prostitution;
         p.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVIIA, Human Trafficking;
         q.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVI, Sexual Conduct;
         r.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVIII, Robbery;
         s.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXXIII-A, Michigan Anti-Terrorism
Act;
         t.   MCL, 333, Part 74, Controlled Substances Offense and Penalties;
         u.   MCL § 205.27, Taxation-Prohibited Acts, including tax evasion;
      (2)   Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the
foregoing offenses; or
      (3)   Any offense enumerated in the city Code of Ordinances which
substantially corresponds to one of the foregoing state offenses; or
      (4)   Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s)
been committed in Michigan, would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses.
   Influential interest shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   Actual power to operate or control the operation, management, or
policies of a current or prospective business, including the manager of the
prospective business; or
      (2)   Ownership of a financial interest in the business, or ownership of
an interest that is ten percent or more of the total interest of a current or
prospective business, including such business entities as a firm, partnership,
limited partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation; or
      (3)   Holding an office, such as, president, vice president, secretary,
treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc., in a legal entity which
operates a current or prospective business.
   Minor shall mean any person under 18 years of age.
   Non-tobacco smoking products or substances shall include any product or
substance, loose or contained within smoking paraphernalia, that can be
consumed by smoking such as, but not limited to, clove cigarettes, herbal
cigarettes, herbal hookah, steam stones, smoking gels or other smoked products.
   Premises shall mean the location at which a smoking lounge establishment
operates and includes the land, and all improvements located thereon, including
the primary building and all accessory and out-buildings, and is not limited to
the smoking area.
   Sale shall mean, the exchange, barter, traffic, or furnishing, of tobacco
products, non-tobacco smoking products, and substances which are regulated by
the State of Michigan and pursuant to this article.
   Smoking lounge shall mean an establishment that allows smoking of tobacco
products or non-tobacco products or substances on the premises. The term
"smoking lounge" includes, but is not limited to, facilities commonly described
as tobacco retail specialty stores, cigar bars and lounges, hookah cafés and
lounges, tobacco bars and lounges, tobacco clubs or zero percent nicotine
establishments.
   Tobacco product shall mean a product that contains tobacco and is intended
for human consumption, loose or contained within smoking paraphernalia,
including, but not limited to, cigars, cigarettes, non-cigarette smoking
tobacco or smokeless tobacco as defined by the Tobacco Products Tax Act, MCL
205.422, e-cigarettes, bidis, and kreteks.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Secs. 12-1202—12-1205. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 12-1206. - Business license required.
   A person shall not operate a smoking lounge in the city without first
obtaining a smoking lounge business license issued pursuant to the provisions
of this article.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1207. - Location.
   (a)   Special regulation of smoking lounges is necessary to insure that the
adverse effects of this land use will not contribute to the deterioration of
the surrounding neighborhood, including the diversity and vibrancy of business
districts, or negatively impact the health and well-being of minors.
   (b)   The establishment of a smoking lounge is prohibited if it constitutes
the second such use within a 1,200-foot radius.
   (c)   The establishment of a smoking lounge is prohibited if it is located
within 700 feet of a school, childcare facility, or a park.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1208. - Application.
   Any person required by this article to have a smoking lounge business
license shall file an annual written application with the city clerk on a form
furnished by the clerk. The application shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The applicant's full true name and any other names used by the
applicant in the preceding seven years. If the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity, then all persons
with an influential interest in the entity shall be deemed an applicant and
shall provide the information required by this article. Each applicant must be
qualified under section
12-1209, each applicant must sign the application, and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted;
      (2)   Current business address or another mailing address of the
applicant;
      (3)   Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a
copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document
issued by a governmental agency;
      (4)   The business name, location, zoning classification, legal
description, parcel identification number, mailing address and phone number;
      (5)   The name and business address of the designated local agent who is
responsible to supervise the premises and activities and who is authorized to
receive service of process;
      (6)   A statement of the status of monies owed to the city including, but
not limited to, water bills, real property taxes, personal property taxes, and
miscellaneous fees;
      (7)   A statement of whether any applicant has been convicted of or has
pled guilty or no contest to a disqualifying criminal act as defined in this
article and, if so, a list of each criminal act involved, including the date,
place, jurisdiction, date of conviction, and release from confinement, where
applicable;
      (8)   A statement as to whether any business in which an applicant has
had an influential interest has, in the previous seven years, and at the time
during which the applicant had the influential interest:
         a.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance, as defined by
the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.3801;
         b.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking; or
         c.   Been subject to foreclosure proceedings; and
      (9)   A statement of the nature of the proposed operation.
   The information provided pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (9) of this
subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1209. - Issuance of license.
   (a)   Pre-existing businesses. All smoking lounges operating pursuant to a
valid certificate of occupancy for a smoking lounge on the effective date of
the ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby granted a de facto
temporary license to continue operating for a period of 180 days following the
effective date. During this period all smoking lounge businesses shall apply
for a license pursuant to this article and, by the expiration date of the 180
days, shall conform to all requirements for issuance of a license.
      (1)   All smoking lounges operating pursuant to a valid certificate of
occupancy for a smoking lounge on the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, and who are otherwise eligible for a license
pursuant to this article, are exempt from the location requirements stated in
section
12-1207.
      (2)   De facto temporary licenses will only be granted if the business is
in good standing with the city (e.g., no taxes are owed, no water bills are
unpaid, etc.).
   (b)   Application review. Upon the filing of a completed application for a
smoking lounge business license, the city clerk shall forward a copy to the
following departments: department of law, police department, fire department,
department of economic and community development, treasury division of the
finance department, water division of the department of public works, and any
other department, to review the application for compliance with the
requirements of this article and all other applicable ordinances and codes.
   (c)   The city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, or issue to the
applicant a written notice to deny the application. The city clerk shall issue
a license unless:
      (1)   Information. An applicant has failed to provide information as
required by section
12-1208 for issuance of a license, or has falsely answered a question or a
request for information on the application form;
      (2)   Fee. The license application fee required by this article has not
been paid;
      (3)   Code compliance. The subject premises lack a current certificate of
occupancy or does not comply with applicable building, zoning, plumbing,
mechanical, electrical, health, or fire prevention codes.
      (4)   Ventilation and parking. The department of economic and community
Development has indicated that the premises lack the ventilation or parking
required for the proposed use;
      (5)   Unpaid fees. Relevant city departments have indicated that there
are unpaid fees or incurred violations under their purview related to the
subject premises;
      (6)   Taxes. The treasury division has denied a real and/or personal
property tax clearance pertaining to the subject premises;
      (7)   Ownership/lease. The applicant does not own the premises for which
a license is sought or does not have a lease for the full period for which the
license is sought;
      (8)   Disqualifying criminal act. An applicant has been convicted of, or
has pled guilty or no contest to, a disqualifying criminal act as defined in
this article;
      (9)   Additional licensing. The business is not licensed to do business
in Michigan or has not obtained a sales tax license;
      (10)   Exceeding cap. The cap of 15 smoking lounge business licenses
issued to smoking lounges operating in this city, established by this article,
has been met and a waiver has not been obtained from the city council;
      (11)   Location. The proposed location of the smoking lounge violates
section
12-1207 above.
   (d)   Reservation of authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
this article, no applicant has a right to the issuance of a license. The city
hereby reserves the right to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the
issuance of such a license, based on the objective criteria listed in this
article which relate to concerns for public health, safety, and welfare as
identified herein.
   (e)   License contents; posting; possession. The license, if granted, shall
state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, the
address of the business. The business license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the business so that it may be read at any
time.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1210. - Fees.
   The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid to the treasurer before a license may be
issued.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-
22)
Sec. 12-1211. - Inspection.
   Filing an application for a smoking lounge business license shall constitute
consent to inspection by city officials and/or representatives for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article. During
city business hours or at other mutually agreeable time, the applicant shall
allow the representatives of city departments onto the property and into the
proposed licensed premises to complete an inspection. This section shall be
narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the
licensed premises pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1212. - Transfer of license.
   (a)   A licensee shall not transfer the license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a smoking lounge under the authority of a license at any place
other than the address designated in the smoking lounge business license
application. A proposed transfer shall require a new application and shall be
subject to the same procedures, standards and fees required for a new license.
Each location operated by a licensee requires a separate license.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1213. - Annual license, expiration.
   Each license shall expire annually on the 31st day of July unless otherwise
suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application
and payment of the fee as required by this article.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1214. - Cap on allowable number of smoking business licenses;
reservation of license.
   (a)   The number of smoking lounge business licenses issued to smoking
lounges operating in the city shall be capped at 15.
   (b)   Any person wishing to obtain a smoking lounge business license and
thereby exceed the cap of 15, may petition the city council for permission to
do so.
   (c)   An individual who has submitted an application to the city clerk for a
smoking lounge license and has submitted a special land use application to the
planning division of the department of law or has received special land use
approval shall be considered to have reserved a license, provided that one is
available under the cap of 15 active or reserved licenses. A license may only
be reserved for a period of six months from the date the smoking lounge
business license or special land use application is submitted, whichever is
earlier. An extension of time may be granted by the city council to an
applicant who has shown diligence toward fulfilling all requirements for a
smoking lounge business license
   (d)   The city clerk shall not issue a smoking lounge license application,
nor shall the planning commission consider a special land use application for a
smoking lounge license after 15 smoking lounge business licenses have been
approved and/or reserved, unless the applicant has received prior approval from
the city council to exceed the cap of 15 active and/or reserved licenses.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 16-1555, 10-18-
16)
Secs. 12-1215—12-1220. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, HEARING
Sec. 12-1221. - Denial.
   In the event the city clerk issues a written notice to deny for failure to
comply with the requirements of section
12-1209, the provisions of section
12-1224 providing for an appeal hearing shall apply.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1222. - Suspension.
   The city clerk shall suspend the license for a period of 30 days if the
licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an
employee to violate this article. Upon receiving notice of a violation, the
clerk shall issue a written notice to suspend, which shall include the grounds
for the suspension, the effective date of the suspension, and that the licensee
may within 20 days, request in writing, an appeal hearing before the city
council pursuant to the provisions of section
12-1224. If an appeal hearing is not requested, the suspension shall take
effect 21 days after the date of the notice of suspension.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1223. - Revocation; non-renewal.
   (a)   Violation after previous suspension. The city clerk shall issue a
written notice of revocation if the licensee knowingly violates this article or
has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and the licensee's
license has been suspended within the previous 12-month period.
   (b)   Grounds for revocation/non-renewal. The city clerk shall issue written
notice to revoke or non-renewal of the license if:
      (1)   The licensee would not meet the standards set forth in section
12-1209 if the licensee were an applicant for a new license;
      (2)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed two or more
violations of the regulations of this article in the preceding 12-month period
and the violations have been adjudicated;
      (3)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a nuisance, as
defined under the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.3801, to be maintained upon
the premises;
      (4)   The subject premises has existing violations of building, zoning,
plumbing, mechanical, electrical, health, nuisance or fire prevention codes;
      (5)   The operation of the licensed establishment has resulted in a
pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the establishment that
substantially disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood;
      (6)   The licensee has failed to maintain the grounds and exterior of the
licensee's establishment by allowing litter, debris, and/or refuse to
unreasonably remain on the property or adjoining properties;
      (7)   The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the business during a
period of time when the license was suspended; and/or
      (8)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in illegal
activity or allowed any illegal activity to occur in or on the licensed
premises.
   (c)   Effect of appeal of conviction. The fact that any relevant conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation/non-renewal of the
license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license
revocation/non-renewal is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction
shall be treated as null and of no effect and the license shall be reinstated.
   (d)   Effective date. The revocation/nonrenewal shall not take effect for 21
days from the date of the notice of revocation/non-renewal.
   (e)   Appeal. The written notice to revoke or to not renew shall include the
grounds for the revocation/non-renewal, the effective date of the revocation/
non-renewal, and advise that the licensee may request in writing, within 20
days of the date of the notice of revocation/non-renewal, an appeal hearing
before the city council pursuant to the provisions of section
12-1224. If not appealed, the revocation/non-renewal shall take effect 21 days
after the date of the notice of revocation/non-renewal.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1224. - Appeal hearing.
   (a)   Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the city
council shall provide the licensee with notice and an opportunity to be heard.
The city council shall serve notice upon the licensee by certified mail, not
less than 20 days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall state:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the hearing.
      (2)   A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony,
and may be represented by an attorney.
   (b)   Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the city
council and shall be open to the public. The city council shall, by resolution,
decide the appeal at the public hearing. Within 14 days of the public hearing,
the city council shall provide the licensee with a copy of its resolution which
shall include the specific grounds for its decision and, if relevant, a
statement that the decision may be appealed to the circuit court.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Secs. 12-1225—12-1230. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-1231. - Hours of operation; dining; outdoor dining; other outdoor
activities prohibited.
   (a)   Businesses operating a licensed smoking lounge shall be closed between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
   (b)   Patrons of a licensed smoking lounge can have food on the premises one
of two ways: 1) brought onto the premises by the patron in take-out containers;
or 2) delivered to the front door of the premises in take-out containers at the
request of the patron. Employees of a smoking lounge shall not have any
involvement in food preparation or service.
      (1)   Outdoor dining may be permitted provided it is in compliance with
the zoning ordinance and does not violate any other section of the Code or
state law.
      (2)   No outdoor dining shall occur at a business operating a licensed
smoking lounge with outdoor seating between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 10:00
a.m.
   (c)   A licensee may petition the city council for permission to allow
smoking in an outdoor patio area.
      (1)   When considering a request for outdoor smoking, the council shall
consider the following (not an exhaustive list): proximity to food
establishments; proximity to the public right-of-way; proximity to schools and
parks; proximity to residential areas; free standing building v. adjoining
businesses; nature of adjoining businesses. The council may condition its
approval of outdoor smoking.
   (d)   All other smoking lounge business activities, including but not
limited to the smoking of any substance by any person, shall be conducted
wholly indoors.
   (e)   Only employees and/or contractors shall be on the premises of a
licensed smoking lounge between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and shall
carry proof of employment.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1232. - Mechanical ventilation required.
   Mechanical ventilation shall be supplied in compliance with the Michigan
Mechanical Code to ensure sufficient ventilation of the smoking lounge. The
recirculation and the natural ventilation of air from the smoking lounge are
prohibited. The air supplied to the smoking lounge shall be exhausted and
discharged to an approved location in compliance with the Michigan Mechanical
Code.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1233. - Loitering, exterior lighting, and monitoring requirements.
   It shall be the duty of the licensee or the designated local agent to:
      (1)   Signs. Post conspicuous signs stating that:
         a.   The business is a smoking lounge;
         b.   The business is not a food service establishment;
         c.   No loitering is permitted on the premises; and
         d.   No minors are permitted on the premises.
      (2)   Monitor. Designate one or more employees to monitor, while the
premises are open for business, the activities of persons on the premises by
visually inspecting the interior and exterior of the premises at least once
every 90 minutes or inspecting and monitoring the premises by use of video
cameras; and
      (3)   Exterior. Ensure lighting of the exterior premises is provided,
including all parking areas, for visual inspection and security. All exterior
lighting shall comply with city Code and ordinances.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1234. - Minors prohibited.
   No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business unless
the individual is 18 years of age or older. The licensee and local agent shall
ensure that identifications of individuals on the premises have been checked to
determine that every individual is 18 years of age or older before entry into
the premises. A sign shall be posted near the entrance stating "No one under
the age of 18 allowed."
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Secs. 12-1235—12-1240. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 12-1241. - Penalties and enforcement.
   (a)   Misdemeanor. A licensee, and/or a manager, agent, employee of a
licensee, who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of
$500.00 and/or a maximum of 93 days imprisonment. Each day a violation is
committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be treated as a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1242. - Repealer.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed only to the extent necessary to give the ordinance from which this
article is derived full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
Sec. 12-1243. - Severability.
   If any section, clause or provision of the ordinance from which this article
is derived shall be declared to be unconstitutional, void, illegal, or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section, clause or
provision declared to be unconstitutional, void, or illegal shall thereby cease
to be a part of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but the
remainder of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall stand and
be in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 15-1455, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 15-1469, 6-23-15)
ARTICLE XXVI. PROHIBITION OF MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 12-1244. - Intent.
   The Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act of 2018, has passed
with the intent to adopt marijuana (or "marihuana" as it is identified in the
legislation) policies that enable taxing, controlling and legalizing marijuana
similar to alcohol. The state legislation permits municipalities to completely
prohibit or limit the number of marijuana establishments within its boundaries.
   It is the intent of this division to prohibit any and all marijuana
establishments within the geographic boundaries of the City of Dearborn
pursuant to section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana
Act of 2018, and to the fullest extent allowed by law.
   It is also the intent of this division that all existing Ordinances or parts
of Ordinances are to be interpreted as consistent with this Ordinance and State
law. Any Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with any of the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed. Nothing in this Ordinance
results in any prohibitions otherwise allowed under the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act, as adopted, or the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act,
Initiated Act 1 of 2008, MCI 333.26421 et seq.
(Ord. No. 18-1631, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 22-1739, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-1245. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have, the meanings ascribed to them in this section and as defined in Section 3
of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, except when the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Cultivate means to propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure, or separate
parts of the marijuana plant by manual or mechanical means.
   Department means the department of licensing and regulatory affairs as
defined in section 3 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act.
   Industrial hemp means a plant of the genus cannabis and any part of that
plant, whether growing or not, with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration that does not exceed 0.3% on a dry-weight basis, or per volume or
weight of marijuana-infused product, or the combined percent of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid in any part of the plant
of the genus cannabis regardless of moisture content.
   Licensee means a person holding a state license.
   Marijuana means the substance or material identified and defined as
"Marihuana" in section 3 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana
Act. It means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, growing or not; the
seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant
or its seeds or resin, including marijuana concentrate and marijuana-infused
products. For purposes of this act, marijuana does not include:
   (1)   The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or
cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin
extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed of the
plant that is incapable of germination;
   (2)   Industrial hemp; or
   (3)   Any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or
oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
   Marijuana establishment means a marijuana grower, marijuana safety
compliance facility, marijuana processor, marijuana microbusiness, marijuana
retailer, marijuana secure transporter, a licensed smoking lounge, as defined
and regulated by Dearborn Code of Ordinances section
12-1200 et seq., which allows the use or consumption of marijuana upon its
premises, or any other type of marijuana related business licensed by the
department, as defined in section 3 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act.
   Marijuana grower means a person licensed to cultivate marijuana and sell or
otherwise transfer marijuana to marijuana establishments, as defined in Section
3 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act.
   Marijuana-infused product means a topical formulation, tincture, beverage,
edible substance, or similar product containing marijuana and other ingredients
and that is intended for human consumption.
   Marijuana microbusiness means a person licensed to cultivate not more than
150 marijuana plants; process and package marijuana, and sell or otherwise
transfer marijuana to individuals who are 21 years of age or older or to a
marijuana safety compliance facility, but not to other marijuana
establishments.
   Marijuana processor means a person licensed to obtain marijuana from
marijuana establishments; process and package marijuana; and sell or otherwise
transfer marijuana to marijuana establishments.
   Marijuana retailer means a person licensed to obtain marijuana from
marijuana establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer marijuana to
marijuana establishments and to individuals who are 21 years of age or older.
   Marijuana secure transporter means a person licensed to obtain marijuana
from marijuana establishments in order to transport marijuana to marijuana
establishments.
   Marijuana safety compliance facility means a person licensed to test
marijuana, including certification for potency and the presence of
contaminants.
   Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership of any type, trust, or other legal entity.
   Process or processing means to separate or otherwise prepare parts of the
marijuana plant and to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or
prepare marijuana concentrate or marijuana-infused products.
   State license means a license issued by the department that allows a person
to operate a marijuana establishment.
(Ord. No. 18-1631, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 22-1739, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-1246. - Prohibition.
   Any and all marijuana establishments as defined in this article are
prohibited within the geographic boundaries of the City of Dearborn pursuant to
section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act of 2018,
and to the fullest extent allowed by law.
(Ord. No. 18-1631, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 22-1739, 2-8-22)
Secs. 12-1247—12-1259. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXVII. NIGHTCLUBS AND NIGHTCLUB PROMOTERS
Sec. 12-1260. - Purpose.
   Successful communities are those that provide desirable atmospheres for
living, working and recreating. To foster strong neighborhoods and a healthy
economy, it is vital that a balance between these sometimes competing interests
be achieved and maintained. Viable, well-managed nightlife activities are
crucial elements to the success of the city, as they provide needed
recreational opportunities to visitors and residents alike. The hospitality
industry is of particular importance to the city's tourist economy, and it is
imperative that this industry be conducted in a manner that fosters safe,
inviting entertainment so that the city remains attractive to first-time, and
returning, visitors. These establishments, often in close proximity to one
another, provide natural places for gathering and frivolity. Due to their hours
of operation, the entertainment they provide and their numbers of patrons
coming and going, these establishments often generate noise, litter, traffic
and other negative effects which disturb the peace, quietude and good order of
the community and impose unnecessary burdens on public safety officers. The
City of Dearborn finds it in the interests of public safety and good order in
the community that reasonable measures be enacted to require that nightclubs
demonstrate a willingness and ability to responsibly conduct their business and
monitor the activities of their patrons.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1261. - Applicability.
   This article shall apply to all nightclubs and nightclub promoters as
defined in this article, including existing nightclubs as well as any that make
application subsequent to the effective date of this article.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1262. - Definitions.
   Disqualifying criminal act shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   Any of the following misdemeanor or felony offenses under any of
the following statutes, as amended, for which less than seven years elapsed
since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date:
         a.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter X, Arson and Burning;
         b.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XI, Assaults, except MCL 750.81(1)
and (2);
         c.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XVII, Bribery and Corruption;
         d.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXII, Compounding Offenses;
         e.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVA, Criminal Enterprises;
         f.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVIII, Disorderly Persons;
         g.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXI, Embezzlement;
         h.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIII, Explosives, Bombs, Harmful
Devices;
         i.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIV, Extortion;
         j.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIII, Frauds and Cheats;
         k.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIV, Gambling;
         l.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLV, Homicide;
         m.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLVIII, Indecency and Immorality;
         n.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LVIII, Mayhem;
         o.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVII, Prostitution;
         p.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVIIA, Human Trafficking;
         q.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVI, Sexual Conduct;
         r.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVIII, Robbery;
         s.   Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXXIII-A, Michigan Anti-Terrorism
Act;
         t.   Michigan Compiled Laws, 333, Part 74, Controlled Substances
Offense and Penalties;
         u.   Michigan Compiled Laws Section 205.27, Taxation-Prohibited Acts,
including tax evasion.
      (2)   Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the
foregoing offenses; or
      (3)   Any offense enumerated in the City Code of Ordinances which
substantially corresponds to one of the foregoing state offenses; or
      (4)   Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s)
been committed in Michigan, would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses.
   Influential interest shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   Actual power to operate or control the operation, management, or
policies of a current or prospective business, including the manager of the
prospective business; or
      (2)   Ownership of a financial interest in the business, or ownership of
an interest that is 10% or more of the total interest of a current or
prospective business, including such business entities as a firm, partnership,
limited partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation; or
      (3)   Holding an office, such as, president, vice president, secretary,
treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc., in a legal entity which
operates a current or prospective business.
   Nightclub shall mean a place operated for a profit, which is open to the
public and provides the opportunity to engage in social activities such as
dancing, promoter parties and special events, live or prerecorded music
including DJs, offering a limited bar food menu, all of which are provided for
a consideration that may be included in a cover charge or included in the price
of the food or beverage.
   Nightclub promoter shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, or
other entity or agent promoting any venue, performing artists, DJ, advertising
services, or similar activities by contracting with a nightclub not owned and/
or operated by the promoter.
   Nuisance Abatement Board shall refer to the public body established by
Article 1A of
Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances, entitled "Nuisances."
   Premises shall mean any place where a nightclub is operated or maintained,
including all hallways, bathrooms, public and private parking areas, and other
adjacent outdoor areas including the public sidewalk.
   Security personnel shall mean a person, persons, or agency that is licensed
by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs and hired to
provide protection of property on the premises of a nightclub.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1263. - Nightclub and nightclub promoter license required.
   (a)   A building, part of a building, or outdoor location may be occupied
and used as a night club, either on a regular basis or as a one time event,
only when a license for such use has been issued and is in effect under the
provisions of this article.
   (b)   A building, part of a building, or outdoor location may be occupied
and used as a night club by a nightclub promoter, entity or organization other
than the building owner or fulltime lessee, only when a nightclub promoter
license has been issued in addition to a nightclub license and is in effect
under the provisions of this article.
   (c)   Compliance with the requirements of this article shall be the
responsibility of the business owner at all times, including when events are
held by a nightclub promoter.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1264. - Application for license and fee.
   A nightclub and/or a nightclub promoter license application may be obtained
from the city clerk. The license issued shall allow its holder to operate the
nightclub or as a nightclub promoter under the terms and provisions of this
article. The license shall include the following requirements:
   (a)   An applicant for a nightclub and/or nightclub promoter license shall
provide the following:
      (1)   The business name, location, zoning classification, legal
description, parcel identification number, mailing address and phone number
where the nightclub or event is operated or is to be operated;
      (2)   The status of the applicant as an individual, partnership or
limited partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, or other entity;
      (3)   Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a
copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document
issued by a governmental agency;
      (4)   The applicant's full true name and any other names used by the
applicant in the preceding seven years. If the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity, then all persons
with an influential interest in the entity shall be deemed an applicant and
shall provide the information required by this article. Each applicant must
sign the application, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted;
      (5)   A statement of the status of monies owed to the city including, but
not limited to, water bills, real property taxes, personal property taxes, and
miscellaneous fees;
      (6)   A statement as to whether any business in which an applicant has
had an influential interest has, in the previous seven years, and at the time
during which the applicant had the influential interest:
         a.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance, as defined by
the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.3801, or by the City of Dearborn Code of
Ordinances;
         b.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking;
         c.   Been subject to foreclosure proceedings; and/or
         d.   Been declared to be a nuisance by the Nuisance Abatement Board.
      (7)   Authorization for an investigation into the background, including
any criminal record of the applicant and any person or entity named in the
application, including authorization to conduct subsequent investigations to
supplement or update the information;
      (8)   The applicant's agreement to abide by these regulations, the codes
and ordinances of the City of Dearborn, the laws of Michigan, and any
amendments, additions, or reenactments thereof;
      (9)   A written statement with a security plan approved by the chief or
police or his designee setting forth all measures proposed to ensure that
adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and
outside the premises will be maintained, and that the ages of patrons admitted
to the nightclub will be monitored;
      (10)   A statement of the approved occupancy load of the premises as
established by the Dearborn Fire Marshal;
      (11)   A statement of the proposed schedule of operating hours and days.
      (12)   The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of this Chapter, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-22)
Sec. 12-1265. - Action on the application.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall act on the application within 30 days after the
applicant has complied with the provisions of section
12-1264.
   (b)   This application will be denied if:
      (1)   The application is incomplete, contains any false information or
fails to comply with these regulations;
      (2)   Relevant city departments have indicated that there are unpaid fees
or incurred violations under their purview related to the specified premises;
      (3)   The Treasury Division has denied a real and/or personal property
tax clearance pertaining to the specified premises;
      (4)   The operation of a nightclub at the specified premises would
violate existing zoning restrictions;
      (5)   The subject premises lacks a current certificate of occupancy or
does not comply with applicable building, zoning, plumbing, mechanical,
electrical, health, or fire prevention codes;
      (6)   The applicant within the past seven years has been convicted of, or
pleaded guilty to, a disqualifying criminal offense;
      (7)   The Michigan Liquor Control Commission has revoked a license held
by any one of the persons named on the application;
      (8)   The applicant has violated these regulations or aided and abetted
any violation of these regulations;
      (9)   The location of the nightclub or event is within 700 feet of a
school, childcare facility, or a park measured from the nearest property lines;
      (10)   The location of the nightclub is within 1,200 feet of another
licensed nightclub establishment.
   (c)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, no applicant
has a right to the issuance of a license. The city hereby reserves the right to
determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such a license,
based on the objective criteria listed in this article which relate to concerns
for public health, safety, and welfare as identified herein.
   (d)   If the application is denied, the city clerk shall promptly notify the
applicant in writing of the order denying the application. If approved, the
city clerk shall promptly issue to the applicant a license. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk shall have a right of appeal in
accordance with the procedure set forth in section
12-14.
   (e)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the business so that it may be read at any time.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1266. - Transfer of license.
   A licensee shall not transfer the license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a night club, as the nightclub owner or the nightclub promoter, under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in
the business license application.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1267. - Annual license, expiration.
   Nightclub and nightclub promoter licenses shall expire annually on the
thirty-first day of July unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Licenses may be
renewed only by making application and payment of the fee as required by this
article.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1268. - Cap on allowable number of nightclub and nightclub promoter
licenses.
   (a)   The number of nightclub licenses issued in the city shall be capped at
five.
   (b)   Any person wishing to obtain a night club license and thereby exceed
the cap of five, may petition the City Council for permission to do so.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1269. - Grounds for non-renewal.
   The city clerk shall issue written notice of non-renewal of the license if:
   (1)   The licensee would not meet the standards set forth in section
12-1264 if the licensee were an applicant for a new license;
   (2)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a nuisance, as
defined under the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.3801, or as defined by the
Code of the City of Dearborn, to be maintained upon the premises;
   (3)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed the number of patrons
to exceed the approved occupancy load as established by the Dearborn Fire
Marshal;
   (4)   The subject premises has existing violations of building, zoning,
plumbing, mechanical, electrical, health, nuisance or fire prevention codes;
   (5)   The operation of the licensed establishment has resulted in a pattern
of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the establishment that substantially
disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood;
   (6)   The licensee has failed to maintain the grounds and exterior of the
licensee's establishment by allowing litter, debris, and/or refuse to
unreasonably remain on the property or adjoining properties; and/or
   (7)   The unlawful sale of any regulated drug, narcotic or other controlled
substance, prostitution, quarrelling, drunkenness, fighting, discharge of
weapons, or other breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted on the
specified premises. The term "specified premises" shall include the business
itself, as well as the parking area owned or used by the business; and/or
   (8)   Violations of this article occur on the premises during events
conducted by persons, entities or organizations, whether licensed under this
article or not.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1270. - Emergency temporary suspension by the Police Department.
   The chief of police or his designee shall have the full and absolute right
to temporarily suspend a nightclub and/or nightclub promoter license if it is
determined that the activities at the specified premises are detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (a)   The facility shall be vacated and closed effective immediately upon
verbal notification to the licensee, and/or a manager, agent, representative,
or employee of a licensee, by the chief of police or his designee.
   (b)   The nightclub may reopen thereafter, provided that the situation
giving rise to the emergency temporary suspension of the license has been
addressed effectively as determined by the Police Department.
   (c)   The Police Department shall promptly submit a document outlining the
basis for the decision to suspend the license(s) to the Nuisance Abatement
Board. The Nuisance Abatement Board may schedule a hearing in accordance with
the procedure outlined in section
13-26. If a hearing is held, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Nuisance
Abatement Board may:
      (1)   Continue the license;
      (2)   Temporarily suspend the license; or
      (3)   Permanently revoke the license.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1271. - Suspension or revocation.
   If a nightclub or nightclub promoter license is suspended or revoked, no
entertainment activities including amplified music, whether live or programmed,
dancing, table games or video games may be conducted on the premises. If any
such entertainment activities occur during a period of suspension or
revocation, the certificate of occupancy shall be revoked. Such suspension or
revocation does not otherwise affect the nightclub's sale, purchase,
transportation, possession, consumption, or other use of alcoholic beverages or
food service during suspension or revocation.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1272. - Regulations.
   (a)   Only persons over the age of 21 years shall be permitted to enter or
remain on the premises of a nightclub after 9.00 p.m.
   (b)   A nightclub may operate any day of the week and shall close no later
than 2:00 a.m.
   (c)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to employ an adequate
number of qualified security personnel in accordance with a security plan that
is approved by the Dearborn Police Department. Security staff shall be readily
identifiable and present on club premises during Friday, Saturday, and Sunday
and during all promoter parties and special events to maintain peace and order
and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws of the state and of the city.
   (d)   Nightclubs shall not allow any nightclub promoter to use, lease or
rent the nightclub premises (including any outdoor and/or parking areas)
without verifying that the promoter has a valid nightclub promoter license.
   (e)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to insure that no
controlled substances are offered for sale or consumed on the club premises.
   (f)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to insure that the
occupancy allowed by the fire marshal is not exceeded.
   (g)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to insure that no
guns, knives, brass knuckles, or other paraphernalia that may be used as
weapons are brought into the nightclub except by security guards duly licensed
and authorized to carry said weapons.
   (h)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to remove from the
nightclub premises any person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of,
or affected by the use of alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical
danger to the safety of others present.
   (i)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to prevent loitering
and the creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any
patrons of the nightclub on club premises or in the immediate vicinity.
   (j)   It shall be the obligation of the owner/operator to clean up all
litter resulting from club operations. The cleanup shall occur immediately
after the end of each day's operation.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1273. - Inspections.
   (a)   The city may order a building, health, and/or safety inspection at any
time there is reasonable cause to believe that any sanitary, unsafe, or
hazardous condition exists on the licensed premises.
   (b)   City personnel or agents including police officers may inspect the
licensed premises to insure continued compliance with the laws and these
regulations.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Sec. 12-1274. - Penalties and enforcement.
   A licensee, and/or a manager, agent, employee of a licensee, who violates or
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of $500.00 and/or a maximum of 93
days imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be treated as a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 17-1581, - -17)
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Air pollution act, MCL 336.11 et seq.; environmental
protection act, MCL 691.1201 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Nuisance means any person doing an unlawful act, omitting to perform a duty,
or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
commission, condition or thing either:
      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Is offensive to the senses;
      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
render dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk,
stream, ditch or drainage;
      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
      (6)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
Sec. 13-2. - Illustrative enumeration.
   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain on any public or private property of any of the following items,
conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
      (1)   Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation.
      (2)   Lawns in front yard, side yard, rear yard, adjacent rights-of-way
and easement with growth of grass, vegetation and weeds in excess of six
inches.
      (3)   The storage upon any property of building materials unless there is
in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such
property, and such building materials are intended for use in connection with
such construction; building materials shall include but shall not be limited to
lumber, bricks, concrete or cinderblocks, blocks, plumbing materials,
electrical wiring or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails,
screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. All unused
building materials shall be removed from the premises by the contractor prior
to the issuance of any occupancy permit or final acceptance of the building
inspector.
      (4)   The storage or accumulation of junk, goods and/or materials. The
term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves
or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other
material or other castoff material of any kind, whether or not the same could
be put to any reasonable use.
      (5)   The storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, litter, yard waste
and/or debris, except domestic refuse stored in such a manner as not to create
a nuisance.
      (6)   The storage and location of refuse containers not in compliance
with sections
16-5 and
16-6 of the City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances.
      (7)   Storage upon any property of junk vehicles or any vehicle parts
except in a completely enclosed building; for the purpose of this chapter the
term "junk vehicle" shall include any motor vehicle which is inoperative for
any reason such as being in a state of disassembly, disrepair, stripped,
dismantled, unregistered and unlicensed.
      (8)   The existence of any structure or damaged partial structure which
because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is
no longer habitable if a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which
it may have been intended.
      (9)   The existence of any vacant building, garage or other outbuilding
unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly
boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals.
      (10)   The existence of any incomplete structures, unless such structure
is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting
building permit issued by the city, and unless such construction is completed
within a reasonable time.
      (11)   Any condition which provides a food source or harborage for rats,
mice, snakes and other vermin.
      (12)   All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and any annoying
vibrations, including animal noises.
      (13)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the
conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of such odors and stenches.
      (14)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a
reasonable time after death.
      (15)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal
or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other
substances.
      (16)   Any building, structure or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained.
      (17)   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any
lot or piece of ground.
      (18)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities.
      (19)   The encouragement of lingering, roosting, and/or congregating of
pigeons by offering or providing food; the ground-feeding of any bird shall be
considered a nuisance per se.
      (20)   The possession, harboring, or providing shelter for an excessive
number of animals. The term "excessive number" shall be determined on a case-
by-case basis; the criteria to be applied in making such determination shall
include, but is not limited to, violations of subsections 21-28.
      (21)   Failure to remove and/or properly dispose of animal waste.
      (22)   Foul odors emitted from the dwelling and/or surrounding property
due to improper care of animals.
      (23)   Structural damage caused by repeated animal defecation and/or
urination.
      (24)   Presence of fleas, ticks, and/or other insects due to improper
care of animals.
      (25)   Poor health of animals due to improper care and and/or feeding.
      (26)   Poor health of humans due to unsanitary conditions caused by
improper care of animals.
      (27)   Failure to prevent and/or clean up of defecation and/or urination
on any property, public or private.
      (28)   Damage to the property of others by animal(s) running at large.
      (29)   Failure to correct and/or eliminate cross connections that have
been identified pursuant to
chapter 19 of this Code.
      (30)   The existence of landscaping, including hardscape elements and
outdoor furniture, installed so as to prevent or unreasonably obstruct the use
of adjacent property, including a driveway or other means of access to the
adjacent property. Landscaping installed within three feet of an adjoining
property will be presumed to constitute a nuisance, except for landscaping
installed along a lawfully-existing perimeter fence and landscaping that is set
back at least 18 inches from the adjoining property and measures no more than
four inches above the level of the adjoining property.
      (31)   Front yard gardens used for growing vegetables, fruits, berries,
or any other edible product.
      (32)   Outdoor lighting installed to illuminate recreational activities
in residential areas (e.g., basketball, tennis, hockey).
      (33)   Within 24 hours after the end of each accumulation of snow greater
than three inches, the failure of the property owner or occupant to remove the
accumulation from the adjacent public sidewalk and walks and ramps leading to a
crosswalk.
      (34)   Any business in or upon which the unlawful sale of any regulated
drug, narcotic or other controlled substance, prostitution, quarrelling,
drunkenness, fighting, discharge of weapons, or other breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted. The term "business" shall include the business itself,
as well as the parking area owned or used by the business.
         a.   Prosecution for a violation of this subsection may be instituted
against the business owner and/or the business manager.
   Violations of subsections (2), (5), (21) and (33) shall be subject to
immediate abatement as described in section
13-5.1.
   (35)   Failure to remove a tree stump located in the front yard of a
property, and side yard if a property is located on a corner, to six inches
below the surface of the ground within 90 days of the removal of a tree;
provided, however, that if weather conditions prevent the removal of a stump
within 90 days, then the director of property maintenance and development
services may allow a stump to remain for a definitive period of time. If the
property owner is dissatisfied with the decision of the director of property
maintenance and development services, then the property owner may appeal to
City Council, whose decision shall be final.
   (36)   Private property owners and/or the occupants of private property
shall not park or store vehicles used to conduct business enterprises on the
private property.
      a.   For the purposes of this subsection, "vehicles used to conduct
business enterprises" shall include, but is not limited to, heavy duty trucks,
panel
         vans or light duty trucks with commercial signage and/or roof racks,
ladders, winches or other equipment attached to the vehicle which is designed
to be used to transport commercial equipment and used in a business such as
construction, painting, plumbing, carpentry or landscaping.
      b.   This subsection shall not apply to vehicles stored in a garage.
      c.   This subsection shall not apply to a vehicle that the traffic
commission has permitted to park on private property.
   (37)   The parking of motor vehicles on grass or other unpaved areas unless
it is an area approved by the City of Dearborn.
   Violations of subsections (2), (5), (21) and (33) shall be subject to
immediate abatement as described in section 13-5.1.
(Ord. No. 96-687, 10-10-96; Ord. No. 06-1073, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 09-1237, 9-8-
09; Ord. No. 12-1361, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 14-1435, 9-9-14; Ord. No. 15-1497, 11-
10-15; Ord. No. 16-1553, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 16-1560, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 18-
1617, 7-17-18)
Sec. 13-3. - Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any partnership, corporation
or association, who owns, manages, leases, rents, or occupies any premises to
cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance.
   (1)   A violation of this section constitutes a civil infraction punishable
by a civil fine of $250, plus costs imposed by the court.
   (2)   Increased civil fines shall be imposed for repeat violations of this
section by a person, partnership, corporation or association.
      a.   As used in this section, "repeat violation" means a violation
committed within six months of an admission or determination of responsibility
for a violation of this section occurring upon the same property.
      b.   The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine
of $500, plus costs imposed by the court.
   (3)   Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be a
separate violation.
(Ord. No. 18-1618, 7-17-18; Ord. No. 22-1776, 10-25-22)
Sec. 13-4. - Enforcing officers.
   The police department, the department of building and safety, the department
of public works, and their deputies, agents and inspector, are hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 96-687, 10-10-96; Ord. No. 02-899, 5-21-02)
Sec. 13-5. - Notice to abate.
   Upon observing a violation of the provisions of this chapter, a notice to
abate shall be issued to the property owner as shown on the records maintained
by the department of assessment. The notice to abate shall be served by first
class mail to the address shown on the assessor's records. Additionally, the
notice to abate shall be posted in a conspicuous location upon the property at
issue. Failure to receive such notice to abate shall not be a defense to any
action by the city to abate the nuisance, collect abatement costs, collect
administrative costs, or impose penalties authorized by this Code. The notice
to abate shall inform the owner of the following:
   (1)   The nature of the violation;
   (2)   The time within which the violation must be abated, being not less
than three days and no more than five days from the date of the notice to
abate;
   (3)   That the owner or occupant of the property on which the violation has
occurred is responsible for contacting the city if they have corrected the
violation within the time period required, and providing proof of the
correction. The property owner must contact the city no later than 5:00 p.m. on
the date listed as the deadline they have to correct the violation.
      a.   The owner or occupant will have the following options for contacting
the city under this subsection:
         (i)   By completing an online form and submitting proof of compliance.
         (ii)   By emailing Neighborhood Services at the email address listed
on the notice and submitting proof of compliance.
         (iii)   If the owner or occupant does not have the ability to complete
the online form or send an email, they can call the phone number listed on the
notice to advise whether the violation has been corrected within the required
time. A code enforcement officer will report to the property to verify whether
the violation has been corrected.
      b.   Voice messages, emails or online submissions left after 5:00 p.m. on
that the deadline date will not be considered timely.
      c.   If the deadline date falls on a weekend or holiday when non-
emergency city services are closed, the next normal business day shall be
considered the deadline for purposes of owner/occupant abatement under this
subsection.
      d.   Failure to contact the city as specified in this subsection on the
notice will be considered a failure to timely abate the violation.
   (4)   That the city shall act to abate the violation if it is not abated by
the owner;
   (5)   That the cost of abatement by the city, together with an amount of
$75.00 per invoice to cover administrative costs and
      contingent expenses, shall be charged against the owner or occupant and
against the property itself; and
      a.   If the city acts to abate the violation, a service fee of 50% of the
cost of abatement, not to exceed $250.00, shall be charged to the owner or
occupant and against the property if the violation is abated but the owner or
occupant fails to notify the city of such abatement pursuant to subsection (3),
the purpose of which is to help defray costs associated with traveling to the
property and abatement preparation.
      b.   That, due to the increased administrative costs associated with
repeat offenders (e.g., increased monitoring of property), an additional fee of
$100.00 will be charged against the owner or occupant and against the property
itself for the second and subsequent incidents in a calendar year.
         (i)   At the request of the owner or occupant, and upon good cause
shown, the director of economic development, or his designee, may waive the
additional $100.00 fee once in a calendar year.
   (6)   That refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall
be a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $500, plus costs imposed by
the court.
      a.   The city may seek reimbursement from any person, partnership,
corporation or association for mobilization costs of any contractor hired by
the city to abate the nuisance when the contractor was unable to complete the
abatement due to the actions of that person, partnership, corporation or
association.
   (7)   Effective date of ordinance. The amendments adopted by Ordinance No.
24-1830 shall become effective on January 1, 2025.
(Ord. No. 02-899, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 11-1338, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 18-1619, 7-17-
18; Ord. No. 24-1830, 11-19-24)
Sec. 13-5.1. - Immediate abatement.
   (a)   Upon observing a violation of sections
13-2(2),
13-2(5),
13-2(21),
13-2(33),
13-5.3,
16-5, and/or
16-6, a notice to abate shall be issued and posted in a conspicuous location
upon the property at issue. Failure to receive such notice to abate shall not
be a defense to any action by the city to abate the nuisance, collect abatement
costs, collect administrative costs, or impose penalties authorized by this
code. The notice to abate shall include the following:
   (1)   The nature of the violation;
   (2)   The time within which the violation must be abated shall be no less
than one day from the date of the notice to abate;
   (3)   That the owner or occupant of the property on which the violation has
occurred is responsible for contacting the city if they have corrected the
violation within the time required, and providing proof of the correction. The
property owner must contact the city no later than 5:00 p.m. on the date listed
as the deadline they have to correct the violation.
      a.   The owner or occupant will have the following options for contacting
the city under this subsection:
         i.   By completing an online form and submitting proof of compliance.
         ii.   By emailing Neighborhood Services at the email address listed on
the notice and submitting proof of compliance.
         iii.   If the owner or occupant does not have the ability to complete
the online form or send an email, they can call the phone number listed on the
notice to advise whether the violation has been corrected within the required
time. A code enforcement officer will report to the property to verify whether
the violation has been corrected.
      b.   Voice messages, emails or online submissions left after 5:00 p.m. on
that the deadline date will not be considered timely.
      c.   If the deadline date falls on a weekend or holiday when non-
emergency city services are closed, the next normal business day shall be
considered the deadline for purposes of owner/occupant abatement under this
subsection.
      d.   Failure to contact the city as specified in this subsection on the
notice will be considered a failure to timely abate the violation.
   (4)   That the city shall act to abate the violation if it is not abated by
the owner;
   (5)   That the cost of abatement by the city, together with an amount of
$150.00 per invoice to cover administrative costs and contingent expenses,
shall be charged against the owner or occupant and against the property itself;
      a.   If the city acts to abate the violation, a service fee of fifty
percent of the cost of abatement, not to exceed $1,000.00, shall be charged to
the owner or occupant and against the property if the violation is abated but
the owner or occupant fails to notify the city of such abatement pursuant to
subsection (3), the purpose of which is to help defray costs associated with
traveling to the property and abatement preparation.
   (6)   That refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall
be a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $500, plus costs imposed by
the court.
      a.   The city may seek reimbursement from any person, partnership,
corporation or association for mobilization costs of any contractor hired by
the city to abate the nuisance when the contractor was unable to complete the
abatement due to the actions of that person, partnership, corporation or
association.
   (b)   Upon observing the same violation a second time in a calendar year, a
notice of violation shall be issued and the city shall act to abate the
violation without further notice.
   (c)   Upon observing the same violation a third time in a calendar year, a
notice of violation shall be issued and the city shall act to abate the
violation without further notice. Additionally, the violation shall constitute
a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $250, plus costs imposed by
the court.
   (d)   Upon observing the same violation a fourth and subsequent time in a
calendar year, a notice of violation shall be issued and the city shall act to
abate the violation without further notice. Additionally, the violation shall
constitute a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $500, plus costs
imposed by the court.
   (e)   Due to the increased administrative costs associated with repeat
offenders (e.g., increased
monitoring of property), an additional fee of $100.00 will be charged against
the owner or occupant and against the property itself for the second and
subsequent incidents in a calendar year.
   (1)   At the request of the owner or occupant, and upon good cause shown,
the director of economic development, or their designee, may waive the
additional $100.00 fee once in a calendar year.
   (f)   It shall be the duty of the director of economic development to give
general notice to the public of the requirements of this article by publishing
a notice in the official newspaper during the month of March each year and
continuously on the city's website. The notice shall indicate that a violation
of section
13-2(2),
13-2(5),
13-2(21),
13-2(33), and/or
13-5.3 (each section stated in its entirety) will result in immediate abatement
by the city with associated cost and fees being assessed against the property
owner.
   (g)   Effective date of ordinance. The amendments adopted by Ordinance No.
24-1830 shall become effective on January 1, 2025.
(Ord. No. 06-1074, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 12-1348, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 14-1428, 6-17-
14; Ord. No. 15-1466, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 15-1497, 11-10-15; Ord. No. 18-1620, 7-
17-18; Ord. 20-1679, 8-25-2020; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22; Ord. No. 24-1830,
11-19-24)
Sec. 13-5.2. - Unimproved land; duties; notice; immediate abatement.
   (a)   It is the duty of the owner of unimproved land, and/or any person
having charge of any unimproved land within the limits of the city to maintain
said property in continuous compliance with sections
13-2(2),
13-2(5),
13-2(21),
13-2(33),
16-5 and
16-6. For all unimproved land, general notice to the public of the requirements
of this article shall be published in the official city newspaper in the manner
provided in section
13-208(a), and such publication shall satisfy all notice requirements precedent
to immediate abatement by the city.
   (b)   A violation of this section shall be subject to the same penalties
identified in section
13-5.1.
(Ord. No. 15-1514, 12-16-15)
Sec. 13-5.3 - Fugitive dust control; for paved, partially paved, unpaved, and
storage lots.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate
commercial parking and storage lots, including transportation to, from, and
within these lots, in order to minimize the proliferation of dust, debris,
odors, vapors, smoke, and vehicle track-out in the City.
      The City finds that activities associated with these lots, including
transportation, have the potential to create, or contribute to the creation of,
dust, debris, odors, vapors, smoke, and vehicle track-out. The proliferation of
dust, debris, odors, vapors, smoke, and vehicle track-out have the potential to
create negative impacts on both residents and property. These include, but are
not limited to, potential health hazards associated with inhaling fugitive
dust, debris, odors, vapor, and smoke, which include pulmonary inflammation,
asthma, and fibrosis. In addition, the accumulation of dust, debris, odors,
vapors, smoke, and vehicle track-out negatively impacts the enjoyment of life
and property, and tends to depreciate the value of the property of others near
these lots.
      This section prescribes reasonable regulations to minimize dust, debris,
odors, vapors, smoke, and vehicle track-out from commercial parking and storage
lots, and applies to any owner, operator, or other person who owns, manages,
leases, rents, or occupies any commercial or storage lot, including any person
that transports materials to, from, or within these lots.
   (b)   Nuisance prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, including
any partnership, corporation, association, or agent thereof who owns, manages,
leases, rents, or occupies any paved, unpaved, or partially paved commercial
parking or storage lot(s) to cause, permit, maintain, or allow any condition(s)
to exist on said lots which creates or contributes to the creation of a
nuisance as defined in section 13.1 above as a result of dust, debris, odors,
vapors, smoke, or vehicle track-out.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
      (1)   Dust means any solid particulate matter that becomes airborne or
otherwise moves beyond the lot, facility, building, or structure property line
or, if being transported by a vehicle, moves beyond the confines of the
vehicle, by natural or human-made activities, excluding engine combustion
exhaust and particulate matter emitted from a properly permitted exhaust stack
equipped with a pollution control device.
      (2)   Storage lot shall mean any area in the City, whether publicly or
privately owned, where any object, solid waste, industrial waste, scrap
materials, industrial product or byproduct, containers, demolished building
materials, Utter, or material of any kind that may be a detriment to the public
health and safety or constitutes a nuisance is stored, placed, or kept for any
amount of time. This shall include, but is not limited to, any roadway,
highway, right-of-way, driveway, yard, building, structure, or other area where
the aforementioned items are stored, placed, or kept.
      (3)   Track-out shall mean the carrying of mud, dirt, soil, or debris on
vehicle wheels, slides, or undercarriages from a private, commercial, or
industrial site onto a public road, right-of-way, or property of another.
      (4)   Vapors includes any gaseous substances emanating from the movement
of materials by a vehicle. Vapors shall not include emissions or exhaust from a
vehicle as long as the emissions or exhaust are within accepted guidelines
under federal and state law.
      (5)   Vehicle is any car, truck, or railcar.
   (d)   Notice of violation. If a nuisance or condition(s) causing or
contributing to a nuisance are discovered by an enforcement official, the
enforcement official may issue a notice of violation to the person, including
any partnership, corporation, association, or agent thereof who owns, manages,
leases, rents, or occupies any paved, unpaved or partially paved commercial
parking or storage lot(s), that requires elimination of the nuisance and/or
condition(s) causing or contributing to the nuisance within 3 days of
notification.
      (1)   Any steps taken to eliminate a nuisance and/or condition(s) causing
or contributing to the nuisance must comply with all existing local, state, and
federal laws.
      (2)   Exception to notice of violation. If pursuant to subsection (d) a
notice of violation is issued and the violation is corrected, but the same
violation occurs again within 18 months of the original notice of violation, it
shall constitute a violation pursuant to subsection (f) of this section.
   (e)   Vehicles and transportation.
      (1)   Any vehicle that is discovered to have dust, debris, smoke, odor,
vapor, and/or gaseous substance coming from material(s) that it is carrying,
hauling, or otherwise transporting, and that either causes or contributes to
the creation of a nuisance or obstructs, impedes, or otherwise interferes with
the normal flow of traffic or obstructs the view of a driver in a different
vehicle, must cover the material(s) to eliminate the nuisance caused by said
dust, debris, smoke, odor, vapor, or gaseous substance while traversing public
rights of way.
      (2)   When transportation to, from, or within an unpaved or partially
paved commercial or storage lot is done by truck, the owner or operator of the
lot shall ensure the following:
         a.   That the trucks will not cause any unaddressed track-out of
materials onto the public way.
         b.   That all outgoing material transport trucks, whether loaded or
empty, are cleaned so that any part of any tractor, bed, trailer, or tire
exterior surface, excluding the inside of the beds or trailer, are free of all
loose materials.
         c.   All outgoing material transport trucks, whether loaded or empty,
pass over rumble strips that will vibrate the trucks and shake off loose
materials and dust, and pass through a wheel wash station.
         d.   That any material removed by the truck cleaning operation, rumble
strips, or a wheel wash station must be collected and recycled or otherwise
disposed of in a manner that complies with all applicable state and local code
requirements related to waste disposal, including the Michigan Building and
Plumbing Code, and does not result in fugitive dust emissions or negative
impacts on applicable sewers and drains.
   (f)   Violation and penalty. Subject to subsection (d)(2), failure to
correct a violation within 3 days of the issuance of the notice identified in
subsection (d) of this section shall constitute a violation, which is
punishable as a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $1,000, plus any
costs imposed by the court. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.
      (1)   An increased fine schedule shall be imposed for repeat violations
of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, "repeat violation" means a violation
committed within ninety (90) days of an admission or determination of
responsibility for a violation of this section occurring upon the same
property.
      (3)   The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine
of $2,500, plus costs imposed by the court.
      (4)   If a fourth violation occurs within a 12-month period, violation
shall be a 93-day misdemeanor.
   (g)   Distribution of fines collected. Fines collected through enforcement
of this section shall be separated and kept in an environmental project
maintained by the City. Fines collected from a particular community in the City
will be used in the community of the City where the violation occurred to fund
projects and/or initiatives designed to address public health, pollution
prevention, pollution reduction, and environmental restoration and protection.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
         a.   Community shall mean those areas of the City as identified in the
Community Boundaries map included with this section. These communities are
identified as:
            1.   Cherry Hill
            2.   West Michigan Business
            3.   Princeton-Carlysie
            4.   Edison-Snow
            5.   Fairlane
            6.   Fordson West
            7.   Fordson East
            8.   Springwells
            9.   Salina
         b.   Public health projects shall include those that provide
diagnostic, preventative and/or health care treatment related to the actual or
potential harm to human health caused by the violation. This includes, but is
not limited to, epidemiological data collection and analysis, medical
examinations of potentially affected persons, collection and analysis of blood/
fluid/tissue samples, medical treatment and rehabilitation therapy. Examples of
qualifying projects include, but are not limited, blood level testing, asthma
screening and treatment, mobile health clinics, and mosquito eradication
programs.
         c.   Pollution prevention projects prevent pollution at its source
before it is generated. They include any practice that reduces the quantity
and/or toxicity of pollutants entering a waste stream prior to recycling,
treatment, or disposal. After the pollutant or waste stream has been generated
pollution prevention is no longer possible, and the waste must be handled by
appropriate recycling, treatment, containment, or disposal methods (i.e.,
pollution reduction). Examples of qualifying projects include, but are not
limited to, those that replace or reduce the use of traditional energy sources
with alternative energy sources or that implement energy efficiency activities,
potentially reducing air pollutants associated with electrical power generation
and greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change. The goal of any
pollution prevention project should be the overall decrease in the amount and/
or toxicity of pollution produced and released into the environment, not merely
a transfer of pollution among various environmental mediums such as air, water,
or land.
         d.   Pollution reduction projects seek to recycle, treat, contain, or
dispose of pollutants and/or waste streams that have already been generated
and/or released. A pollution reduction project is one which results in a
decrease in the amount and/or toxicity of any hazardous substance, pollutant,
or contaminant entering any waste stream or otherwise being released into the
environment by an operating business or facility by a means which does not
qualify as pollution prevention. Examples of pollution reduction projects
include, but are not limited to, installation of a more effective end-of-
process control or treatment technology, improved containment, or safer
disposal of an existing pollutant source, and out-of-process recycling, wherein
industrial waste collected after the manufacturing process and/or consumer
waste materials are used as raw materials for off-site production.
         e.   Environmental restoration and protection projects are those that
enhance the condition of the ecosystem or immediate geographic area adversely
affected by the violation. These projects may be used to restore or protect
natural environments and address environmental contamination and similar issues
in man-made environments, and may include any project that protects the
ecosystem from actual or potential damage resulting from the violation or that
improves the overall condition of the ecosystem. Examples of such projects
include, but are not limited to: restoration of a wetland in the same ecosystem
along the same avian flyway in which the facility is located, or purchase and
management of a watershed area to protect a drinking water supply where a
violation could potentially lead to damage due to unreported discharges.
   (h)   In addition to any civil fines, the City may seek other remedies
permitted by law including, but not limited to, abatement of the condition as
provided in sections
13-5,
13-5.1,
13-5.2,
13-8, and
13-9, imposition of restitution, or any other relief provided by law. The cost
of abatement by the City, together with an amount of $75.00 per invoice to
cover administrative costs and expenses, shall be charged against the owner or
occupant of the property and the property itself where the nuisance is located
or that is causing and/or contributing to the nuisance, in accordance with
Chapter 13 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances. Any and all costs incurred by
the City in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this section
shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6721.png]
 
(Ord. 20-1680, 8-2 5-2020; Ord . 21-1708, 5-2 2-2021; Ord . 25-1837, 1-2 8-
2025)
Sec. 13-6. - Unlawful to occupy condemned premises.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use such premises thus
condemned by the department of building and safety until put in a sanitary and
habitable condition, in accordance with state law and this Code.
Sec. 13-7. - Unlawful to remove condemnation sign.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, alter, deface
and/or destroy any sign or notice posted on any premises under authority of the
City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to "Unlawful to
Occupy," "Illegal Occupancy," "Unfit for Human Habitation," "Dangerous and
Unsafe" and "Stop Work," or declaring such premises to be a nuisance, unless
directed by the director of the department of building and safety or his/her
designee.
   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor offense.
(Ord. No. 06-1075, 5-15-06)
Sec. 13-8. - Abatement by city.
   Upon failure of the person upon whom the notice to abate a nuisance was
served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same, the
department of building and safety or department of public works shall proceed
to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the
abatement thereof.
(Ord. No. 09-1237, 9-8-09)
Sec. 13-9. - Emergency abatement by city.
   When, in the opinion of the director of the department of building and
safety, there is actual and immediate danger to the public or occupants of a
particular premises caused by a nuisance on such premises, the director of the
department of building and safety is hereby authorized and empowered, without
any notice or hearing, to order and require such premises to be vacated. The
department of building and safety shall immediately post the premises, warning
of the dangerous condition, and shall then abate such nuisance and prepare a
statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.
Sec. 13-10. - City's costs.
   Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property
upon which such nuisance existed.
Sec. 13-11. - Owners and occupants responsible for premises.
   All persons who own, manage, lease, rent or occupy any premises whatsoever
shall be equally responsible for keeping such premises in a clean and habitable
condition and shall take all necessary precautions to prevent any nuisance as
declared in this chapter, from arising thereon.
Sec. 13-12. - Commercial buildings.
   The owner and occupant of a commercial building shall be equally responsible
for maintaining the commercial building in a neat, clean and structurally sound
manner and to prevent the premises, including the adjacent public right-of-way,
from becoming littered or becoming a nuisance. The provisos contained herein
shall be equally applicable to empty, unused or unrented commercial buildings,
and in the case of vacant commercial buildings, such buildings shall be kept
securely locked at all times.
Sec. 13-13. - Unsolicited written materials.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to
reduce visual blight, litter and migration to public streets of unsolicited
written materials by establishing reasonable, predictable locations for the
placement of such materials on the private property to which they are being
delivered. Placement of such materials in consistent, secure and predictable
locations will reduce the visual impact of such materials and will increase the
probability that the intended recipients will find and collect the materials.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   Front door. The street-facing entrance(s) to a principal structure.
In the event no door faces the street, then any other door of a principal
structure nearest the street shall be considered a front door for purposes of
this section.
      (2)   Porch. An exterior appendage to a principal structure leading to a
doorway, including any stairway attached thereto.
      (3)   Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structures,
driveways, or other impervious surfaces thereon.
      (4)   Principal structure. A structure, or combination of structures of
primary importance on the premises, and that contains the primary use
associated with the premises. The primary use is characterized by identifying
the main activity taking place on the premises.
      (5)   Unsolicited written materials. Any written materials delivered to
any premises without the express invitation or permission, in writing or
otherwise, by the owner, occupant, or lessee of such premises.
   (c)   Placement of unsolicited written materials. Unsolicited written
materials delivered to premises shall be placed:
      (1)   On a porch, if one exists, nearest the front door;
      (2)   So that such materials are securely attached to the front door;
      (3)   Through a mail slot on the front door or principal structure, if
one exists, as permitted by the United States Postal Service;
      (4)   Between the exterior front door, if one exists and is unlocked, and
the interior front door;
      (5)   Where permitted, in a distribution box located on or adjacent to
the premises; or
      (6)   Personally with the owner, occupant, and/or lessee of the premises.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (c) above, an owner, lessee, or occupant
maintains the right to restrict entry to his or her premises.
   (e)   Unsolicited written materials placed at a premises create a rebuttable
presumption that the materials were placed at the premises by the owner, agent,
manager, and/or authorized distributor of the business, product, good, service,
message, or idea, which is being advertised, promoted, endorsed, or conveyed in
such materials.
   (f)   The provisions of this section do not apply to the United States
Postal Service.
   (g)   Any placement of unsolicited written materials in areas on or adjacent
to a premises other than as set forth in subsection (c) of this section shall
be a violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction.
   (h)   Civil penalty. The civil penalty for each violation of this section
shall be a maximum fine of $500.00 per violation. Each premises upon which a
violation occurs may be charged as a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 19-1652, 6-18-19)
Sec . 13-14. - Shopping carts.
   (a)   Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to
regulate the storing, labeling, and recovery of shopping carts and to prohibit
any person from the unlawful removal of shopping carts from the premises of the
owners, or the abandonment of carts in the city.
   (b)   Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section
shall the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
      Premises shall mean the entire private property where a store is located,
and shall include any adjacent public parking lot.
      Shop, store, grocery, and supermarket shall mean and include any place
that offers merchandise for sale.
      Shopping car or cart shall mean any rolling or nonrolling basket or
container such as is used in shops, stores, groceries and supermarkets to hold
and/or transport merchandise.
   (c)   Identification; penalty. All shops, stores, groceries and supermarkets
making carts available to their customers shall identify their ownership of
said carts by attaching thereto, in a permanent manner, a tag or other
identification stating the owner of said cart and the store at which the cart
is to be maintained or kept in the city. A tag or other identification must
include the owner's name, physical address, phone number, and email address.
The failure to attach the required identification to a cart, or the failure of
such identification to be on a cart at the time it is recovered from
abandonment, shall relieve the city of any necessity to notify any owner
thereof of the fact that the said cart is in the possession of the city, and
shall be deemed abandoned.
      Violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a civil infraction
with a fine of $250.00, plus any additional costs or penalties imposed by the
court.
      Owners of shopping carts in the city have 90 days from the effective date
of this section to attach a tag or other identification required by this
section to their carts.
   (d)   Care and storage; penalty. A store owner and/or manager whose store
has more than 5,000 square feet shall provide a minimum of two cart corrals.
One additional cart corral for every 50 shopping carts over the first 100 will
also be required. The corrals should be conveniently located either in the
parking lot area serving any store, shop, grocery or supermarket in the city,
or in a designated area adjacent to the building where the store, shop, grocery
or supermarket operates, wherein shopping carts are made available for use by
customers. A cart corral shall be defined as four freestanding posts connected
in such a manner that shopping carts can be stored therein in a compact and
orderly fashion. The cart corrals must be at least 12 feet in length. Any
person removing a shopping cart from the premises of any shop, grocery or
supermarket to the adjacent parking lot serving such store shall use the cart
corral so provided for deposit of shopping carts.
      A store owner and/or manager whose store has less than 5,000 square feet
shall keep and store their shopping carts in a designated area that is
immediately adjacent to the building where the store, shop, grocery or
supermarket is located.
      All shops, stores, groceries, and supermarkets making carts available to
their customers shall, on a daily basis, put all carts left on the premises
inside the building or in storage areas so designated on approved plans within
one hour after closing of the business to the general public. It shall be the
duty of the manager of the business, or person in charge of said business, to
comply with enforcement of this section.
      Violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a civil infraction,
with a civil fine of $250.00 plus any additional costs or penalties imposed by
the court.
   (e)   Abandonment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
or cause to be abandoned any shopping cart from a shop, store, grocery or
supermarket on any street, alley or other public place within the city. Carts
not located on the premises of a store shall be deemed abandoned. Carts found
on adjacent public parking lots shall be considered on the premises and not
abandoned.
   (f)   Impoundment; notice to owners of abandoned carts; redemption and
disposal; penalties for failure to redeem. Any shopping cart found abandoned on
any street, alley or other public place within the city, may be impounded by
the police, who shall then notify the cart's owner in writing as identified by
the tag or other identification affixed to the cart by mailing and emailing
said notice to the addresses listed. Such carts may be reclaimed by the owner
upon payment of a fee which shall be determined by the Director of the Property
Maintenance and Development Services Department or his/her designee, but which
shall not exceed $50.00 per cart. Any unclaimed carts may be disposed of by the
city 21 days after notice to the owner. Failure to reclaim an abandoned cart
where ownership is identified shall be considered a violation of this section.
Carts that are unidentifiable as to ownership shall be deemed abandoned, and
may be disposed of by the city 21 calendar days after impounding.
      The owner of a shopping cart that fails to redeem a cart within 21 days
after being provided with notice pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a
civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $250.00 per incident, plus any
additional costs or penalties imposed by the court. "Per incident" shall be
considered any occurrence where city staff respond on a particular date and
time to a particular location in the city to collect a cart(s) at that
location. Any time a cart(s) is collected at a separate location in the city,
regardless of the date or time, shall be considered a separate incident. The
location of each incident shall be documented by staff that are called to the
scene to collect the cart(s).
      In addition to any penalties imposed for violating this section, the
owner of a shopping cart, as identified the tag or other identification affixed
to the cart, shall also be responsible for any costs the city incurs in
disposing of any shopping carts that are not redeemed within 21 calendar days
of being provided with notice pursuant to this section.
      The total cost of penalties, fines, fees, and costs imposed on the owner
of a shopping cart under this subsection shall not exceed a total of $300.00
per cart.
   (g)   Repeat violations. An increased fine schedule shall be imposed for
repeat violations of this section. As used in this section,"repeat violation"
means a violation committed within 12 months of an admission or determination
of responsibility for a violation of this section occurring with the same
shopping cart owner. The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be
$500.00, plus any additional costs or penalties imposed by the court.
   (h)   Enforcement. Pursuant to section
13-4 of the Code, the police department and the Property Maintenance and
Development Services Department shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this section.
      The Director of the Property Maintenance and Development Services
Department shall be responsible for providing City Council with a report that
provides, at a minimum, the number of carts collected; owner information of
each cart; redemption and disposal information; and the penalties, fines, and
fees collected. This report shall be provided to Council on a quarterly basis
per calendar year.
(Ord. No. 81-134, §§ 1—3, 11-4-81)
Secs. 13-15—13-24.   Reserved.  
ARTICLE IA. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT BOARD
Sec. 13-25. - Established; intent; composition.
   There is hereby established a nuisance abatement board ("NAB") of the City
of Dearborn. The city council shall sit as the members of the NAB. A member of
the police department, the property maintenance and development services
department, and the department of law shall serve as resource members (non-
voting) of the NAB.
(Ord. No. 16-1554, 10-18-16)
Sec. 13-26. - Duties.
   (a)   The NAB shall hear complaints regarding the nuisances described in
section
13-2(34). Any employee, officer, or resident of the city may bring a complaint
before the NAB. The complaint shall be made to the city council and forwarded
to the department of law. The department of law shall place the complaint on an
agenda for a hearing before the NAB. The department of law shall provide notice
as follows:
      (1)   The business owner will be served by first class mail, at least ten
days prior to the hearing, with a written notice of the hearing, which notice
shall contain the following information:
         a.   Notice of the proposed NAB hearing;
         b.   Reason(s) for the proposed NAB hearing;
         c.   Date, time and location of the hearing; and
         d.   A statement that at the hearing, the business owner may present
witnesses, evidence and arguments on his or her behalf and confront adverse
witnesses and that the business owner has the right to be represented by
counsel.
   (b)   After a hearing, in which the NAB may consider any evidence, including
evidence of the general reputation of the place or premises, and at which the
owner shall have an opportunity to present evidence in his or her defense, the
NAB may declare the place or premises to be a nuisance.
   (c)   If the NAB declares a place or premises to be a nuisance pursuant to
subsection (b) above, the NAB may adopt a resolution requiring the owner of
such place or premises to adopt such procedures as may be appropriate under the
circumstances to abate any such nuisance, which may include, but is not limited
to:
      (1)   Prohibiting the conduct, operation or maintenance of any business
or activity on the premises which is conducive to such nuisance;
      (2)   Requiring the owner to provide increased security on the premises;
      (3)   Requiring the owner to install security-enhanced equipment, such as
cameras;
      (4)   Requiring the owner to submit a detailed plan of proposed operation
that will eliminate the cause of the nuisance;
      (5)   Limiting the hours of operation;
      (6)   Reviewing the certificate of occupancy issued for the business to
determine if the business and building comply with the plans, specifications,
and representations that were submitted to, relied on, and approved by the
city. The certificate of occupancy may be put into escrow until all issues are
resolved; and/or
      (7)   Establishing continuing jurisdiction for a period of up to one year
over any place or premises that has been or is declared to be a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure to comply with the decision of the NAB may result in criminal
prosecution.
   (e)   Decisions of the NAB may be appealed to the Wayne County Circuit
Court.
(Ord. No. 16-1554, 10-18-16)
Secs. 13-27—13-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-1268, adopted May 3, 2010, amended art. II in its
entirety and enacted similar provisions as herein set out. The former art. II
derived from Ord. No. 80-9, §§ 1—7, adopted Oc5. 21, 1980.
Sec. 13-41. - Declaration of policy.
   This article is designed to provide comprehensive regulations to control
noise levels so as to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety
and welfare, and the peace, comfort, and quiet of the inhabitants of the city,
prevent injury to humans, animals, and property, and foster the comfort of its
inhabitants and reasonable enjoyment of property.
   This article is not designed to impede any person's First Amendment rights
of freedom of speech.
   This article is not designed to impede the growth or economic health of the
commercial or downtown districts of the city.
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10)
Sec. 13-42. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning and all terminology used in this article,
not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body:
   Ambient noise level means the composite of noise from all sources near and
far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the normal or
existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
   Commercial area means as the term is defined in the zoning ordinance of the
city.
   Construction means operating or permitted the operation of any tools or
equipment or conducting of other activities incidental to the erection,
demolition, repair, remodeling, assembling, altering, modification or equipping
of buildings, structures, roads, sewers, water lines and other utilities,
landscaping, including land clearing, grading, excavating, filling, paving or
resurfacing of roads or driveways or other appurtenances thereto.
   Continuous noise means any noise whose level varies less than 3 dB(A) during
the course of a period of at least five minutes.
   Cumulative period means an additive period of time composed of individual
time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.
dB(A) means the intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a
calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighting scale and the fast
meter response, as specified in American National Standards Institute standard
S1.4—1971.
   Daytime , except when indicated otherwise, shall mean 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
   Fixed noise source means a stationary device which creates sounds while
fixed or motionless, including but not limited to, residential, agricultural,
industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors,
air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.
   Impulsive noise means sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound
include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.
   Industrial area means as the term is defined in the zoning ordinance of the
city.
   Intermittent noise means any noise which goes on and off during a course of
measurement of at least five minutes, but which exceeds ten seconds in duration
each time it is on.
   Intrusive noise means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing
ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound
depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and
tonal or informational contents as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
   Mobile noise source means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.
   Nighttime , except when indicated otherwise, shall mean 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
   Perpetual noise means any noise whose level varies less than 3 dB(A) during
a period of at least 30 minutes.
   Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and
its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real
property divisions.
   Receiving land use means the use (commercial, industrial or residential) of
the land on or at which a noise is received.
   Residential area means the area defined by the zoning ordinance of the city.
   Sound amplifying equipment means any device for the amplification of the
human voice, music, or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios
when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is
installed, and, as used in this article, warning devices on authorized
emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only
for traffic safety purposes.
   Sound truck means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of
motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or
attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.
   Weekday means any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday.
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 19-1643, 2- 26-19)
Sec. 13-43. - General noise regulations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit,
continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing,
unusual or unnecessary noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the
city.
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10)
Sec. 13-44. - Maximum permissible sound levels for receiving land use.
   Except as provided in section
13-44A, no person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at
any location within the incorporated city or allow the creation of any noise on
property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which
causes the noise level when measured at or within the real property boundary
line of the receiving land use to exceed:
      (1)   Impulsive noise.
         a.   Residential area— 
            Nighttime: 60 dB(A)
            Daytime: 70 dB(A)
         b.   Commercial area— 
            Nighttime: 70 dB(A)
            Daytime: 80 dB(A)
         c.   Industrial area— 
            Nighttime: 80 dB(A)
            Daytime: 90 dB(A)
      (2)   Intermittent noise .
         a.   Residential area— 
            Nighttime: 55 dB(A)
            Daytime: 60 dB(A)
         b.   Commercial area— 
            Nighttime: 60 dB(A)
            Daytime: 65 dB(A)
         c.   Industrial area— 
            Nighttime: 70 dB(A)
            Daytime: 75 dB(A)
      (3)   Continuous and perpetual noise .
         a.   Residential area— 
            Nighttime: 45 dB(A)
            Daytime: 50 dB(A)
         b.   Commercial area— 
            Nighttime: 50 dB(A)
            Daytime: 55 dB(A)
         c.   Industrial area— 
            Nighttime: 55 dB(A)
            Daytime: 60 dB(A)
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10)
Sec. 13-44A. - Outdoor music in downtown districts.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      Daytime shall mean 7:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Wednesday;
7:00 a.m. through 12:00 a.m. Thursday through Sunday and holidays.
      Downtown business district means as the term is defined in the zoning
ordinance of the city for both east Dearborn and west Dearborn.
      Holiday shall mean those holidays recognized by the federal government
and the city's homecoming event.
      Night 1 shall mean 12:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m. Thursday through Saturday
and holidays.
      Night 2 shall mean 10:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Wednesday;
2:00 a.m. through 7:00 a.m. Thursday through Saturday and holidays.
   (b)   No outdoor music shall be provided in the downtown business districts
which causes the noise level when measured at or within the real property
boundary line of the receiving land use to exceed:
 
                  Residential
                  Day      Night 1  Night 2
Downtown District 65 dB(A) 60 dB(A) 55 dB(A)
Non District      60 dB(A) 55 dB(A) 55 dB(A)
 
 
                  Commercial
                  Day      Night 1  Night 2
Downtown District 75 dB(A) 70 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
Non District      65 dB(A) 60 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
 
   (c)   No outdoor music shall be performed or played between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (d)   Sound level measurements pursuant to this section shall be made at the
receiving property and in accordance with the policy adopted by the Dearborn
Police Department.
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10)
Sec. 13-45. - Specific prohibitions.
   Except as provided in section
13-44A, the following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof, are declared
to be in violation of this article.
      (1)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices .
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which
produces or reproduces sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in
such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or
commercial real property line.
      (2)   Loudspeakers (amplified sound) . Using or operating for any purpose
any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, or similar device between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance across a residential real property line.
      (3)   Animals and birds . Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or
bird which frequently or for long duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks, or
makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential or
commercial real property line.
      (4)   Loading and unloading . Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans,
or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line.
      (5)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing . Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary.
      (6)   Places of public entertainment . Operating or permitting the
operation or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing
vehicle, or other source of sound in any place of public entertainment that
exceeds 95 dB(A), as read on the slow response of a sound level meter at any
point normally occupied by a customer, without a conspicuous and legible sign
stating: "WARNING! SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT."
      (7)   Domestic power tools, machinery . Operating or permitting the
operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or
garden tool, or similar tool between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to create
a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line.
      (8)   Recreational activities in residential areas. Noise generated by
outdoor recreational activities (e.g., basketball, tennis, hockey) shall be
prohibited in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (9)   Construction. Construction shall be prohibited within 500 feet of a
residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless an
exemption is received as provided in section
13-46. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a civil infraction
with a civil fine of $500.00 for a first offense, and as a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 90 days in jail for a second
and subsequent offense within six months of a previous conviction or finding of
responsibility, or both fine and jail in the discretion of the Court.
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 13-1408, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 14-1436, 9-9-14;
Ord. No. 19- 1643, 2-26-19)
Sec. 13-46. - Exemptions.
   (a)   Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
      (2)   Noises resulting from emergency work. “Emergency work” shall mean
work which is necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a
public calamity or accident, repair of water, sewer or other utility breakage
or disruption, or work which is required to protect persons or property form
imminent danger.
      (3)   The occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and
sporting and entertainment events, provided such events are conducted pursuant
to a permit or license issued by the city relative to the staging of such
events.
      (4)   Construction of a temporary duration for which a special permit has
been granted by the City Engineer or the City Building Official, or their
designee. Such a permit may be granted for good cause shown, upon a minimum of
24 hours notice under the following conditions:
         a.   The applicant has demonstrated that no reasonable alternative is
available which would permit compliance with the noise restrictions of this
article.   
         b.   The noise created by such activities will not unreasonable
disturb residents or endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public.
         c.   The permit shall specify any conditions, limitations or
requirements deemed necessary by the City Engineer or the City Building
Official to minimize the impacts of the activity upon the community, persons
within the community, or the surrounding neighborhood.
         d.   The permit shall specify the exact time period it is in effect.
         e.   The permit shall specify and be signed by the individual
responsible for strict compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
The permit shall be conspicuously posted at the job site at all times while the
work is being performed and is subject to immediate revocation if, in the
discretion of the City Engineer or City Building Official, or their designee,
any of the terms or conditions of the permit have been violated.
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 19-1643, 2-26-19)
Sec. 13-47. - Penalty.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in section
13-45 above, any person or corporation responsible for an activity which
violates any provision of this article, or if the responsible person cannot be
determined, the owner, lessee or occupant of the property on which the activity
is located, shall be deemed responsible for the violation. The penalty for a
person or corporation found guilty or responsible under this section shall be
as follows:
 
First offense                        Civil infraction $100.00
Second offense
(within 6 months of a previous       Civil infraction 200.00
offense)
Third offense
(within 6 months of a second         Misdemeanor      250.00/45 days or both
offense)
Fourth and subsequent                Misdemeanor         500.00/90 days or both
(within 6 months of a third offense)
 
(Ord. No. 10-1268, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 19-1643, 2- 26-19)
Secs. 13-48—13-70. - Reserved.
   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 19-1643, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed § 13-48 in
its entirety. Former § 13-48 pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No.
10-1268, adopted May 3, 2010. See §
13-47 for penalty provisions.
ARTICLE III. - SNOW REMOVAL
Sec. 13-71. - Sidewalks and areas to be cleared.
   (a)   No occupant of any premises or owner of premises or property shall
fail to keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises or property
clear of ice and/or snow, so far as to facilitate pedestrian use. Where there
are no sidewalks, no such occupant or owner shall fail to clear a path free
from snow and ice, when such a path will provide an extension of existing
sidewalk on an adjacent property.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 11-1315, 3-7-11)
Sec. 13-72. - Discarding snow and ice.
   (a)   Untreated snow may be deposited on a neighbor's unpaved property in
such a way that the necessity for clearing paved areas can be met in the most
reasonable way. Homeowners should put the snow closest to their property on
their own property and only use a neighbor's property when reasonable given
proximity and structural barriers. No snow shall be deposited on a neighbor's
property in such a way that windows, vents, driveways, or pedestrian walkways
are blocked.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to deposit any
accumulation of snow or ice upon the traveled portion of any street or highway,
or upon any public sidewalk, or upon any municipally owned or leased parking
lot, anywhere within the city.
(Ord. No. 11-1315, 3-7-11)
Sec. 13-73. - Responsibility for repairs.
   Any person who removes snow for hire within the city shall be responsible
for the repair of any damages to public or private property.
Sec. 13-74. - Violations.
   (a)   If any occupant or property owner shall fail to clear an accumulation
of ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining his property within a reasonable
time, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on the sidewalk in a
dangerous manner, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
   (b)   Any snowplow operator who fails to repair damages to any public or
private property within the time period agreed shall be guilty of a violation
of this article.
   (c)   Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $50.00 for each offense, plus the cost of removing snow and ice or
repairing damages to public or private property.
(Ord. No. 11-1315, 3-7-11)
Sec. 13-75. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-1315, adopted March 7, 2011, deleted §
13-75, which pertained to waiver of provisions.
Secs. 13-76—13-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE ABATEMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 13-96. - Short title.
   The short title of the article hereinafter set forth shall be the "Smoke
Abatement Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 1.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-97. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Air pollution means the discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts, vents,
ducts, openings, open bonfires, or material or stock piles, of any smoke, soot,
fly ash, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, oxides, injurious gases, vapors, or
dust that cause contamination in the air in amounts detrimental to the public
health and welfare or to property, in amounts prohibited by this article.
   Baffling means any row, rows, plane or planes of refractory or other
material that causes the gases in a steam boiler or other vessel or device to
assume a definite and predetermined path of travel before reaching the chimney
or smoke stack.
   Board means the board of appeals, as created by this article.
   Cinders means particles not ordinarily considered as fly ash or dust,
because of their greater size, resulting from the process of combustion and
consisting essentially of fused ash or unburned combustibles.
   Combustion equipment means any furnace, incinerator, refuse-burning
equipment, fuel-burning equipment, boiler, apparatus, stoker, device,
mechanism, stack, or structure used in the process of burning fuel or
combustible material.
   Department means the department of building and safety.
   Director means the director of the building and safety department.
   Dust means any gas-borne or airborne particles larger than one micron in
average diameter.
   Dust collectors shall mean cyclone centrifugal effect collectors, screen
cloth (bag type) wet type filters or those using charcoal, spun glass fibers or
other material as a filter. Contact, impact baffled, or adhesive collectors,
spray centrifugal type washers, filter towers, electric precipitators, gravity
type dust or settling chambers, and verticose effect collectors, either single
or in batteries, shall also be included in the meaning of "dust collectors."
   Fly ash shall mean gas-borne or airborne particles larger than one micron
and consisting essentially of fused ash or burned or unburned combustible
material.
   Fumes shall mean gases, vapors, metallic oxides, or odors that are of such
character as to create an unclean, destructive, offensive, or unhealthful
condition.
   Furnace volume shall mean that volume which is above the fuel bed and in
front of the bridgewall. In case of horizontal fire box boilers, it is that
volume measured to the front tube sheet. In the case of vertical tubular
boilers, it is that volume measured to the lower tube sheet.
   Heating surface means any boiler surface having water on one side and hot
gases on the other side not excepting any surface covered by the arches or
refractory used in the construction of the boiler furnace.
   Injurious gases means any gases of such character and quantity which injure
the health or property of the individual or the public.
   Noxious acids means anhydrous or hydrous acids existing in concentrations
high enough to be poisonous or to constitute a nuisance.
   Open fire means any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into
the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney.
   Ringlemann chart means the Ringlemann chart with instructions for use, as
published by the United States Bureau of Mines.
   Smoke means small gas-borne particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material in sufficient number to be observable.
   Soot shall mean a collection of particles consisting essentially of
carbonaceous material.
   Smokeless solid fuel means, for the purpose of this article, a fuel, the
volatile content of which is 23 percent or less on an ash and moisture-free
basis; provided however, that if a fuel contains volatile matter in excess of
23 percent on an ash and moisture-free basis, it shall be acceptable under the
terms of this article if it meets the same standards with regards to smoke
production as that of a fuel containing less than 23 percent volatile matter on
an ash and moisture-free basis; provided, further, that the following
conditions shall apply in order to ascertain whether or not such standards are
met in the case of violation:
   First, complete specifications of the fuel and description of its processing
or manufacture must be submitted to the division, and, from time to time, any
additional information that may be reasonably required must also be submitted.
   Second, an adequate supply of the finished product must be made available to
the division to conduct whatever tests are deemed necessary to establish its
value as a smokeless fuel.
   Third, field tests may be required to determine if such fuels can be so
fired as to comply with the provisions of this article.
   Fourth, any person whose product is submitted to such tests must pay all
expenses necessary to the attendant tests, and the division shall furnish such
person a copy of the report showing the results of such tests.
   Fifth, the enforcement of this section, with reference to the volatility
standard for fuel, shall not apply to hand-fired combustion equipment in
buildings containing not more than four one-family dwelling units, until
February 1, 1952, after which date all of the provisions of this section shall
apply to such equipment.
   Solid fuel means any mined, packaged, or prepared coal, coke, petroleum
coke, carbonized coal, either natural or manufactured, synthetic, processed or
patented fuel, not sold by liquid or metered measure.
   Stack or chimney means flue, conduit, or opening arranged for emitting gases
into the open air.
   Surface burning equipment means any combustion equipment in which the fresh
fuel can be thrown directly on the hot fuel bed.
   Umbrascope means an instrument consisting of an open tube through which
observations are made to measure the density of smoke. One end of the tube is
closed except for a small opening serving as an eye-piece. At the other end,
which is open, there are four semicircular glass lightfilters, so adapted as to
cover a maximum of one-half the field of vision, and so arranged as to allow
their use singly or collectively for measuring the relative density of smoke
against the sky. The results are then compared with the Ringlemann chart and
the proper reading obtained.
   Volatile means the gaseous constituents of solid fuel, as determined by the
standard American Society of Testing Materials Procedure, amended or revised to
date.
(Ord. No. 81-73, §§ 1.2, 1.3, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Secs. 13-98—13-110. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 13-111. - Air pollution unlawful.
   Air pollution caused by the escape of smoke, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
injurious gases, dust or fly ash is hereby declared to be unlawful and to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to operate or cause
to be operated any combustion equipment in such manner that it produces air
pollution within the meaning of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-112. - Emission of smoke.
   It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to cause, permit or
allow the emission of any smoke from any source whatever of a density equal to
or greater than that density shown by diagram No. 2 on the Ringlemann chart,
set forth in sectiion 13-116; provided, however, this article shall not apply
to:
      (1)   Residences having therein less than four dwelling units.
      (2)   Smoke of a shade of appearance equal to but not greater than that
shown by diagram No. 2 on the Ringlemann chart for a period not to exceed four
minutes in any single period of 30 minutes; provided, further, that the
restrictions in this section herein shall not apply to railroads, roundhouses
and locomotives.
      (3)   A firebox, furnace boiler, or other combustible equipment which is
being cleaned out or in which a new fire is being built and which emits smoke
of a shade or appearance no greater than that shown by diagram No. 3 of the
Ringlemann chart for a period of not to exceed three minutes in any single
period of 15 minutes.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-113. - Escape of soot.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to cause, suffer, permit, or
allow any soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, injurious gases, fly ash, or
dust to escape into the air beyond the boundaries of his own property in such
amounts that such soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, injurious gases, fly
ash, or dust shall be injurious to the property of others, to any person who is
outside the boundaries of the property from which such materials are escaping,
or to the public; or to endanger the health, comfort, welfare, convenience, or
safety of any such person or of the public; or to escape in such manner or
amount as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or
persons.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-114. - Unlawful to operate equipment emitting fly ash, soot or air-
borne solids: amounts.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to operate or cause to
be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any process or operation which
produces gas, airborne solids or fumes, or furnace to combustion device for the
burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and
operating, while using such process or furnace or combustion device, recognized
and approved equipment, means, method, device, or contrivance to reduce the
quantity of gas or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air, which is
operated in conjunction with such process, furnace, or combustion device so
that the quantity of gas or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per
cubic foot of the carrying medium when corrected to a temperature of 500
degrees Fahrenheit, and adjusted to 50 percent excess air at full load. The
A.S.M.E. test code for dust-separating apparatus, or any other generally
recognized standard or method of measurement which is acceptable to the
division, shall be used for determining the weight of the airborne solids
discharged to the atmosphere.
   (b)   The above regulation shall not apply to incineration units whose
capacity, as rated under this article, does not exceed 60 pounds per hour. The
allowable discharge of fly ash, soot, or air-borne solids to the atmosphere for
incineration units up to 60 pounds per hour per square foot of grate area shall
not exceed 0.30 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium, when corrected to
500 degrees Fahrenheit and adjusted to 50 percent excess air at full load.
   (c)   It is also hereby expressly prohibited and unlawful for any person to
engage in the burning of any material whatsoever in an open manner, such as
wire baskets or drum type containers, when such materials are the result of any
commercial or industrial operation; provided, however, this regulation shall
not apply to single- and two-family residences; and provided, further, that the
board of appeals may grant a permit to an applicant to burn in an open manner
any such materials when it appears from the application that the materials to
be burned and the manner and plan of burning will not cause such air pollution
as is declared to be unlawful by this article.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-115. - Smoke inspector.
   (a)   There shall be a smoke inspector who shall be employed in the division
of the department whose qualifications shall be those specified by the
department and the civil service board.
   (b)   The smoke inspector shall make all annual inspections of combustion
equipment, as required by this article. He shall investigate all complaints for
violations of this article. He shall use the Ringlemann chart, or the
umbrascope in correlation with the Ringlemann chart, for the purpose of
determining violations of this article in the emission of smoke.
   (c)   He shall use any generally recognized methods and equipment for the
determination of violations of this article, or the superintendent, with the
approval of the director, may employ qualified experts to make such tests.
   (d)   The smoke inspector shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions
of this article. He may promulgate and advance an educational program for the
prevention or minimizing of smoke and air pollution under the supervision and
direction of the director.
   (e)   The director of the department shall designate one or more persons to
represent the city at any and all meetings of boards or committees organized
for the purpose of discussing or arbitrating smoke disputes involving the city.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-116. - Ringlemann chart and umbrascope.
   (a)   The standard by which the density of smoke is to be measured shall be
as set forth in the six numbered diagrams of the Ringlemann chart, as published
by the United States Bureau of Mines, which diagrams showing the respective
percentages of black area are as follows:
   (b)   Use of the chart will be made by placing it at such distance from the
observer so that the squares appear as even shades of coloring or when no white
spaces between the lines are visible. Comparison of the smoke under observation
with the various shades of the diagrams will then indicate the density of the
smoke. Observation at all times shall be not less than 100 feet nor more than
one-quarter mile from the smoke observed.
   (c)   The umbrascope may be used by the smoke inspector or other observer in
determining the density of smoke, but it shall be used in correlation with the
Ringlemann chart.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-117. - Permits and certificates.
   (a)   No person shall construct, install or alter any combustion equipment,
or any equipment pertaining thereto for use within the city, until an
application including suitable plans and specifications of the combustion
equipment and structures of buildings used in connection therewith has been
filed in the the department of building and safety; has been approved by the
smoke inspector; and an installation permit issued for such construction,
installation or alteration; provided, however, that maintenance repairs or
minor alterations, which do not change the capacity of such combustion
equipment and which do not include any change in the method of combustion and
the expense of which covering labor and materials does not exceed $50.00, may
be made without an installation permit; and provided further, that emergency
repairs for which an installation permit would ordinarily be required may be
made before applying for or securing an installation permit, when necessary if
an emergency arises and serious consequences would result if the repairs were
to be deferred; provided further, that in the case of such emergency repairs, a
permit therefor shall be secured on the first business day following the
starting of such repairs. Permits shall issue to the contractor or person
making the installation, alteration or repair of such combustion equipment.
   (b)   No person shall use, fire, or otherwise operate any combustion
equipment within the city until he has secured a certificate of operation. A
certificate of operation shall be issued only after the combustion equipment
has been installed, and such installation approved by the smoke inspector.
Certificates of operation shall be renewable annually after an inspection of
the combustion equipment by the smoke inspector and his approval thereof.
   (c)   There shall be no charge for an installation permit or for a
certificate of operation. Fees shall be charged for inspections as provided in
this division.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-118. - Preexisting and nonconforming combustion equipment; temporary
certificate.
   (a)   Every person who owns or operates combustion equipment which was
installed prior to November 13, 1981, and for which a certificate of operation
is required, shall apply for a certificate of operation within 12 months from
such date. Upon receiving each application, the smoke inspector shall inspect
the combustion equipment therein described and, if approved by him, shall
recommend issuance of a certificate of operation, valid for one year from the
date of issuance. If the combustion equipment is not so approved, the smoke
inspector shall specify the necessary repairs or alterations which shall be
made.
   (b)   The owner or operator may appeal from the decision of the smoke
inspector to the board. If the board finds that hardship or injustice will be
done in carrying out the charges specified by the smoke inspector, the board
may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the smoke inspector, and, if it
so decides, it may grant a temporary certificate of operation for the
combustion equipment pending its alteration or repair, but no such temporary
certificate of operation shall be granted for a longer period of time than one
year.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-119. - Annual inspection.
   (a)   An annual inspection of all combustion equipment, dust producing or
dust collecting equipment or any other devices or apparatus connected with or
pertaining to any process or operation which discharges into the air dust,
fumes, soot, fly ash, cinders, noxious acids or gases, as described in this
article, whether or not a previous certificate of operation has been issued by
the superintendent, shall be made to determine that such equipment can be
operated in such manner that it will comply with the provisions of this
article. However, no annual inspection shall be required in cases of furnaces
or other combustion equipment or devices installed to heat buildings used
exclusively for private residences.
   (b)   Upon determining that the equipment complies with the provisions of
the article, a certificate of operation shall be issued, which shall be posted
in a conspicuous place within the building or plant.
   (c)   If at the time of any inspection, it is found that the combustion
equipment is in such condition that it cannot be operated within the provisions
of this article, the smoke inspector shall give notice in writing to the person
owning, operating or in charge of such equipment of the defects found and an
order to correct, repair or replace the defective equipment. Failure to comply
with this order within 30 days from its date shall constitute a violation of
this article, and the smoke inspector may institute the necessary proceedings
to invoke the penalties as hereinafter provided or to abate the nuisance if one
exists.
   (d)   Fees for incinerator installation and annual inspection of dust
collecting equipment will be governed by the building code.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-120. - Railroad locomotives; roundhouses.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to permit the
emission of any smoke from any railroad locomotive or roundhouse of a density
greater than that density described as No. 2 on the Ringlemann chart; provided,
however, that the following exceptions to the provisions of this section shall
be permitted:
      (1)   Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker
than No. 3 of the Ringlemann chart, will be permitted for a period of one
minute in any 15-minute period when the locomotive is in service, for the
duration of one year from November 13, 1981.
      (2)   Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker
than No. 3 of the Ringlemann chart, for a period or periods aggregating three
minutes in every 15 minutes when building a new fire or when breakdown of
equipment in roundhouses occurs such as to make it evident that the emission
was not reasonably preventable.
      (3)   Roundhouses and fire-building stations shall be subject to annual
inspection, as provided in this article.
   (b)   Failure on the part of any person, railroad company, corporation,
association or their agents to provide the necessary means, equipment or device
to prevent the emission of smoke and pollution of air, as prohibited by this
article, or failure to instruct the operating crews, enginemen, firemen,
hostlers or others about proper operation of such locomotives shall be deemed a
violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties and abatement
as herein provided.
   (c)   Failure of the operating crews, enginemen, firemen, hostlers or others
to comply with the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation of
this article and shall be subject to the penalties herein provided.
(Ord. No. 81-73, §§ 2.10, 2.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-121. - Smoke indicators.
   (a)   All combustion equipment that heat boilers having more than 200 square
feet of boiler heating surface, or combustion equipment equivalent thereto,
except combustion equipment which uses gas or electricity as fuel, shall be
equipped with smoke indicators, mirrors or similar devices approved by the
smoke inspector to enable the fireman to observe the top of his stack or stacks
from the boiler room at all times, unless the top of the stack is readily
visible to the fireman from the boiler room without the use of such devices. In
plants where a fireman is not in constant attendance in the boiler room or
furnace room, the smoke indicator shall be of a type which will sound an alarm
or flash a signal to attract the attention of the fireman when smoke is being
emitted that violates the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The owner of any plant which emits smoke prohibited by this article
shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to this article if the owner refuses
for a period of 20 days to comply with the provisions of this section upon
demand by the smoke inspector.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-122. - Smokeless solid fuel.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agents to import, sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, exchange, deliver or transport for use or
consumption in the city, or to use or consume in the city any solid fuel for
handfiring or intermittent feeding of surface-burning types of equipment which
does not meet the standards of a smokeless solid fuel; provided, however, that
the term "hand firing or intermittent feeding of surface-burning types of
equipment" is hereby specifically declared not to include "downdraft boilers";
provided, further, that the importation, delivery or transportation of such
fuel by railroad companies and other common carriers, in the course of their
common carrier business, shall not be deemed to be a violation of the
provisions of this section.
   (b)   The director shall, upon request, furnish a list of brands or trade
names of smokeless solid fuels, which have been tested for conformity with the
provisions of this article and which, as a result of such tests, have been
approved.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-123. - Solid fuels in mechanical combustion equipment.
   A solid fuel not meeting the requirements of this article for a smokeless
solid fuel may be used or consumed only in approved mechanical combustion
equipment or devices, as specified in this article; provided, however, that
after suitable inspections and tests have proven to the division that any
combination of combustion equipment or devices and fuel satisfactorily comply
with the provisions of this article, the director shall approve the use of such
combination of combustion equipment or devices and fuel. 
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-124. - Duty of owner to report.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of all persons purchasing combustion equipment,
except repair parts and minor accessories, which is required to be connected to
a vent or stack, to report to the division the purchase of every such article
to be installed or used anywhere within the corporate limits of the city. The
report herein provided for shall be in writing and be delivered or mailed to
the division within seven days after such purchase and shall contain the name
and address of the purchaser and the location of the building in which each
article is to be installed or used.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this requirement, or
making any false statement or report in connection with the purchase of any
such articles mentioned in this section, shall be subject to the fines and
penalties hereinafter set forth; provided, however, this requirement shall not
apply to wholesale transactions made for the purpose of resale.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-125. - Type of combustion equipment to be specified.
   (a)   No person or his agent shall purchase or contract to purchase for use
or consumption within the city any solid fuel without first informing the fuel
dealer as to the type of combustion equipment or device in which the fuel is to
be used and the type of fuel specified for use in such combustion equipment or
device, under the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The fuel dealer's records shall indicate, among other things, the type
of combustion equipment or devices and the type of fuel specified by the
purchaser and supplied by the fuel dealer.
   (c)   No fuel dealer shall supply fuel to a purchaser that is not approved
for use in the purchaser's combustion equipment or devices as provided in
section
13-133.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.16, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-126. - Plans to be filed for new equipment.
   Except in buildings used exclusively for residential purposes, containing
less than four one-family dwelling units or flats, no new fuel burning plant or
equipment which discharges dust into the air from its operation, or the
reconstruction, repair or addition to any existing fuel-burning plants for
producing power and heat, or either of them, or equipment for refuse-burning,
or equipment which discharges such dust, or any stack or furnace connected with
such fuel or refuse-burning or operating equipment, shall be installed,
erected, reconstructed, repaired or added to, or operated in the city until
plans and specifications for the same have been filed by the owner, contractor,
installer or other responsible person, in the department of building and safety
being so designed that the equipment can be managed and operated to conform to
the provisions of this article, and permit issued for such installation,
erection, reconstruction, addition to, or repair and operation, as specified in
this division.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-127. - Plans, what to show.
   (a)   Plans and specifications shall show the type of installation, the
amount of work and the amount of heating to be done by such fuel- or refuse-
burning equipment and all appurtenances thereto, including all provisions made
for the purpose of securing complete combustion of the fuel or refuse to be
used and the manner in which it is to be burned so as to prevent smoke and
other air pollution, as covered by this article.
   (b)   Such plans and specifications shall also contain a statement of the
rate of burning and kind of fuel or refuse proposed to be used and the manner
in which it is to be burned.
   (c)   Such plans shall further show the dimensions of the room in which such
fuel- or refuse-burning equipment is to be located, and the location and
dimensions of all stacks used in connection with or as a part of such fuel or
refuse-burning plant.
   (d)   The division may require such additional data as is deemed necessary
for the purpose of issuing a permit for the operation of such fuel-burning
devices, or dust producing or dust collecting equipment.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.18, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-128. - Approval of plans; payment of fees; issuance of permit.
   (a)   Upon the inspection and approval of such plans and specifications by
the department and upon payment of the fees set forth in this article, if such
plans and specifications shall show that adequate and approved conditions for
securing complete combustion of the fuel or refuse to be used and for
preventing of eliminating smoke, soot, cinders, fly ash, noxious acids, fumes,
gases or dust have been made, a permit for the installation or for the
construction, erection, reconstruction, repair, or addition to and operation of
such fuel or refuse-burning plant shall be issued.
   (b)   As soon as the permit has been issued, as above provided, it shall be
the duty of the various other inspectors in the department having charge of the
inspection of the premises wherein such fuel- or refuse-burning equipment is
located, to cooperate in seeing that the execution of the work authorized by
such permit is done in conformity with the approved plans and specifications,
and the standards, rules and regulations fixed by the department.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-129. - Failure to submit plans, seal.
   If plans and specifications, as described above, are not submitted to the
department for approval previous to the installation of any new fuel-burning
equipment, addition to or repair or reconstruction of any fuel-burning
equipment for producing power, heat, or either of them, or equipment for
burning refuse or equipment that is dust producing or dust collecting, or any
stack connected with such fuel- or refuse-burning or other equipment, the
division is authorized to seal immediately such equipment until the owner,
contractor, installer or other person has complied with these provisions.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.20, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-130. - Unlawful to use any equipment sealed.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any new, reconstructed, or
repaired equipment, or addition thereto, or any equipment duly sealed under the
provisions of this article, for the production or generation of heat and power,
or either of them, or for the burning of refuse or for dust collecting, or that
is dust producing, until he shall have first procured a certificate from the
division, certifying that the equipment is so constructed that it will do the
work required with the type of fuel and equipment used, and that, in the
opinion of the superintendent, it can consistently be operated in compliance
with the terms of this article when burning the type of fuel in the manner
specified in the permit, and until a notice of the size, type, kind of fuel and
the manner of burning the fuel, as specified in the permit, has been
prominently displayed and permanently attached to such equipment, or so it will
not emit dust or fumes contrary to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-131. - Issuance of permit not to exempt a violator from prosecution.
   The issuance and delivery by the division of any permit or certificate for
the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or addition thereto, of
any equipment, or stack connected with the equipment, or for the operation of
such equipment or stack shall not be held to exempt such person from
prosecution on account of the emission of dense smoke, fly ash, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, gases or dust caused or permitted by any such person.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-132. - Permit not to issue until plans approved.
   The department shall not issue a building permit for the erection,
construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure where
the plans for such building or structure show any stack in connection with such
building or structure, until such plans have been submitted, the dimensions of
such stack approved as having sufficient capacity and as being suitable for the
type of equipment and fuel to be used.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.23, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-133. - Plans not to be approved if the fuel is not proper.
   The department shall not approve plans or issue permits for the installation
of any fuel-burning equipment or device of the surface-burning type, unless the
fuel to be used in such device shall be a smokeless solid fuel, or a mechanical
fuel-burning or other kind of device is to be used of a type which will so
operate as not to emit dense smoke or permit the escape of soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or dust or otherwise pollute the air in
violation of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.24, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-134. - Three or more violations, authorization to seal equipment.
   (a)   After any owner, agent, occupant, manager or lessee of any premises
has been previously notified of three or more violations of this article within
any consecutive 12-month period, in respect to the emission of smoke, soot,
cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or dust, the owner, agent,
occupant, manager or lessee of such premises shall be notified to show cause
before the board of appeals not less than ten days after the date of notice,
why the equipment causing such violations should not be sealed, and such board
of appeals is hereby authorized and empowered to seal the equipment against
further use until compliance with the provisions of this article is made.
   (b)   The notice herein provided for may be given by mail directed to the
last known address of the party to be notified, or if such party or his
whereabouts is unknown, then by posting a notice on or near the premises at
which the violations have occurred. Upon such date the violator may appear and
be heard. If the board of appeals finds that adequate corrective means and
methods have not been employed to correct the cause of such conditions, then it
is hereby empowered to order such equipment sealed until such time as a permit
and certificate, as provided in this division, have been applied for and issued
for such plant.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break a seal of any refuse-
burning equipment, any boiler or any fuel-burning equipment or device producing
heat or power or for regulating and collecting dust that has been sealed by the
department upon order of the board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.25, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-135. - Refusal of certificate; sealing.
   When a certificate of operation is refused in the case of an original
inspection or in the case of an annual inspection, the department is authorized
to seal immediately the furnace or other combustion equipment or device until
the owner, lessee or other person required to procure the certificate of
operation shall have complied with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 2.26, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-136. - Violations.
   (a)   Any person who shall refuse to comply with or who shall violate or
assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this article; who, in any
manner, hinders, obstructs, delays, resists, prevents, or in any way interferes
with the smoke inspector, or any police officer in the performance of any duty
in the administration or enforcement of this article; shall refuse to permit
such inspector, superintendent, or officer from performing his duty by refusing
them, or any of them, entrance at reasonable hours to any premises in which the
provisions of this article are being violated; or shall refuse to permit the
inspection or examination of such building, establishment, premises,
enclosures, or open areas for the purpose of the administration or enforcement
of this article shall be subject to the abatement thereof or to the fines and
penalties provided in this section.
   (b)   Air pollution may be abated by filing injunctive proceedings in the
county circuit court by the smoke inspector. The right to such abatement shall
be cumulative and shall be in addition to the fines and penalties hereinafter
specified.
   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding the sum of $500.00 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 81-73, §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 11-4-81)
Secs. 13-137—13-145. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - WORK CODE
Sec. 13-146. - Chimneys and stacks.
   (a)   Chimneys shall be of such height to produce sufficient available draft
to supply a proper amount of air to burn, without excessive smoke, the maximum
amount of fuel that is to be consumed, and to overcome draft loss or
restrictions in furnace, boiler setting, gas passages, damper openings,
breechings and stacks. The chimney must be of sufficient cross sectional area
to allow the free, unrestricted discharge of the products of combustion.
   (b)   For high pressure boilers the height and dimensions of the chimney
shall be figured in accordance with any acceptable formula, but in no case
shall such height and dimensions be less than that specified in Table 1,
hereinafter set forth, without specific approval of the board of appeals after
hearing thereon, as herein provided.
   (c)   For low pressure heating boilers the height and dimensions of the
stack may be figured in accordance with any acceptable formula, but in no case
shall the height and dimensions be less than that specified in Table 2,
hereinafter set forth, without specific approval of the board of appeals after
hearing thereon, as herein provided.
   (d)   No smokestack or chimney, irrespective of the provisions of the
preceding subsections (b) and (c), shall be installed with less cross sectional
area than those recommended by the manufacturers of the boiler or boilers
connected thereto.
   (e)   All incinerator stacks and other chimneys, smokestacks, or flues which
emit sparks in sufficient amount or size to cause a hazard to buildings or
surrounding property, shall be equipped with a spark arrester of suitable size
and construction to prevent the emission of such sparks.
   (f)   All stacks and chimneys and parts thereof or appurtenances thereto
shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the official building
code of the city and of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-147. - Incinerators—Generally.
   (a)   All incinerators creating a nuisance under the provisions of this
article shall be equipped with gas washing devices, settling chambers or other
approved devices for the elimination of the nuisance, if the smoke inspector
determines that such devices will correct the existing nuisance.
   (b)   Hereafter, every building, except single- and two-family residences,
which is built in the city, shall be equipped with an incinerator, or where
alterations to existing buildings require structural changes which increase the
floor area by ten percent, or where the occupancy of an existing building has a
rubbish load in excess of two bushels per day, shall be equipped for burning in
an incinerator, in connection with such building, all rubbish and combustible
material of all kinds which might be produced or picked up or brought into such
building, it being hereby required that such incinerator shall be equipped to
add natural or artificial gas or fuel oil in suitable quantities to supplement,
if necessary, the incineration process, such incinerator shall be of sufficient
size to dispose of all combustible wastes from the premises; provided, however,
that any existing mercantile, manufacturing, business or trade establishment
which shall produce rubbish or wastes in excess of two bushels per day shall be
required to install adequate incineration for same within 90 days from November
13, 1981; provided, further, that if any such existing mercantile,
manufacturing, business, or trade establishment operates in more than one
building or location in the city under the same ownership, the requirements of
this section will be satisfied if one adequate incinerator facility is acquired
by such establishment; provided, further, that if any such existing mercantile,
manufacturing, business or trade establishment shall dispose of all such
rubbish or wastes on or before the close of each business day by dumping or
otherwise disposing of it at a duly authorized location, either within or
without the limits of the city, the requirements of this section will be
satisfied without the necessity of installing or acquiring an incinerator, in
accordance with the provisions of this article; provided, further, that if the
need for storing excess refuse, rubbish, or wastes shall arise at any time,
such material shall be stored only in a separate fireproof inclosure,
consisting of eight-inch masonry walls and four-inch reinforced concrete
ceiling, or equal, with a class A firedoor, in accordance with requirements of
the building code, such inclosure shall always be under lock and key, and such
material shall be removed the following workday.
   (c)   No incinerator shall burn garbage or food waste so as to create a
nuisance. If garbage is burned, secondary fuel will be required.
   (d)   The details of construction of incinerators using over two bushels per
day must be shown on a plan sealed by a registered engineer or architect or on
plans approved by a combustion engineer. Three sets of plans must accompany
each application for an incinerator permit, and the plans shall be checked for
compliance by the plan examiner, civil engineer and smoke inspector.
   (e)   Approved fly ash collection facilities need not be furnished on
installation where the burning rate of such incinerator does not exceed 60
pounds per hour, as outlined under this article, unless it can be demonstrated
that the discharged amounts of fly ash are in excess of those amounts permitted
in this article.
   (f)   Chimneys and stacks shall comply with the requirements of the building
code.
(Ord. No. 81-73, §§ 3.2, 3.2-A, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-148. - Same—Fuel.
   (a)   All incinerators creating a nuisance under the provisions of this
article shall be equipped with gas washing devices, settling chambers or other
approved devices for the elimination of the nuisance, if the superintendent
determines that such devices will correct the existing nuisance.
   (b)   All incinerators which shall be built, altered or remodeled, or those
existing, shall use one of the following classifications of fuels for purposes
of construction design only.
      (1)   Fuel analysis, type 1 fuel. Rubbish, consisting of 75 percent dry
combustible waste and moisture not to exceed 25 percent by weight. The term
"rubbish" means fuel made up of combustible waste such as paper, rags, scrap
wood, cartons, floor sweepings and by-products of industrial waste from
manufacturing operations. In commercial operations it consists of all wrapping
waste and offal from such operations. The 25 percent moisture represents normal
moisture content in dry waste materials. Type 1 fuel is based on not more than
8,000 Btu per pound, having ten percent ash and 65 percent fuel. Secondary
auxiliary fuel may be required in this type.
      (2)   Type 2 fuel. Garbage, consisting of 65 percent wet materials and 35
percent dry materials. The term "garbage" means fuel made up of food wastes and
spoilage from hotels, restaurants, hospitals, markets and like installations.
Seventy-five percent of the wet materials is moisture, and 35 percent of the
total load is rubbish, containing up to 25 percent moisture, ash and
noncombustible eight percent, as charged. This type of fuel has 5,000 Btu per
pound, as fired. Auxiliary fuel must be provided with Type 2 fuel, both primary
and secondary.
      (3)   Type 3 fuel. Refuse consisting of an even mixture of rubbish and
garbage. This type of waste is common to industrial, commercial and
institutional installations combining accumulation of combustible waste and
garbage from cafeteria and food preparation work. Auxiliary fuel must be
provided for Type 3 fuel.
      (4)   Type 4 fuel. Human and animal remains and pathological waste which
require primary and secondary auxiliary fuel, as dictated by individual job
analysis.
      (5)   Type 5 fuel. Byproduct waste, gaseous, liquid or semi-liquid,
noxious or contaminated, of density and viscosity that will be burned through
air or pressure atomizing burner equipment. Btu values must be set on
individual materials to be destroyed.
      (6)   Type 6 fuel. Byproduct waste, semi and solid, toxic or otherwise,
to be direct charged on hearth, or refractory crucible.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.2-B, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-149. - Classification of incinerators.
   All incinerators which shall be built, altered or remodeled in the city
shall use one of the following classifications for purposes of a permit and
construction only.
      (1)   Class I residential, basement fed, wall and portable, direct fed.
Normal disposal of Type 1 fuel.
      (2)   Class II apartment and multiple dwelling, flue fed destructor type.
Normal disposal of Type 1 and 3 fuel.
      (3)   Class III commercial destructor type, designed for either Type 1 or
3 fuel, as demanded by particular occupancy.
      (4)   Class IV industrial, heavy-duty destructor type, normally
destroying Type 1 and 3 fuel in varying quantities.
      (5)   Class V municipal, destructor type, destroying Type 3, 4, 5, or 6
fuel in large quantities.
      (6)   Class VI crematory and pathological units, normal destruction of
Type 4 fuel.
      (7)   Class VII retort type equipment, designed for specific byproduct
waste fuel, Type 5 or 6.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.2-C, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-150. - Flue fed incinerators.
   (a)   All apartment and multiple dwellings shall be equipped with an
approved incinerator of a Class II type. Flue fed equipment requires a separate
flue for incinerator use only. Basement installations may be brick set or steel
casing type. All brick set units shall use a minimum 4½ inches of refractory
lining (33 to 34 P.C.E.) for grate burning areas up to nine square feet. Grate
burning areas exceeding nine square feet using a brick setting shall use 4½
inches refractory lining of a 33 to 34 P.C.E. and an eight-inch common brick
exterior wall. Ash pit and secondary combustion areas shall be lined with a
minimum of two inches of approved insulating material where same is constructed
on concrete slab.
   (b)   Minimum flue requirements for new construction shall be 12 inches × 12
inches. Each flue lining shall be built of an approved refractory 4½ inches
thick, 30 feet above the breeching line of incinerator, balance of same to be
teracotta or approved equal. Self-closing hopper doors at each floor shall be
used with daylight opening not to exceed 1/3 of the cross sectional area of the
flue. Any incinerator using Type 3 fuel will be required to furnish secondary
fuel.
   (c)   Evidence of positive draft control must also be furnished. Approved
fly ash collection equipment must also be furnished. The following details must
also be included in the design:
      (1)   Mean design temperature 1,500 degrees Fahrenheit;
      (2)   The volume of the primary combustion chamber shall have a
designated heat release of eight Btu per cubic foot per second;
      (3)   Second combustion chamber to have an area normal to gas path such
that maximum furnace heat release will not exceed 850,000 Btu per square foot
of area, 25 feet per second;
      (4)   Settling chamber to have an area normal to gas path such that
minimum furnace heat release will not exceed 370,000 Btu per square foot of
area, 11 feet per second;
      (5)   Flue cross section area not less than one square foot for each
850,000 Btu's released in the furnace, 25 feet per second;
      (6)   Chimney cross section area not less than one square foot per
780,000 Btu's of heat released in the furnace based on an assumed 50- to 60-
foot stack. The equivalent velocity is about 23 feet per second;
      (7)   Maximum burning capacity of the grates shall be 40 pounds per
square feet per hour;
      (8)   Calculation for combustion air shall be based on figuring zero
excess air:
         Btu × 7.6
          10,000
      (9)   Calculations to include provision for 50 percent excess air;
      (10)   Total weight of products of combustion to equal total combustion
air plus 90 percent of dry fuel;
      (11)   Design of incinerator and its equipment for the disposition of
moisture in the fuel shall also include the computation of the volumes for the
control of velocities including the volume of the super-heated steam at the
design unit temperature, plus the volume of the products of combustion.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.2-D, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-151. - Units burning over 60 pounds per hour.
   (a)   The following requirements govern units burning over 60 pounds of
refuse or debris per hour: commercial, industrial, municipal and special fuel
burning units. All installations hereinafter erected shall be equipped with
incinerators of a Class III to VII type, designed for the principal waste to be
destroyed. They shall be of a heavy duty construction and shall include primary
combustion chamber designed with a maximum heat release of eight Btu's per
second per cubic feet, secondary combustion chamber to maintain 1,500 degrees
Fahrenheit and final combustion chamber, wherein the gases shall not exceed 11
feet per second, calculated at 1,500 degrees Fahrenheit maximum fuel weight, to
be destroyed on grates not to exceed 65 pounds per square foot per hour. Flue
gas travel changes from primary chamber to breeching shall be 450 degrees.
   (b)   Incinerators handling wet material shall add a drying hearth area
designed for 25 pounds per hour per square feet of hearth and an additional 90
degrees gas directional change.
   (c)   Material charging may be direct, side, end of top charge chutes no
longer than one-half of the height of the incinerator.
   (d)   Refractory linings shall be of a 33 to 34 P.C.E. minimum, using a 4½-
inch lining up to nine square feet of grate burning area, nine-inch lining over
nine square feet and 13½-inch lining on all walls over nine feet in height.
   (e)   When a brick setting is used, a two-inch air space will be required
between the lining and the exterior wall, or in lieu of masonry, a steel casing
with two inches of approved insulation may be applied.
   (f)   All Class III to VII types of incinerators shall have exterior
structural steel framework designed to withstand interior thrusts and the
necessary supports for doors and appurtenant assemblies. Type 1 fuel shall be
burned on approved cast iron grates with cast iron supports. Grate openings are
not to exceed 40 percent of total burning area. Grates may be stationary,
mechanically or manually operated. All incinerators which destroy fuel or any
type in sufficient quantities to be equal to or greater than 750,000 Btu's per
hour input shall be equipped with the following: positive pressure overfire
air, secondary fuel, photoelectric smoke indicator, and indicatory pyrometer.
Refractory coating may also be necessary by the division in order to maintain
maximum furnace temperatures. Type 2 fuel shall be burned on hot drying hearths
with fuel grate burned on combination hot refractory drying hearth and cast
iron grate area, each approximately 50 percent of total burning area. Type 4
shall be burned on hot refractory hearth area over the total burning area. Type
5 may be applied to standard type heavy duty incinerators with safety and
automatic controls for firing. Type 6 fuel shall be burned on hot or cold
refractory hearth or crucible with direct charging to burning area. Approved
fly ash collection equipment must also be furnished in order to meet the
requirements of this article. Units up to 400 pounds per hour total burning
area may be manually operated and controlled, provided the user has an operator
in attendance and a sufficient amount of the time during operation to guarantee
functioning within the code limits. Units over 400 pounds per hour capacity, as
rated under this article shall have control over auxiliary fuel, over fire air,
photoelectric smoke indicator with suitable alarm and indicating pyrometer. All
breeching shall be of high temperature construction refractory lined. Ash pits
and secondary combustion chambers shall be lined with a minimum of two inches
of approved insulation material when same is constructed on concrete slab.
   (g)   The following details must also be included in the design:
      (1)   Mean design 1,500 degrees Fahrenheit;
      (2)   Secondary combustion chamber to have an area normal to gas path
such that maximum furnace heat release will not exceed 850,000 Btu's per square
foot of area, 25 feet per second;
      (3)   Settling chamber to have an area normal to gas path such that
maximum furnace heat release will not exceed 370,000 B.T.U's per square foot of
area, 11 feet per second;
      (4)   Flue cross section area not less than one square foot for each
850,000 Btu's released in the furnace, 25 feet per second;
      (5)   Chimney cross section area not less than one square foot per
780,000 Btu's of heat released in the furnace based on an assumed 50- to 60-
foot stack. The equivalent velocity is about 23 feet per second;
      (6)   Calculation for combustion air shall be:
         Btu × 7.6
          10,000
   based on figuring zero excess air;
      (7)   Calculations to include provision for 50 percent excess air;
      (8)   Total weight of products of combustion shall equal total combustion
air plus 90 percent of dry fuel;
      (9)   Design of incinerator and its equipment for the disposition of
moisture in the fuel shall also include computation of the volumes for the
control of velocities, including the volume of superheated steam at the design
unit temperature, plus the volume of the products of combustion;
      (10)   In the case of steel stack a painter trolley shall also be
provided.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.2-E, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-152. - Low pressure boilers.
   (a)   Low pressure boilers are hereby determined to include all boilers
carrying a pressure of not more than 15 pounds per square inch of steam
pressure and not more than 30 pounds per square inch of water pressure.
   (b)   Ratings as to combustion volumes for all low pressure cast iron and
steel boilers shall be selected in accordance with the recommendations for low
pressure boilers, as determined by the Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning
Contractor's National Association, Engineering Standards and all rules
contained therein, and amendments thereto, shall apply to all boilers governed
by the provisions of this article; provided, however, that any low pressure
boiler having an approved rating from the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers shall be acceptable under this article. The above provisions apply to
design unit only.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.2-F, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-153. - Necessary plans.
   (a)   Before the issuing of a permit, the applicant shall submit the
aforementioned plans, specifications and any other data deemed necessary by the
division. This permit shall be issued for construction purposes only. Upon
completion of the incinerator or the repairs or alterations, the applicant
shall call for an inspection.
   (b)   If any unit fails to perform satisfactorily at the time of inspection
and test, the certificate of operation, as required, shall be denied until the
necessary corrections have been made.
   (c)   This section is deemed necessary for the preservation of the public
health and safety of the people of the city and is being enacted under the
police powers of the city for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.2-G, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-154. - Breechings.
   Breechings of all boiler combustion equipment shall be of sufficient cross
sectional area to prevent excessive gas velocity and to defeat the obtaining of
complete combustion; and shall have a minimum number of bends and turns.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-155. - Draft fans and venturi stacks.
   (a)   Induced draft fans may be used, where necessary or desirable, provided
the requirements concerning stack or chimney size and height are observed in
accordance with the provision herein specified.
   (b)   The use of Venturi stacks and other stacks or chimneys not deemed to
be within the coverage of this article shall be permitted only upon approval by
the board of appeals after hearing thereon, as herein provided.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-156. - Accumulation of soot and fly ash.
   (a)   Tube areas and gas passages through heating surfaces shall be of
sufficient area to permit the ordinary accumulation of soot and fly ash without
such restriction to draft as would interfere with smokeless operation of the
fuel-burning equipment. Sufficient means must be provided for the removal of
soot, fly ash, dust and cinders from the heating surfaces, tube region and gas
passages; provided, however soot, fly ash, dust and cinders shall not be
removed from the heating surfaces, tube region and gas passages by the use of
compressed air, steam or other agency whereby such soot, fly ash, dust or
cinders shall be forced through the chimney or stack into the open air in
violation of the provisions of this article.
   (b)   Baffles must be of such design, and so installed and maintained, as
not to interfere with smokeless combustion due to the impinging of flame on
heating surfaces where such impingement would result in reduction of
temperature below the ignition point of the combustible gas.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-157. - Furnace volume.
   Requirements for furnace volume shall be as follows:
      (1)   A steam boiler furnace or other furnace using hand-method of firing
shall be provided with a furnace volume of not less than one cubic foot
combustion volume for each rated horsepower, or for each 140 square feet
equivalent direct radiation capacity.
      (2)   Mechanical stokers shall be provided with a furnace volume of not
less than one cubic foot per rated horsepower.
      (3)   Furnaces using fuel oil shall be provided with a furnace volume of
not less than 1.50 cubic feet per rated horsepower, or for each 140 square feet
equivalent direct radiation.
      (4)   Furnaces using pulverized coal shall not have less than three cubic
feet furnace volume per rated horsepower.
      (5)   Wood-refuse burning boilers or furnaces shall maintain a furnace
volume of from six to ten cubic feet per rated horsepower.
      (6)   Refuse-burners and destructor type of incinerators shall maintain a
furnace volume of two cubic feet per square foot grate surface.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-158. - Horizontal return tubular boilers.
   Horizontal return tubular boilers not equipped with mechanical stokers shall
be so set as to provide adequate combustion facilities, and in no case shall
the distance from shell to grate be less than specified in Table 3 hereinafter
set forth.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-159. - Power boilers.
   Power boilers equipped with stokers shall be set in accordance with at least
the minimum dimensions found in Table 4 hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-160. - Induced draft fans.
   Induced draft fans may be used provided suitable arrangements are made for
the prevention of the emission of soot, cinders and fly ash.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-161. - Air jets.
   (a)   All high pressure boilers using solid fuel, and not equipped with
mechanical stokers or provisions for using pulverized fuel, shall have at least
one air jet for each 200 square feet heating surface or fraction thereof. In no
case shall there be less than two air jets.
   (b)   Where it is impossible, due to construction, to equip a boiler and
furnace with air jets, it will be necessary to install mechanical stokers on
all boilers having more than 200 square feet heating surface or 2,500 square
feet equivalent direct radiation.
(Ord. No. 81-73, § 3.10, 11-4-81)
TABLE NO. 1—Sizes of Chimneys for Steam Boilers*
Based on Kent Chimney Formula (11)
*Calculated on basis of 1 Boiler Horsepower equal 5 lb. of coal burned per
hour. For any other rate of combustion, multiply the value in the table by the
ratio of 5 to the actual rate of combustion.
                                                                                        Equivalent
                                                        Height of                       Square
                                                        Chimney, ft.                    Chimney
                                                                                        Side
            Effective
                      40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 of
            Area, E.
Diam., Area
       A.   A-0.6VA                                 Commercial Horsepower               Sq. In.
in.    sq.  sq. ft.                                 of Boiler                           (12 VE)—4
       ft.
                                                                                                                                    Equivalent
                                                                                    Height of Chimney, ft.                          Square
                                                                                                                                    Chimney Side
              Effective
                        40    50    60    70    80    90    100   110   125   150   175   200   225   250   275   300   325   350   375   400   of
              Area, E.
Diam., Area
       A.     A-0.6VA                                                         Commercial Horsepower of Boiler                       Sq. In.
in.    sq.    sq. ft.                                                                                                               (12 VE)—4
       ft.
18     1.77   0.97      21    23    25    27    29    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 16
21     2.41   1.47      31    35    38    41    44    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 19
24     3.14   2.08      44    49    54    58    62    66    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 22
27     3.98   2.78      59    65    72    78    83    88    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 24
30     4.91   3.58      ..... 84    92    100   107   113   119   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 27
33     5.94   4.48      ..... ..... 115   125   133   141   149   156   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 30
36     7.07   5.47      ..... ..... 141   152   163   173   182   191   204   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 32
39     8.30   6.57      ..... ..... ..... 183   196   208   219   229   245   268   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 35
42     9.62   7.76      ..... ..... ..... 216   231   245   258   271   289   316   342   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 38
48     12.57  10.44     ..... ..... ..... ..... 311   330   348   365   389   426   460   492   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 43
54     15.90  13.51     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 427   449   472   503   551   595   636   675   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 48
60     19.64  16.98     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 536   565   593   632   692   748   800   848   894   938   ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 54
66     23.76  20.83     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 694   728   776   849   918   981   1040  1097  1150  1201  ..... ..... ..... ..... 59
72     28.27  25.08     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 835   876   934   1023  1105  1181  1253  1320  1385  1447  1506  ..... ..... ..... 64
78     33.18  29.73     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 1038  1107  1212  1310  1400  1485  1565  1642  1715  1785  1852  ..... ..... 70
84     38.48  34.76     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 1214  1294  1418  1531  1637  1736  1830  1920  2005  2087  2166  2241  ..... 75
90     44.18  40.19     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 1496  1639  1770  1893  2008  2116  2219  2318  2413  2504  2592  2677  80
96     50.27  46.01     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 1712  1876  2027  2167  2298  2423  2541  2654  2762  2866  2967  3064  86
102    56.75  52.23     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 1944  2130  2300  2459  2609  2750  2884  3012  3136  3254  3368  3479  91
108    63.62  58.83     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 2090  2399  2592  2771  2939  3098  3249  3393  3532  3665  3794  3918  76
114    70.88  65.83     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 2685  2900  3100  3288  3466  3635  3797  3952  4101  4245  4384  101
120    78.54  73.22     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 2986  3226  3448  3657  3855  4043  4223  4396  4562  4722  4876  107
132    95.03  89.18     ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 3637  3929  4200  4455  4696  4925  5144  5354  5556  5751  5939  117
144    113.10 106.72    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 4352  4701  5026  5331  5618  5893  6155  6407  6649  6882  7108  128
156    132.73 125.82    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 5542  5925  6285  6624  6948  7264  7553  7838  8114  8380  138
168    153.94 146.51    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 6454  6899  7318  7713  8091  8459  8795  9127  9448  9758  150
180    176.71 168.76    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 7434  7947  8430  8886  9318  9734  10131 10514 10883 11240 160
192    201.06 192.55    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 8482  9068  9618  10138 10633 11106 11559 11996 12417 12824 172
204    226.98 217.94    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 10263 10886 11475 12035 12570 13083 13577 14054 14515 131
216    254.47 244.90    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 11533 12233 12894 13524 14125 14702 15257 15792 16310 192
228    283.53 273.43    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 13658 14397 15099 15771 16414 17034 17632 18210 202
240    314.16 303.53    ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... ..... 15161 15981 16761 17507 18222 18909 19573 20215 213
 
TABLE NO. 2
CHIMNEY FLUE DIMENSIONS
Boiler Ratings Square Feet Chimney Flue  Chimney
                           Sizes         Height—Ft.
Steam Water                Round Square  Minimum
Boiler Ratings Square Feet        Chimney Flue                 Chimney
                                  Sizes                        Height—Ft.
Steam            Water            Round Square                 Minimum
300 to 600       300 to 1,000     10"   8" × 12"              35' to 40'
700 to 1,200     1,200 to 1,800   10"   8" × 12"              35' to 40'
1,300 to 1,800   2,000 to 2,800   12"   12" × 12"             40' to 45'
2,000 to 2,500   3,000 to 4,000   15"   12" × 16"             40' to 45'
3,000 to 3,500   4,800 to 5,600   16"   16" × 16"             45' to 50'
4,000 to 4,500   6,400 to 7,200   18"   16" × 20"             45' to 50'
4,500 to 5,000   7,200 to 8,000   20"   16" × 20"             50' to 55'
5,000 to 5,500   8,000 to 8,800   20"   20" × 20"             50' to 55'
5,500 to 6,000   8,800 to 9,600   20"   20" × 20"             55' to 60'
6,000 to 6,500   9,600 to 10,000  22"   20" × 20"             55' to 60'
6,500 to 7,000   10,400 to 12,000 24"   20" × 24"             60' to 65'
7,000 to 8,000   12,000 to 12,800 24"   20" × 24"             65' to 70'
8,000 to 9,000   12,800 to 14,400 26"   24" × 24"             70' to 75'
9,000 to 10,250  14,400 to 16,800 28"   24" × 28"             75' to 80'
10,250 to 12,750 16,800 to 20,400 28"   24" × 28"             80' to 85'
12,750 to 15,600 20,400 to 25,000 30"   24" × 28"             85' to 90'
15,600 to 18,000 25,000 to 28,800 32"   28" × 28"             90' to 100'
18,000 to 20,400 28,800 to 32,640 32"   30" × 30"             100' to 110'
                 (From the Association of Radiator Mfrs. Lab.,
                 Geneva, N. Y.)
 
TABLE NO. 3
Boiler Diameter Distance Shell to Grate
Boiler Diameter Distance Shell to Grate
84"             72"
78"             72"
72"             60"
66"             60"
60"             54"
54"             48"
48"             48"
36"             36"
 
TABLE NO. 4
SETTING HEIGHTS FOR STOKER EQUIPPED BOILERS
   Min.—Absolute minimum
   P.M.—Preferred minimum
                             Type of Stoker
Type of       Multiple  Single    Side      Front
Boiler        Retort    Retort    Overfeed  Overfeed
              Underfed  Underfed
         Min. P.M. Min. P.M. Min. P.M. Min. P.M. Chain  Grates
                                                 Min.   P.M.
                                       Type of Stoker
Type of                 Multiple  Single    Side      Front
Boiler                  Retort    Retort    Overfeed  Overfeed
                        Underfed  Underfed
                   Min. P.M. Min. P.M. Min. P.M. Min. P.M. Chain  Grates
                                                           Min.   P.M.
Water Tube:
 Horizontal        10'  12'  8'   12'  8'   10'  8'   10'  10'    14'
Inclined
 (Hor. M.D.)       7'   8'   6'   8'   5'   8'   6'   8'   6'     8'
Inclined
 (Vert. M.D.)      5'   8'   3'6" 6'   3'6" 5'   3'6" 5'   3'6"   8'
Vertical
 (Hor. M.D.)       3'   4'   3'   4'   3'   4'   3'   4'   3'     4'
Vertical
 (Vert. M.D.)
 150 hp            4'6" 6'   4'6" 5'   3'3" 5'   3'6" 4'6" 4'1"   5'6"
 250 hp            5'6" 6'   5'6" 6'   3'3" 6'   3'6" 4'6" 4'1"   5'6"
 500 hp            6'   6'6" 6'   6'6" 4'3" 6'6" 3'6" 4'6" 4'1"   6'6"
Hor. Ret. Tubular:
 72 inch           8'   10'  7'   10'  7'   10'  6'   8'   7'     10'
 83 inch           8'   10'  7'   10'  7'   10'  6'   8'   7'     10'
 
Secs. 13-162—13-180. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE
Sec. 13-181. - Obligation to abate.
   (a)   The department of public works is hereby authorized and directed to
inspect, from time to time, all American elm trees in the public parks and
along all streets and highways and on lands privately owned in the city for the
purpose of determining whether any of such trees are infected with the Dutch
elm disease. If such infection is discovered in any such trees in the public
parks and along any streets and highways in the city, the department is hereby
authorized and directed to remove and destroy any and all such infected trees
forthwith.
   (b)   If the department of public works inspects, or caused to be inspected,
such elm trees growing on privately owned land in the city and determines that
any of such elm trees are infected with the Dutch elm disease, the department
of public works is hereby authorized and directed to give notice to the owner
of such premises, as shown by the records in the city assessor's office, to
remove any and all such diseased elm trees forthwith and, upon the failure of
such owner to remove and destroy such elm trees within ten days from the date
of receiving such notice, the department of public works may proceed to remove
or have the diseased trees removed, and the reasonable cost of such removal
shall be charged against the property and, if unpaid, such charges shall be
transferred to the miscellaneous special assessment roll, as provided by
section 16.24 of the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 81-89, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-182. - Duty to spray elm trees.
   The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to spray with
suitable poisonous liquids all American elm trees in the city, whether
privately owned or publicly owned, for the purpose of preventing any such trees
from becoming infected with such disease. In connection with such spraying of
such elm trees, the director of public works, his agents and employees, are
hereby authorized to go upon private property to spray such trees.
(Ord. No. 81-89, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-183. - Penalty.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding the
sum of $500.00 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 81-89, § 3, 11-4-81)
Secs. 13-184—13-205. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - NOXIOUS WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Sec. 13-206. - Unlawful to permit.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant or any person having charge
of any lot or parcel of land within the city to permit or allow to grow thereon
vegetation of any kind scattered among which are noxious weeds such as Canada
thistles, wild carrot, ox-eyed daisies, wild mustard, ragweed goldenrod, or any
other varieties which are recognized as inducing hay fever, rose fever, or
other diseases or being in any other way deleterious to the health or comfort
of the community. The presence of such weeds upon any lot or parcel of land
within the limits of the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 81-92, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 13-207. - Duty to cut weeds and other vegetation.
   It is hereby made the duty of the owner of unimproved land, or any person
having charge of any unimproved lands within the limits of the city upon which
vegetation is growing or standing, to cut and destroy or cause to be cut and
destroyed all such vegetation growing or standing on such premises as often as
may be necessary to prevent them going to seed and/or reaching a height of six
inches or more. If any owner of unimproved land or any person having charge of
unimproved lands in this city shall knowingly allow or permit any vegetation to
grow upon such lands or shall allow or permit the vegetation to ripen so as to
cause or endanger the spread thereof, he/she shall, upon conviction in any
court of competent jurisdiction, be liable to the penalty imposed in this
article for the violation thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-92, § 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 03-945, 3-4-03; Ord. No. 06-1076, 5-15-
06)
Sec. 13-208. - Duty of director to give notice; failure to comply.
   (a)   It is hereby made the duty of the director of public works to give
general notice to the public of the requirements of this article by publishing
a notice in the official city newspaper during the month of March each year.
This notice shall indicate that vegetation reaching a height of six inches or
more will be cut by the city and the owner of the property charged with the
cost.
   (b)   In case the owner or occupant or the person having charge of any
unimproved land in the city shall refuse or neglect to comply with such notice,
or shall refuse or neglect to cut the vegetation, it shall be the duty of the
director of public works, or someone working under his direction, to enter upon
the land as many times as is necessary, to cause all such vegetation to be cut
down and to charge the cost thereof, together with an amount of $150.00 per
invoice to cover administrative costs and contingent expenses, against the
owner or occupant of such premises and against the property itself.
   (1)   Due to the increased administrative costs associated with repeat
offenders (e.g., increased monitoring of property), an additional fee of
$100.00 will be charged against the owner or occupant and against the property
itself for the second and subsequent incidents in a calendar year where the
director of public works, or someone working under his direction, has entered
upon the property to cut vegetation.
      a.   At the request of the owner or occupant, and upon good cause shown,
the director of public works, or his designee, may waive the additional $100.00
fee once in a calendar year.
(Ord. No. 81-92, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1077, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 11-1339, 11-
21-11; Ord. No. 22-1768, 8-23-22)
Sec. 13-209. - Cost to be charged against owner.
   The director of building and safety shall keep a record of the cost of
cutting the vegetation upon each separate lot and parcel of unimproved land by
the city, and shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises by ordinary
mail or otherwise, if the address of such owner or occupant be known, that the
city has cut or caused to be cut and destroyed the vegetation upon the premises
in accordance with the provisions of this article, together with a statement of
the amount due the city. If the costs and charges due the city for cutting and
destroying vegetation upon any lot or parcel of unimproved land, in accordance
with the provisions of this article, shall not have been collected on or before
December 31 of the year in which the expense was incurred by the city, the same
shall be reported by the finance director to the council to be collected by a
special assessment, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 15 of the
Charter of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-92, § 4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1078, 5-15-06)
Sec. 13-210. - Penalty.
   In addition to the remedies described above, any individual who violates any
of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   First offense: The individual is responsible for a civil infraction
subject to a fine of $100.00.
      (2)   Second and subsequent offenses committed within a calendar year:
The individual is guilty of a misdemeanor with a mandatory minimum fine of
$500.00.
(Ord. No. 81-92, § 5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 03-944, 3-4-03; Ord. No. 06-1079, 5-15-
06)
Secs. 13-211—13-499. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - CONSTRUCTION SITE MAINTENANCE
Sec. 13-500. - Construction site maintenance provisions for residential and
commercial properties.
   All residential and commercial properties shall comply with the following
provisions while under a valid permit for construction:
   (a)   General. Wherever a building or structure is erected, altered,
repaired, removed or demolished, the operation shall be conducted in a safe
manner and suitable protection for the general public shall be provided.
   (b)   Equipment storage. All construction equipment and materials shall be
stored in an orderly fashion and in compliance with the state construction
code.
   (c)   Airborne materials. All construction shall provide control for on-site
dust, soil and any other airborne materials so that such materials remain on
the job site.
   (d)   Fences. Every excavation and/or area of construction on a site located
five feet or less from the street lot line shall be enclosed with a barrier not
less than six feet high to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons. Where
located more than five feet from the street lot line, a barrier shall be
erected where required by the building official. All barriers shall be of
adequate strength to resist wind pressure as required by the building official.
      (1)   Any area under construction for more than two months, regardless of
its proximity to the street lot line, shall be enclosed by a temporary chain-
link fence to protect the safety of the public and to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons.
   (e)   Watchman. Wherever a building is being demolished, erected or altered,
a watchman shall be employed to warn the general public when intermittent
hazardous operations are conducted across the sidewalk or walkway, where
required by the building official.
(Ord. No. 10-1302, 12-13-10)
Secs. 13-501—13-520. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. VEHICULAR NUISANCE.
Sec. 13-521.   Purpose, intent, and authority.
   (a)   The purpose and intent of this article is to regulate reckless driving
and racing on public streets that endanger the health and safety of people and
property in the city.
   (b)   The city finds that reckless driving and racing pose an immediate
threat to the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, creates a nuisance as defined in Section
13-1 of this Code, and interferes with the right of individuals and private
business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the city. Individuals
involved in the type of activity prohibited in this article engage in
activities and behaviors without regard to the safety of oncoming traffic,
pedestrians, property, or vehicles parked or moving nearby.
   (c)   Because reckless driving and racing are a nuisance, the city finds it
necessary and appropriate to take additional and immediate steps to protect
public health and safety. The city may take action to abate the public
nuisance, including impoundment and forfeiture of the vehicle(s) involved as
well as any tractor or trailer used to transport the vehicle(s) to and from the
racing site; or any tools or equipment used to service, maintain, or repair the
racing vehicle(s); or any proceeds of racing.
   (d)   The provisions of this article are authorized by The Home Rule City
Act, Public Act 279 of 1909, more specifically but not limited to MCL 117.30).
   (e)   By adopting this article the city is not opting out of Chapter 207 of
the Wayne County Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-522.   Definitions.
   (a)   Excessively high rate of speed means any speed that is 15 mph or more
over the posted speed limit.
   (b)   Owner of a vehicle means a person in whose name the vehicle is titled,
and any chattel mortgagee or assignee or other lien-holder whose lien has been
filed in the office of the Secretary of State or the office of the Wayne County
Register of Deeds prior to the commencement of the action, as well as a person
who is deemed by law to be a constructive owner.
   (c)   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or joint venture or combination acting as
a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
   (d)   Public street means a street, freeway, highway, alleyway, public
parking lot, private parking lot open to the public, or any other paved surface
that is open to the public, including a private paved surface which is used
without the owner’s permission, which has not been specifically designed for
racing vehicles.
   (e)   Racing means either:
      (1)   Race a vehicle either against another vehicle or against a time- or
speed-measuring device, whether or not there is an agreement to race; or
      (2)   Drive a vehicle at an excessively high rate of speed or
acceleration or in another recklessly dangerous manner in an exhibition of
driving prowess, such as drifting, sliding, or donuts (involving the loss of
traction and/or repeatedly driving in circles or figure-eights or in a sideways
motion in circles or figure-eights) that is recklessly dangerous and could
cause serious injury or death, and /or is an impediment to traffic.
   (f)   Reckless driving or recklessly means the operation of a vehicle
without due caution and circumspection, and in willful or wanton disregard of
the rights or safety of person or property, or in a manner so as to endanger or
be likely to endanger any person or property. Examples of reckless driving or
driving recklessly includes, but is not limited to, drifting, sliding, donuts
(involving the loss of traction and/or repeatedly driving in circles or figure-
eights or in a sideways motion in circles or figure-eights), and burnouts (also
known as peel out or power brake, practice of keeping a vehicle stationary or
relatively stationary and spinning its wheels, with the resultant friction
causing the tires to heat up and smoke).
   (g)   Vehicle includes, but is not limited to, every device in, upon, or by
which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon public
streets, including self-propelled devices. Vehicle does not include devices
exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks or power-driven mobility device when that power-driven mobility device
is being used by an individual with a mobility disability.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-523.   Nuisance prohibited.
   (a)   A person or their agent or employee, who owns, leases, operates, or
maintains a vehicle shall not use that vehicle, nor allow the vehicle to be
used, for reckless driving or racing in violation of this article.
   (b)   Any violation of this article, including a first-time offense, is a
nuisance if the reckless driving or racing is recklessly dangerous to health,
safety, and/or property, and/or impedes traffic.
   (c)   A person who violates any prohibition in this article is guilty of a
nuisance. The vehicle involved in the violation and its contents, including any
tractor or trailer used to transport the vehicle to and from the racing site;
or any tools or equipment used to service, maintain, or repair the racing
vehicle; or any proceeds of racing are also declared a nuisance.
   (d)   Any vehicles driven recklessly or involved in racing in violation of
this article, including the vehicle’s contents, shall be sanctioned, enjoined,
and abated as set forth in this article and by Wayne County Third Circuit Court
rule.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-524.   Enforcement.
   (a)   This article may be enforced by a civil action filed in the Wayne
County Third Circuit Court to abate the public nuisance; to perpetually enjoin
a person, his or her agent or employee from using or allowing a vehicle to be
used for the purposes declared a nuisance in this article; or to provide for
the seizure, impoundment, continued impoundment, sale, or forfeiture to the
seizing agency of a vehicle or its contents, including a tractor or trailer
used to transport the vehicle to and from the racing site, or allied
maintenance or transportation equipment or tools, or any racing proceeds, which
is a nuisance.
   (b)   A civil action may be initiated in the name of the city by the
Attorney General of the State of Michigan, the Wayne County Prosecuting
Attorney, or the Corporation Counsel for the City of Dearborn.
   (c)   In a civil action brought under this article, any chattel mortgagee or
assignee or other lienholder whose lien has been filed on the property with the
Michigan Secretary of State or the Wayne County Register of Deeds shall be
joined as a party defendant.
   (d)   In a civil action brought under this article, evidence of the general
reputation of the owner or operator of the vehicle; the vehicle; or of the
place, area or building in which the racing activity took place is admissible
to establish the existence of the public nuisance.
   (e)   Proof of knowledge of the existence of the public nuisance on the part
of the owner, or his or her agent or employee, or any of them, is not required.
   (f)   In a civil action brought under this article, any monies found on the
driver, passengers, or others directly involved in the racing activity are
presumed to be proceeds of said racing. This presumption may be rebutted by
clear and convincing evidence that the monies are unrelated to the racing.
   (g)   In a civil action brought under this article the operation of two or
more vehicles either at speeds in excess of prima facie lawfully established
speeds or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in
excess of such prima facie lawfully established speed is prima facie evidence
of racing.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-525.   Judgment and order.
   (a)   Upon finding that a public nuisance exists, the Wayne County Third
Circuit Court may render judgment and enter an order of abatement.
   (b)   Any vehicle that has driven recklessly or been used for racing upon
public streets in the city in violation of this article, including the
vehicle’s contents or any tractor or trailer used to transport the racing
vehicles to and from the racing site; or any tools or equipment used to
service, maintain or repair the racing vehicle; or any proceeds of racing may
be impounded or continue to be impounded for a period of up to one year,
ordered to be sold in the manner provided for the sale of chattels under
execution, or forfeited to the seizing agency.
   (c)   Upon the sale of the vehicle or its contents, or a tractor or trailer
used to transport the racing vehicle to or from the racing site, or any tools
or equipment used to service, maintain, or repair the racing vehicle, the
proceeds shall be disposed of in the following order of priority:
      (1)   To pay for the costs of keeping the property and the expenses of
the sale.
      (2)   To pay all bona fide secured interests and liens on the property,
provided that the secured party or lienholder had no knowledge or notice that
the property was being used to maintain a public nuisance.
      (3)   To pay for court costs and to reimburse appropriate units of
government for the costs of enforcing and prosecuting the action, including any
costs of incarceration not otherwise reimbursed which are generated due to a
contempt charge against the owner or an agent or employee of the owner arising
from the abatement order.
      (4)   The remaining balance shall be deposited in the city’s general fund
or distributed as ordered by the court.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-526.   Time period to commence action, storage of vehicle, settlement
conference, and consent order.
   (a)   If a vehicle is seized pursuant to this article, a civil action under
this article shall be commenced within 30 days after the seizure. Pending trial
of a public nuisance action, the court may order that the vehicle, including
its contents, and any tractor or trailer used to transport the vehicle to and
from the racing site, or any allied equipment or tools, be impounded or
continue to be impounded and held in secure storage. The vehicle or its
contents, including any tractor or trailer used to transport the vehicle to and
from the racing site, or any allied equipment or tools may be released upon the
defendant posting a bond equal to the fair market value of the property.
   (b)   A defendant in a public nuisance action brought under this article may
enter into an out-of-court settlement agreement with the Wayne County
Prosecuting Attorney or the City's Corporation Counsel.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-527.   Notice of seizure and intent to forfeit; redemption of property;
forfeiture pursuant to law.
   (a)   If a vehicle and/or property is seized for violating the provisions of
this article, the seizing agency shall provide notice of seizure and intent to
forfeit to the owner of the vehicle and/or property on a form designated for
such purpose.
   (b)   Upon receiving notice of seizure and intent to forfeit, the owner of
the vehicle and/or property may contest the seizure in the Wayne County Circuit
Court.
   (c)   The owner may contest the seizure or, if agreeable to the Wayne County
Prosecuting Attorney (if the matter is being pursued by the Wayne County
Prosecutor’s Office) or the City’s Corporation Counsel (if the matter is being
pursued by the corporation counsel), enter into a settlement agreement to re-
claim the vehicle and/or property. Such settlement agreement may, at the
discretion of either the Wayne County Prosecuting Attorney or Corporation
Counsel (depending which authority is pursuing the matter), include a
redemption fee schedule as follows:
      (1)   $900.00 for a first seizure, plus towing and storage fees.
      (2)   $1,800.00 for a second seizure, plus towing and storage fees.
      (3)   $2,700.00 for a third seizure, plus towing and storage fees.
   Depending on which authority is pursuing the matter, either the Wayne County
Prosecuting Attorney or Corporation Counsel for the City of Dearborn will
decide whether to seek abatement/forfeiture of the vehicle and/or property or
what redemption fee applies.
   (d)   Exemption for drag racing. The redemption fee schedule does not apply
to drag racing cases in violation of MCL 257.626a and/or Dearborn Code of
Ordinances Section
18-249 or other serious cases, depending up on the facts and circumstances of
each case, after review by the Wayne County Prosecuting Attorney or Corporation
Counsel for the City. The Wayne County Prosecuting Attorney or Corporation
Counsel, depending on who is pursuing the matter, will decide whether to seek
abatement/forfeiture of the vehicle and/or property and what redemption fee
applies.
   (e)   Failure to file a claim of interest within 30 days of receiving notice
of seizure and intent to forfeit will result in automatic forfeiture of the
vehicle and/or property pursuant to
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-528.   Provisions in addition to other law.
   The provisions, sanctions and remedies set forth in this article are in
addition to the sanctions and remedies provided in state and other municipal
law, and are not intended to comprise, substitute for, or place a limitation
upon those other laws.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-529.   Provisions severable.
   If any provision of this article shall be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be void, invalid, illegal, or unenforceable, then such
voidness, invalidity, illegality, or unenforceability shall not affect any
other provision in this article, and all remaining provisions shall continue to
be of full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Sec. 13-530.   Liberal construction.
   The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the health, safety and
welfare of the county and the citizens of the county, as such, it shall be
liberally construed in order to effectuate that purpose.
(Ord. No. 22-1762, 7-26-22)
Secs. 13-531—13-540. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. BULK SOLID STORAGE AND HANDLING
DIVISION 1. PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS, AND APPLICABILITY
Sec. 13-541.   Purpose, intent, and authority.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate the storage of bulk solid
material at facilities in the city that store, handle, load, unload, stockpile,
or process such bulk solid material.
   The city finds that activities associated with these facilities have the
potential to create, or contribute to the creation of, fugitive dust and/or
debris, and the proliferation of such fugitive dust and/or debris have the
potential to create negative impacts on both residents and property. These
include, but are not limited to, potential health hazards associated with
inhaling fugitive dust and/or, which include pulmonary inflammation, asthma,
and fibrosis.
   This article prescribes reasonable regulations to minimize fugitive dust
and/or debris coming from facilities that store, handle, load, unload,
stockpile, or process bulk solid material, including any person that transports
materials to, from, or within these lots.
   The provisions of this article are authorized by and adopted pursuant to
part 55 of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
Public Act 451 of 1994, titled “Air Pollution Control,” particularly Sections
5540 and 5542 being MCL 324.5540 and 324.5542.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-542.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed by this section. Words and phrases not
defined in this article shall the meanings as defined in Part 55 of the
Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, PA 451 of 1994,
MCL 324.5501 et seq., or Michigan Administrative Code, R 336.1101 et seq., and
any subsequent amendments to either:
   (a)   Alternative operating plan. Means any of the following:
      (1)   An operating program for a fugitive dust source or potential
fugitive dust source under Section 5524 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, being MCL 324.5524. An operating plan includes a
fugitive dust control program under Rule 336.1371 and 336.1372 of the Michigan
Administrative Code.
      (2)   An operating plan for a fugitive dust source or potential fugitive
dust source under a state permit to operate, state renewable operating permit,
or similar authorization.
      (3)   An operating plan for a fugitive dust source or potential fugitive
dust source under a federal permit or similar federal authorization.
      (4)   An operating plan for a fugitive dust source or potential fugitive
dust source under a state or federal consent order, environmental consent
order, consent judgment, consent decree, or any other equivalent.
   (b)   Asphalt millings. Also known as asphalt grinding or RAP (Reclaimed
Asphalt Pavement), means the fine particles of bitumen and inorganic material
that are produced by the mechanical grinding of bituminous concrete surfaces.
   (c)   Bulk solid material. Means:
      (1)   Any solid substance or material that can be used as a fuel or as an
ingredient or component in a manufacturing or construction process that may
create fugitive dust and that, except for carbonaceous material, is accumulated
in an amount of 50 cubic yards or more at any one time. Bulk solid material
shall include, but is not limited to, ores, iron slag, steel slag,
metallurgical coke, or limestone.
      (2)   Any carbonaceous material regardless of the amount but does not
mean material stored in nurseries, garden centers, and farm supply stores.
   (d)   Carbonaceous bulk solid material facility. Means a source, site, or
facility where carbonaceous material is stored, loaded, unloaded, stockpiled,
handled on-site, blended, processed, or otherwise managed.
   (e)   Carbonaceous bulk solid material. Means bulk solid material that
includes carbonaceous material.
   (f)   Carbonaceous material. Means a solid substance that occurs naturally
or exists as a result of human-made process that is rich in carbon.
Carbonaceous material includes, but is not limited to, petroleum coke,
metallurgical coke, coke breeze, and nut coke.
   (g)   Coke. Means a solid carbonaceous material derived from the
distillation of coal (including metallurgical coke) or from oil refinery coker
units or other cracking processes (including petroleum coke), and includes, but
is not limited to, nut coke and coke breeze.
   (h)   Department. Means the city’s Department of Economic Development.
   (i)   Director. Means the Director of the Department of Economic
Development.
   (j)   Facility. Means all contiguous land, structures, and other
appurtenances, and improvements on the land, used for storing, handling,
loading, unloading, stockpiling, or processing bulk solid and/or carbonaceous
material.
   (k)   Fugitive dust. Means any solid particulate matter that becomes
airborne or otherwise moves beyond the lot, facility, building, or structure
property line or, if being transported by a vehicle, moves beyond the confines
of the vehicle, by natural or human-made activities, excluding engine
combustion exhaust and particulate matter emitted from a properly permitted
exhaust stack equipped with a pollution control device.
   (l)   High wind conditions. Means when average wind speeds exceed 20 miles
per hour on an hourly average.
   (m)   Internal road. Means any route within a facility that is not located
in an area normally used for staging or storage of material and that has
evidence of repeated prior travel by, or is otherwise regularly used by,
vehicles for transporting materials to, from, or within a facility.
   (n)   Metallurgical coke or metcoke. Means a carbonaceous material resulting
from the manufactured purification of coal.
   (o)   Opacity limit. Means the highest degree to which visibility of a
background is reduced by fugitive dust shall be permitted, expressed as a
percentage where 0% represents no interference by fugitive dust and 100%
represents zero visibility due to complete interference by fugitive dust.
   (p)   Owner or operator. Means any person, whether owner, occupant, tenant,
lessee, agent, or other person who: has legal or equitable title to any
facility; who has charge, care, or control of any facility; who is in
possession of any facility; or who is entitled to control or direct the
management of any facility.
   (q)   Person. Means an individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, limited liability company, corporation, association, sole
proprietorship, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, state agency, owner, operator or generator, or any other legal
entity, or its legal representative, agent, or assigns.
   (r)   Petroleum coke or petcoke. Means a solid carbonaceous residue produced
from a coker after cracking and distillation from petroleum refining
operations, including such residue produced by petroleum upgraders in addition
to petroleum refining.
   (s)   PM10. Means particulate matter that has an aerodynamic diameter less
than or equal to nominal 10 micrometers, as measured by a reference test
specified in 40 CFR Part 51, Appendix M.
   (t)   Process or processing. Means any chemical, industrial, commercial, or
manufacturing operation or activity that causes, or has the potential to cause,
the emission of airborne particles, including but not limited to, blending,
mixing, crushing, screening, breaking, wet or dry cleaning, thermal drying, and
chemically treating.
   (u)   Reportable action level. Means the positive difference between the
level of PM10 measures at the upwind monitor(s) at a facility and the level of
PM10 measured at the downwind monitor(s) at a facility that will trigger
response activities under a contingency plan pursuant to Sec. 13-547 as
established in the fugitive dust plan submitted by a facility. The reportable
action level shall be the difference of 20% based on the concentration of PM10
detected at the downwind monitor(s) at a facility.
   (v)   State. Means the State of Michigan.
   (w)   Track-out or tracked material. Means any mud, dirt, soil, debris, or
material stored at a particular facility on vehicle wheels, slides, carriages,
or undercarriages that is carried from a facility onto a public road, right-of-
way, or property of another.
   (x)   Transfer point. Means the location at or within a facility where bulk
solid material is moved, carried, conveyed, dropped, or deposited.
   (y)   Vehicle. Means any car, truck, railcar, vessel, or any other device
in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported.
   (z)   Vessel. Means every description of watercraft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-543.   Applicability.
   Except as otherwise stated in this article, any facility that processes,
handles on-site, transfers, loads, unloads, stockpiles, or stores bulk solid or
carbonaceous materials shall comply with all of the requirements in this
article.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 2. PRE-EXISTING FACILITIES AND ALTERNATE COMPLIANCE
Sec. 13-544.   Pre-existing facilities; temporary certificate of operation.
   (a)   Except as otherwise stated in this article, and subject to subsections
(b) and (c) of this section, all facilities subject to regulation under this
article that operate with a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city
on the effective date of the ordinance enacting this article, and do not have
any outstanding violations or fees owed to the city, shall be issued a
temporary certificate of operation, and may continue to operate for a period of
90 days following the effective date of this article. During this period, a
pre-existing facility shall apply for a certificate of operation pursuant to
one of the following application procedures:
      (1)   If the pre-existing facility operates pursuant to a alternative
operating plan for the facility, as that term is defined in this article, the
owner and/or operator must apply for an certificate for alternate compliance
under the application procedure outlined in this division of this article.
      (2)   If the pre-existing facility does not have an alternative operating
plan for the facility, the owner and/or operator must apply for a temporary
certificate of operation under the application procedure outlined in Division 3
of this article.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-545.   Alternative compliance for qualified solid bulk materials;
application process; certificate of alternate compliance; fee.
   (a)   Application and eligibility for certificate of alternative compliance;
renewal; alternative operating plan; exception to standards set forth in
article; conditions.
      (1)   The owner or operator of a facility that processes, handles on-
site, transfers, loads, unloads, stockpiles, or stores qualified bulk solid
materials shall be deemed in compliance with this article, and shall receive a
certificate of alternative compliance from the department director, if the
owner or operator meets all the terms and conditions of this section.
      (2)   Exception to default standards. If the facility has an alternative
operating plan, as that term is defined in Sec.
13-542, the standards set forth in the plan for fugitive dust sources or
potential fugitive dust sources shall control and be enforceable under this
article if they are subject to enforceable permit condition(s) or enforceable
order(s) as part of the plan.
         a.   Pile height standard exempt from exception. Regulations that
address pile height for outdoor storage of bulk solid materials, including pile
height of combustible materials, are exempt from the exception stated above,
and control over any similar regulations found in an alternative operating
plan.
         b.   A pattern of violations under applicable local, state, or federal
law related to the requirements of this article; or a pattern of violations of
the standards set forth in the alternative operating plan, may result in the
loss of the exception under this section, in which case all terms and
conditions of this article that deviate from those set forth in the alternative
operating plan shall become enforceable.
   (b)   Submission of alternate operating plan for facility. The owner or
operator must submit an alternative operating plan for the facility, as that
term is defined in Sec.
13-542, subject to the review and approval of the department director or their
designee.
   (c)   Compliance with alternative operating plan. The alternative operating
plan, including any amendments, must be approved by the issuing authority, in
effect at the time of submission, and the owner or operator must be in
compliance with the plan.
   (d)   Fee. A non-refundable fee of $2,500.00 is due at the time an
application for a certificate of alternative compliance or renewal is submitted
to the department, which shall cover the costs of application review,
inspections, and compliance monitoring conducted pursuant to this section and,
if applicable, the article. The department reserves the right to increase this
fee if it no longer covers the aforementioned costs. This fee is not inclusive
of other fees that may be required by the Code of Ordinances, the Zoning
Ordinance, or applicable law.
   (e)   Contents of alternative operating plan. The applicant may submit one
of the following alternative operating plans, subject to the following terms
and conditions, as part of the application under this section:
      (1)   Reliance on alternative operating plan under MCL 324.5524(5) with
additional information. The state operating plan includes the information
required by section 5524(5) of the Natural Resources Environmental Protection
Act, being MCL 324.5524(5), and all of the following additional information is
included in (i) the state operating plan, (ii) included in an active national
pollutant discharge elimination system or active groundwater permit for the
facility issued by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or Michigan
Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy or successor agency, or
(iii) included with any supplemental information filed with the department with
an application for a certificate of alternative compliance under this section:
         a.   A site map for the facility, drawn to scale, in conformance with
the requirements and standards of Zoning Ordinance Section
32.02, and providing the following additional information:
            1.   Facility boundaries;
               a.   All buildings, internal roadways, and utilities on facility
property;
               b.   All roadways and transportation corridors within one
quarter mile of the perimeter of the facility that are used for transport of
material to or from the facility;
               c.   The location of all floor drains, storm drains, and storm
water outfalls;
               d.   All potential emission points at the facility, including a
depiction of the footprints of all bulk solid material storage piles, transfer
points, conveyors, and roadways; and
               e.   The location of all fugitive dust control devices and
monitoring devices, including the fugitive dust monitor and wind monitor.
            2.   A description of the facility’s operations, including a list
of all bulk solid materials that are construction bulk solid materials handled
at, processed at, or transported to, from, or within the facility;
            3.   A description of the control measures, devices, and
technologies to be used to minimize and control fugitive dust at the facility
consistent with any applicable standard for density of emissions under Rule
336.1301 of the Michigan Administrative Code, a description of how all control
measures, devices, and technologies will be maintained and calibrated to ensure
their continued effectiveness, and a description of the training provided to
staff regarding the proper application and operation of the control measures,
devices, and technologies;
            4.   A description of the owner or operator’s system for
recordkeeping compliant with the following requirements:
               a.   The facility owner or operator shall record all roadway
cleaning and street sweeping daily.
               b.   The facility owner or operator shall record the application
of water and/or chemical stabilizers, as applicable, as well as any instances
when such application was suspended for any reason, including, but not limited
to, weather conditions.
               c.   The facility owner or operator shall maintain a schedule
for routine inspections, maintenance, and testing of all fugitive dust control
measures, devices, and technologies, including a schedule for inspection of
bulk solid material piles, inspection of all monitors, and inspection of off-
site areas for the presence of dust, and identify the person or persons
responsible for conducting such inspections, maintenance, and testing.
               d.   The system of recordkeeping for the owner or operator’s
compliance with Secs.
13-545(e)(1)a.2. and
13-545(e)(1)e. of this section, and compliant with a requirement that the owner
or operator keep and maintain the records described in this subparagraph at the
facility and available for inspection by the department for at least 3 years
after creation;
         b.   A description of the owner or operator’s measures to comply with
any applicable setback requirements under state law, rule, or permit, or
applicable under the city’s Zoning Ordinance;
         c.   A description of measures to comply with the following height
limits and screening requirements relating to piles, as outlined in Sec.
13-556:
            1.   The vertical distance from the grade immediately adjacent to a
pile to the highest point of that pile shall be no greater than 25 feet. Piles
shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-of-way and properties at the
level of the right-of-way.
               a.   Exception for combustible materials. Combustible materials
capable of self-ignition through chemical action of its constituents shall be
no greater than 15 feet. Piles shall be screened from view from adjacent
rights-of-way and properties at the level of the right-of-way.
         d.   A description of protection for waterways consistent with the
requirements of any applicable state law, rule, operating plan, or permit, or
the requirements of this article, City Code, or a permit issued by the city;
         e.   A description of the owner or operator’s measures to monitor wind
speeds at the facility and to suspend disturbance of piles of qualified solid
materials, including, but not limited to, outdoor loading, unloading, and any
other processing, during high wind conditions unless alternate measures are
implemented to effectively control dust in accordance with any applicable state
operating plan or permit; and
         f.   A description of storm water management, erosion, sediment
control, and drainage measures to control runoff or migration at or from the
facility in a manner consistent with requirements under any applicable state
law, rule, operating plan, or permit, or with any requirement of this article,
City Code, city permit, or both.
      (2)   Reliance on state operating plan. If the owner or operator is
relying only upon a state operating plan for compliance with this section, the
owner or operator must file a copy of the state operating plan and any
amendments to document compliance with this section and all of the following
apply:
         a.   Within 45 days of receipt, the department must review the
operating plan and any amendments and inspect the facility for compliance with
the requirements of this section to determine whether the operating plan and
any amendments satisfy the requirements of this section and are adequate to
protect the public health and the environment and to prevent the emission of
fugitive dust that causes unreasonable interference with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property;
         b.   Within 45 days of the inspection the department director, or
their designee, shall determine and notify the owner or operator of the
facility in writing that the owner or operator of the facility is in compliance
with this section; and
         c.   The owner or operator shall remain in compliance with this
section.
      (3)   Reliance on state permit not part of state operating plan or
supplemental filing in addition to state operating plan. If the owner or
operator is relying on a state permit not part of a alternative operating plan
or other supplemental information filed with the department in addition to a
alternative operating plan for compliance with this section, the owner or
operator shall comply with all the following:
         a.   The owner or operator shall file with the department a copy of
the state operating plan and any amendments and supplemental information to
document compliance with this section along with an application for alternative
compliance under this section on a form determined by the department;
         b.   Within 45 days of receipt, the department or designee:
            1.   Review the application and other documents submitted;
            2.   Inspect the facility for compliance with the requirements of
this section to determine whether the application and other documents submitted
satisfy the requirements of this section and are adequate to protect the public
health and the environment and to prevent the emission of fugitive dust that
causes unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property; and
            3.   If applicable, issue a certificate of alternative compliance
confirming compliance with this section; and
         c.   The owner or operator remains in compliance with this section.
The department director may revoke a certificate of alternative compliance
issued under this section if an owner or operator does not remain in compliance
with this section.
   (f)   Local enforcement of state violation. If an owner or operator of a
facility violates the requirements of the alternative operating plan or permit
for the facility, or otherwise violates section 5524 of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, being MCL 324.5524, or Rule 336.1371 and
336.1372 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended, and the Michigan
Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (“EGLE”), a successor
agency, or another state officer or agency does not act to remedy or penalize
the violation, the violation may be enforced as a violation under Sec.
13-562.
      The city reserves the right to notify EGLE, or its successor agency, of
any violations pursuant to this subsection for enforcement action.
   (g)   Nothing in this section shall be an exclusive remedy, or be construed
to impair or bar any cause of action or legal or equitable remedy of any person
or the public under applicable laws and regulations.
   (h)   Application renewal. The owner or operator of a facility subject to
this section shall apply for a renewal of a certificate of alternative
compliance whenever their applicable alternative operating plan is renewed,
modified, or amended. Renewal shall be made in the same manner as the initial
application, and is subject to all applicable terms and conditions of this
article.
      (1)   The owner or operator shall have 30 days from the date their
alternative operating plan is renewed, modified, or amended to submit an
application for renewal.
   (i)   Inspections. The department shall conduct semi-annual inspections for
the purpose of monitoring compliance with this section and may conduct other
inspections for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this article. If the
department determines that an owner or operator is not complying with the
requirements of this article, including, but not limited to this section, the
department director shall require the owner or operator to take action to
comply with this article, and shall impose fines authorized by Sec. 13-503 of
this article for each day the owner or operator fails to take the action
required by the department.
   (j)   Non-compliance. An owner or operator of a facility not in compliance
with this section at any time must comply with the standards set forth in
Division 4 of this article. An owner or operator of a facility shall not be
deemed in compliance with this section if one or more of the following apply:
      (1)   The state or other applicable authority determines that the owner
or operator is not in compliance with an alternative operating plan or state
permit applicable to the facility;
      (2)   The department determines that owner or operator has not complied
with the requirements of this section; or
      (3)   The owner or operator of the facility violates Rule 336.1901 of the
Michigan Administrative Code.
   (k)   Section definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section. Words and phrases not defined in this section shall have the meanings
as defined in Sec.
13-542 or in Part 55 of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Act 451 of 1994, MCL 324.5501 et seq., or Michigan
Administrative Code, Rule 336.1101 et seq.:
      (1)   Qualified bulk solid materials. Means bulk solid materials that
satisfy all of the following:
         a.   Are bulk solid materials as defined in Sec.
13-542;
         b.   Are not carbonaceous bulk solid material; and
         c.   Are a fugitive dust source or a potential fugitive dust source.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 3. APPLICATION (STANDARD COMPLIANCE), CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION, AND
FUGITIVE DUST PLAN
Sec. 13-546.   Certificate of operation; initial application for temporary
certificate of operation; fees; minimum standards for control of fugitive dust.
   (a)   Initial application. Except for applications filed pursuant to
Division 2 of this article, an owner or operator of a facility regulated by
this article shall file an application for a certificate of operation to
operate pursuant to this article. Such application shall be filed with the
department on a form furnished by the department. The initial application by an
owner or operator shall include the following:
      (1)   Applicant contact information, including address, phone contact,
24-hour emergency contact information, and email address.
      (2)   Name and address of the facility.
      (3)   A non-refundable fee of $5,000.00. This fee is not inclusive of
other fees that may be required by the Code of Ordinances, the Zoning
Ordinance, or applicable law.
      (4)   Information required by for a fugitive dust plan under this
division.
      (5)   If applicable, information required by for an enclosure plan under
this division.
      (6)   An attestation, signed by the owner or operator of the facility,
that they have read and reviewed this article.
      (7)   Such other data and information as required by the department
pursuant to provisions and regulations of this article and applicable law.
   (b)   Application review. Upon the owner or operator filing a complete
application, the department director, or their designee, shall review the
application and any supporting materials and documents for compliance with the
requirements of this article and all other applicable laws, ordinances, and
codes.
      (1)   In determining whether to approve a fugitive dust plan and issue a
certificate of operation, the department shall solicit comments from the
department of public health and the water and sewerage department.
      (2)   The department shall evaluate the information provided in the
application to meet the requirements of this article.
   (c)   Approval, conditions, and renewal. Upon the owner or operator
providing evidence of compliance with the provisions of this article, including
where applicable, submitting an approved fugitive dust plan or an approved
enclosure plan, or both, and upon payment of the application fee established by
this article, the department director or their designee shall issue a
certificate of operation.
      (1)   Approval and expiration. The certificate of operation shall be
conditioned upon continued compliance with this article, and shall expire
annually from the date the certificate is issued.
      (2)   Conditions. The department director may attach reasonable
conditions to the certificate of operation to ensure minimization of any
adverse impacts, as long as such reasonable conditions comport with the
standards and requirements of this article and applicable law. Subject to Sec.
13-545 and any provision of this article to the contrary, these reasonable
conditions may include, but are not limited to, dust control and enclosure
requirements if the director finds that the facility has failed to demonstrate
its ability to control fugitive dust.
      (3)   Renewal. An application for renewal shall be made in the same
manner as the initial application, including payment of a non-refundable fee of
$5,000.00.
   (d)   Reservation of authority. Notwithstanding anything in this article to
the contrary, no applicant has a right to the issuance of a certificate of
operation. The city and department hereby reserve the right to determine who,
if anyone, shall be entitled to a certificate of operation, based on the
criteria listed in this article and all other applicable laws, ordinances, and
codes.
   (e)   Basis for denial of application. The department director shall deny an
application if it is incomplete or if the application does not demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-547.   Fugitive dust plan; change or expansion in operations;
submission and review; public notice; contents.
   (a)   Fugitive dust plan. The fugitive dust plan shall be submitted along
with an application for a certificate of operation. Every owner or operator of
a facility must prepare, submit, and follow a fugitive dust plan that complies
with the following requirements:
      (1)   Pre-existing facilities. Subject to Sec.
13-544, all facilities operating pursuant to a valid certificate of occupancy
on the effective date of the ordinance that enacted this article, the first
fugitive dust plan shall be submitted within 90 days of the effective date of
the ordinance that enacted this article along with the initial application for
a certificate of operation.
      (2)   New and expanding facilities. For new facilities, or expansions or
changes of existing facilities, that come into operation after the effective
date of the ordinance that enacted this article, except those portions of
expanded facilities in operation on the effective date, the first fugitive dust
plan shall be submitted with the facility’
3.00 shall apply.
      (3)   Change or expansion in facility operations. If any part of the
facility’s operation changes or expands, then, at least 30 days before the
expansion or change in operation, the facility owner or operator shall notify
the department director, submit an application to amend the certificate of
operation, and submit a revised fugitive dust plan or establish to the
department director’s satisfaction that the expanded or changed operation will
be compliant with the existing fugitive dust plan. For purposes of determining
whether an existing facility has expanded, the criteria set forth in Zoning
Ordinance Article
3.00 shall apply.
      (4)   Annual plan updates. Every owner or operator of a facility shall
update their fugitive dust plan on an annual basis as part of the annual
renewal application for a certificate of operation. The annual update shall be
due one year to the date that the previous plan was approved by the department.
      (5)   Review of fugitive dust plan and public input. The department shall
review and approve all fugitive dust plans and all updates to fugitive dust
plans. The department shall not approve any fugitive dust plan or any update to
a fugitive dust plan required under this article until the public has had an
opportunity to submit written comments on the fugitive dust plan.
         a.   Public notice. The department shall post public notice of any new
fugitive dust plan or any amendment to an existing fugitive dust plan on the
city’s website. The department shall accept comments for a period of not less
than 30 days from the date of the notice. The department shall not make a
decision on the proposed fugitive dust plan or amendment until after the close
of the public comment period.
         b.   Disapproval of plan. If the department finds that the submitted
fugitive dust plan is missing any required information or is insufficient to
ensure compliance with this article, the department shall reject the fugitive
dust plan. The applicant may resubmit a fugitive dust plan for review subject
to the public notice and comment requirements of this subsection.
      (6)   Approval requirement. Subject to the provisions of this article, an
approved fugitive dust plan is required in order to obtain a certificate of
operation.
      (7)   Fugitive dust plan contents. Each fugitive dust plan must include,
at a minimum, the following:
         a.   The name and address of the facility.
         b.   The name, address, and contact information of the owner or
operator responsible for implementation of the fugitive dust plan, including
phone contact, 24-hour emergency contact information, and email address.
         c.   A site map, drawn to scale, in conformance with the requirements
and standards of Zoning Ordinance Section
32.02, and providing the following additional information:
            1.   Facility boundaries;
            2.   All buildings, internal roadways, and utilities on facility
property;
            3.   All roadways and transportation corridors within one quarter
mile of the perimeter of the facility that are used for transport of material
to or from the facility;
            4.   The location of all floor drains, storm drains, and storm
water outfalls;
            5.   All potential emission points at the facility, including a
depiction of the footprints of all bulk solid material storage piles, transfer
points, conveyors, and roadways; and
            6.   The location of all fugitive dust control devices and
monitoring devices, including the fugitive dust monitor and wind monitor.
         d.   A description of the facility’s operations, including a list of
all bulk solid materials handled at, processed at, or transported to, from, or
within the facility.
         e.   A description of the truck routes within one quarter mile of the
perimeter of the facility that are used to transport material to and from the
facility, including an explanation of how dust will be minimized during
transport (e.g., travel on paved roads where possible, minimize truck speeds,
etc.), and a description of the measures that will be used to ensure trucks are
cleaned of loose material before they leave the facility.
         f.   A calculation showing the facility’s maximum total outdoor bulk
storage material storage capacity in tons or cubic yards. In the first fugitive
dust plan, due within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance that
enacted this article, the calculation shall be certified by signature of an
authorized representative of the owner or operator and shall be accompanied by
evidence of authority to sign on behalf of the owner or operator.
         g.   A description of all control measures, devices, and technologies
to be used to minimize and control fugitive dust, a description of how all
control measures, devices, and technologies will be actively maintained and
calibrated to ensure their continued effectiveness, and a description of the
training provided to staff regarding the proper application and operation of
all such control measures, devices, and technologies.
         h.   A dust monitoring plan that describes:
            1.   A description of the type, placement, operation, and
maintenance of PM10 monitors.
            2.   The schedule and plan for quarterly testing to ensure
compliance with this article. Such testing shall be:
               a.   Conducted by a professional trained and certified to read
opacity in accordance with the measurement method specified in Sec.
13-548; and
               b.   Conducted during a range of weather conditions to ensure
that representative conditions at the facility are covered.
            3.   A description of the facility’s recordkeeping system, which
shall include a schedule for routine inspection, testing, and maintenance.
         i.   A contingency plan describing the owner’s or operator’s planned
response activities when PM10 exceeds the reportable action level. The response
activities should consist of a range of increasingly aggressive measures
appropriate to different levels of exceedance.
         j.   A contingency plan for an alternative method of monitoring in the
event of malfunction or failure of any required PM10 monitors.
         k.   Other information as the department may require to facilitate its
review of the fugitive dust plan.
         l.   A fact sheet or executive summary of the fugitive dust plan
designed to inform the public of the facility’s plan to control and minimize
fugitive dust, which may be posted on the city’s website.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 4. MINIMUM FACILITY STANDARDS *
   *Editor’s note—When applicable, the standards set forth in this division are
subject to the terms and conditions of Sec.
13-545.
Sec. 13-548.   Control of fugitive dust; opacity limits; measurements.
   The facility owner or operator shall control the discharge of dust into the
atmosphere as specified below:
   (a)   Visible dust. The facility owner or operator shall not cause or allow
any fugitive dust that is visible beyond the property line of the facility.
   (b)   Opacity limit. The facility owner or operator shall not cause or allow
any fugitive dust within the property line of the facility at any bulk solid
material storage pile, transfer point, roadway, or parking area that exceeds 5%
opacity. An owner or operator shall not cause or allow any fugitive dust beyond
the property line of the facility that has an opacity greater than 0%.
   (c)   Measurement of opacity. Opacity shall be determined by reference test
method 9d, as defined in section 5525 of the Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, PA 451 of 1995, being MCL 324.5525(j).
   (d)   Testing of visual emissions and opacity limits. The facility owner or
operator shall, on at least a quarterly basis, perform tests of visual fugitive
dust and opacity in accordance with the protocols set forth in the facility’s
approved fugitive dust plan.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-549.   Conveyors and transfer points.
   (a)   All conveyors shall be covered or enclosed in order to reduce fugitive
dust emissions.
   (b)   The facility owner or operator shall maintain all material transfer
points in compliance with one of the following measures:
      (1)   Total enclosure; or
      (2)   Water spray system sufficient to control fugitive dust emissions.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-550.   Truck transport.
   (a)   When transport is by truck, the facility owner or operator shall
ensure that:
      (1)   All vehicles and off-road equipment adhere to the posted speed
limit within the facility, which shall be no more than 8 miles per hour;
      (2)   All outgoing material transport trucks, whether loaded or empty,
are cleaned so that any part of any tractor, bed, trailer, or tire exterior
surface, excluding the inside of the beds or trailer, are free of all loose
material; and
      (3)   All outgoing material transport trucks, whether loaded or empty,
pass through a wheel wash station and pass over rumble strips that will vibrate
the trucks and shake off loose material and dust, unless the approved fugitive
dust plan specifies other measures to ensure that the trucks will not cause any
track-out materials onto any public roadway.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-551.   Vehicle covering and other dust control measures; leaking
fluids.
   (a)   The facility owner or operator shall ensure that all trucks carrying
bulk solid material cover all truck beds and trailers before leaving the
facility in one of the following manners:
      (1)   A solid sliding cover or stackable cover on the top of the truck
bed or trailer that is kept completely closed except during loading; or
      (2)   A continuous tarp that completely covers the truck bed or trailer
and that is installed or constructed to prevent wind from entering over the
leading edge of the bed or trailer to prevent wind from entering over the
leading edge of the bed or trailer rim into the interior of the bed or trailer.
   (b)   The facility owner or operator shall load railcars and vessels in a
manner that will control dust through the use of best management practices,
such as, but not limited to, the use of solid covers, the application of dust
suppression agents and/or water, and the profiling of materials to prevent wind
erosion.
   (c)   Facility owners and operators shall not load material into truck beds,
trailers, railcars, or vessels such that a vehicle leaks material or liquid, or
emits fugitive dust during travel.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-552.   Truck loading and unloading.
   (a)   Enclosed carbonaceous materials. For enclosed carbonaceous bulk solid
material storage piles, the facility owner or operator shall conduct material
truck loading and unloading only in an enclosed structure that is either
equipped with a water spray system to be used as needed to prevent visible dust
emissions or vented to permitted air pollution control equipment that is
operated during loading and unloading activities. The ends of the structure
shall have overlapping flaps that reduce the opening, sliding doors which shall
remain closed except to allow the trucks to enter and leave, or other equally
effective devices.
   (b)   Outdoor bulk solid materials. For outdoor bulk solid material storage,
the facility owner or operator shall ensure that truck loading and unloading
occurs in compliance with the requirements for transfer points specified in
this division.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-553.   Railcar loading and unloading.
   (a)   Enclosed carbonaceous materials. For enclosed carbonaceous bulk solid
material storage piles, the facility owner or operator shall conduct railcar
material loading and unloading only in an enclosed structure that is either
equipped with a water spray system operated to prevent visible dust emissions,
or vented to permitted air pollution control equipment that is operated during
loading and unloading activities. The ends of the structure shall have
overlapping flaps, sliding doors, or other equally effective devices, which
shall remain closed except to allow the railcars to enter and leave.
   (b)   Outdoor bulk solid materials. For outdoor bulk solid material storage,
the facility owner or operator shall ensure that railcar loading and unloading
occurs in compliance with the requirements for transfer points specified in
this division.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-554.   Vessel loading and unloading.
   The facility owner or operator shall conduct vessel material loading only
through an enclosed chute that uses a water spray system, or an air pollution
control system or other mechanism described in the approved fugitive dust plan,
in order to control fugitive dust emissions during operations. Vessel unloading
shall be conducted in a manner that will minimize dust in accordance with
measures set forth in the fugitive dust plan and in compliance with the
requirements for transfer points specified in this division.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-555.   Roadway cleaning and tracked material.
   (a)   In order to clean roads of spilled and tracked material, the facility
owner or operator shall use a street sweeper to clean any paved road that is
used to transport material inside or within one quarter mile of the perimeter
of the facility.
   (b)   The street sweeper shall be equipped with a water spray for use during
nonfreezing weather, and a vacuum system to prevent fugitive dust during street
sweeping.
   (c)   The facility owner or operator shall utilize a street sweeper meeting
the requirements described in this section to clean any paved road that is used
to transport material inside or within one quarter mile of the perimeter of the
facility at least once per day. The facility owner or operator shall document
whether street sweeping has been conducted at least once per day, and the
record shall show the date and time when street sweeping was performed.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-556.   Outdoor storage of bulk solid material other than carbonaceous
materials; height limits and screening; protection of waterways; high wind
events; dust suppressant system; runoff management.
   (a)   Outdoor bulk solid material storage. A facility owner or operator may
maintain outdoor storage of bulk solid materials other than carbonaceous
materials if the facility meets all of the requirements of this section.
   (b)   Height limits and screening. The vertical distance from the grade
immediately adjacent to a pile to the highest point of that pile shall be no
greater than 25 feet. Piles shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-
of-way and properties at the level of the right-of-way.
      (1)   Exception for combustible materials. Combustible materials capable
of self-ignition through chemical action of its constituents shall be no
greater than 15 feet. Piles shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-
of-way and properties at the level of the right-of-way.
   (c)   Protection of waterways. Outdoor storage piles shall be set back at
least 100 feet from a waterway, except that material in the process of being
unloaded from or loaded to a vessel may be located within 100 feet of a
waterway for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours so long as no materials
are allowed to fall, erode, be thrown, discharged, dumped, disposed of, or
deposited in the waterway at any time.
   (d)   High wind events. The disturbance of outdoor bulk solid material
piles, including but not limited to outdoor loading, unloading, and any other
processing shall be suspended during high wind conditions, unless alternate
measures are implemented to effectively control dust in accordance with the
approved fugitive dust plan.
   (e)   Dust suppressant system. The facility owner or operator shall apply
chemical stabilizers and/or maintain and operate a wind screen, water spray
bars, a misting system, water spray systems, and/or water trucks to prevent
fugitive dust emissions in violation those standards set forth in this
division, in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Except as otherwise stated in subsection (e)(3) below, the dust
suppressant system shall be operable and able to dispense water, water-based
solutions, and/or chemical stabilizers at all times unless all bulk storage
material piles are covered or protected by wind screens.
      (2)   When the temperature falls below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, the
facility must use chemical stabilizers and/or water heating systems to ensure
that dust suppression continues.
      (3)   If any part of the dust suppressant system is undergoing
maintenance or otherwise becomes inoperable, the facility owner or operator
must suspend disturbance of bulk solid material piles that would be controlled
by the same inoperable portion of the dust suppressant system until such time
as the system becomes operable again.
   (f)   Runoff management. The facility owner or operator shall install and
maintain storm water management, erosion, and sediment controls, pursuant to a
written plan, sufficient to:
      (1)   Prevent runoff from the pile onto neighboring parcels, public ways,
or any water bodies.
      (2)   Prevent runoff from entering into public sewers or any entry point
into the storm water collection system, unless such discharges are in
compliance with all applicable discharge permits.
      (3)   Address timely and effective ways to respond to spills and/or
visible migration of pollutants that could occur onsite or offsite.
      (4)   Demonstrate that the site is graded in such a way as to ensure
proper drainage and to prevent pooling of water.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-557.   Carbonaceous bulk solid material facilities; enclosure of
carbonaceous materials; enclosure plan; enclosure requirement for existing,
new, and expanding facilities; enclosure deadline; interim requirements.
   (a)   General enclosure requirement. Except as authorized in Division 7, the
owner or operator of a carbonaceous bulk solid material facility that requires
the enclosure of carbonaceous bulk solid materials shall maintain all
carbonaceous bulk solid material in a fully enclosed structure in accordance
with the enclosure requirements described in this section.
   (b)   Enclosure plan. The owner or operator of any carbonaceous bulk solid
material facility that requires the enclosure of carbonaceous bulk solid
materials shall submit to the department for review and approval a plan for the
total enclosure of all carbonaceous piles, conveyors, transfer points, and
processing areas at a facility. The plan must include:
      (1)   A construction schedule prepared using the critical path method for
completion, procurement, permitting, and construction of the enclosure.
      (2)   An interim fugitive dust plan that complies with all of the
requirements of Sec.
13-547.
   (c)   Enclosure requirement. Fully enclosed structures for all carbonaceous
bulk solid material facilities that require enclosure pursuant to this section
must comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Structures that are used to store, handle, or transfer carbonaceous
material shall be completely roofed and walled structures or buildings with
impermeable floors that entirely surround the carbonaceous bulk solid materials
and shall be designed, permitted, and constructed in accordance with applicable
building code requirements, zoning requirements, and other applicable laws,
ordinances, and regulations.
      (2)   Structures used to store, handle, or transfer carbonaceous bulk
solid materials hall be properly maintained and shall be equipped with and
shall use a permitted air pollution control system and/or the ability to apply
water to materials within a structure sufficient to control fugitive dust
emissions at designed vents and at any other openings, including entrances and
exits.
      (3)   Entrances and exits for material or vehicles shall have overlapping
flaps, sliding doors or other devices, which shall remain closed except to
allow material or vehicles to enter and leave or to allow people to enter and
exit, provided that if devices other than overlapping flaps or solid doors are
used, then the performance for dust control as the openings must be shown in
the fugitive dust plan to be equivalent to or better than that of the
overlapping flaps or sliding doors used in conjunction with the required air
pollution controls as determined by the department.
      (4)   Fully enclosed structures in compliance with this section need not
comply with the fugitive dust monitoring requirements of Division 5.
   (d)   Enclosure exemption and abatement for existing facilities; enclosure
deadline for new facilities, expanded facilities, and recommencement of
operation.
      (1)   Enclosure exemption. Subject to the terms and conditions of Sec.
13-545, facilities continuing in operation on the effective date of the
ordinance that enacted this article are exempt from the enclosure requirements
of this section. This exemption is subject to continued compliance with the
provisions of this article, including but not limited to those concerning the
control and mitigation of fugitive dust.
      (2)   For new facilities, expansion or recommencement of operation of
existing facilities, compliance with the enclosure requirements is a condition
to receiving a certificate of operation.
   (e)   Interim requirements. During the implementation requirements described
in this section, carbonaceous bulk solid material may be maintained in outdoor
piles subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The facility owner or operator must comply with the approved
interim fugitive dust plan.
      (2)   The owner or operator of the facility must comply with all
requirements described in Sec.
13-556.
      (3)   Pre-existing facilities. All facilities operating pursuant to a
valid certificate of occupancy on the effective date of the ordinance that
enacted this article are exempt from the requirements of this subsection (e)
for a period of 180 days following the effective date. By the expiration date
of 180 days, such facilities shall conform to all requirements of this
subsection (e).
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 5. MONITORING AND COMPLIANCE
Sec. 13-558.   Fugitive dust monitoring.
   (a)   Unless, pursuant to the variance procedure set forth in this article,
the facility owner or operator establishes that the facility’s operations do
not and will not result in off-site fugitive dust emissions, or if the facility
qualifies as exempt under Sec.
13-545, the department shall require the facility owner or operator to install,
operate, and maintain, according to the manufacturer’s specifications,
permanent, continuous, federal equivalent method (FEM) real-time PM10 monitors
around the perimeter of the facility in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
   (b)   First year of monitoring; placement of monitors. During the first year
of monitoring, at least one monitor shall be placed along each side facing the
four cardinal directions (north, south, east, and west) around the facility to
monitor for fugitive dust in the ambient air around the facility.
   (c)   Subsequent years of monitoring; placement of monitors. During the
second and all subsequent years of monitoring, monitors shall be placed in
accordance with the fugitive dust plan based on the data observed in the first
year, with monitors located at a minimum of two upwind and two downwind
locations and additional monitors as appropriate depending on the size of the
facility and other relevant factors, such as variability of wind direction at
the site and the proximity of neighborhoods.
   (d)   A data logger shall be attached to the monitors to record readings
from the monitors, and the facility owner or operator shall notify the
department in writing within 24 hours each time the monitors exceed the
reportable action level, and any time monitoring equipment has malfunctioned
preventing readings or logging of data.
   (e)   The facility owner or operator shall maintain a log of all maintenance
and calibration activities associated with each fugitive dust monitor.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-559.   Wind monitoring.
   The facility owner or operator shall install, operate, and maintain,
according to manufacturer’s specifications, a weather station or other
permanent device to monitor and log wind speed and wind direction at the
facility at an unobstructed, unsheltered area, centrally positioned in relation
to the storage piles, and at a minimum height of 10 meters above ground level.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-560.   Recordkeeping; quarterly review; record retention.
   (a)   The facility owner or operator shall record all roadway cleaning and
street sweeping daily.
   (b)   The facility owner or operator shall record the application of water
and/or chemical stabilizers, as applicable, as well as any instances when such
application was suspended for any reason, including, but not limited to,
weather conditions.
   (c)   The facility owner and operator shall record any instance when
activities were suspended due to high winds.
   (d)   The facility owner or operator shall record results of the continuous
monitoring for PM10, indicate any instances when a monitor detected PM10 that
exceeds the reportable action level, and record the action taken to respond to
the exceedance of the reportable action level.
   (e)   The facility owner or operator shall record the results of the tests
of visual fugitive dust and opacity.
   (f)   The facility owner or operator shall maintain a schedule for routine
inspections, maintenance, and testing of all fugitive dust control measures,
devices, and technologies, including a schedule for inspection of bulk solid
material piles, inspection of all monitors, and inspection of off-site areas
for the presence of dust, and identify the person or persons responsible for
conducting such inspections, maintenance, and testing.
   (g)   All records required to be kept pursuant to this section shall be
submitted to the department on a quarterly basis, and kept and maintained at
the facility and be available for inspection for a minimum of three years.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 6. INSPECTIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
Sec. 13-561.   Inspections.
   (a)   Inspections for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this article
shall be conducted by the department on a semiannual basis.
   (b)   The department may conduct inspections for the purpose of monitoring
compliance with this article in response to any complaints received by the
department, or the department’s reasonable suspicion of a violation of this
article.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-562.   Enforcement.
   (a)   Illegal dumping and nuisance. Except for activities in accordance with
this article, any dumping, storing, depositing, or transporting bulk solid
material on any private property, public property, right-of-way, or surface
water or around any approved or portable container is illegal dumping, is a
nuisance violation, and is subject to the fines and penalties provided for in
this ordinance.
   (b)   Notice of violation. If a violation or condition(s) causing or
contributing to a violation of this article is discovered, a notice of
violation shall be issued. Such notice shall inform the owner or operator of
the facility of the nature of the violation, and require the owner or operator
of the facility to eliminate and correct the violation or condition(s) causing
or contributing to the violation within 30 days of notification.
   (c)   Violation and penalty. Failure to correct a violation within the time
permitted after receiving notice under subsection (b) shall constitute a
violation of this article, which is punishable as a civil infraction subject to
a fine of $1,000.00, plus any additional costs and/or conditions imposed by the
court.
   (d)   Repeat violation. An increased fine schedule shall be imposed for
repeat violations of this article. As used in this section, “repeat violation”
means a violation committed within 90 days of an admission or determination of
responsibility for a violation of this article occurring upon the same
property. The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine of
$2,500.00, plus any additional costs and/or conditions imposed by the court.
   (e)   Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be a
separate violation.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 7. DEVIATIONS AND APPEALS
Sec. 13-563.   Variances; application; requirements; review; revocation and
appeal; change in operations; public notice.
   (a)   No variance from alternative compliance plan allowed. Facilities
operating pursuant to an alternative compliance plan, as that term is defined
in Sec.
13-542, may not seek a variance from any standard, requirement, or condition of
that alternative compliance plan.
   (b)   Application for variance. Unless otherwise stated, a facility owner or
operator may apply to the department for a variance from any requirement set
forth in Secs.
13-549 to
13-560, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. The
department shall establish a schedule of fees pursuant to which a variance
review fee may be assessed per application.
   (c)   Requirements for a variance application. A request for a variance
shall be submitted to the department director, in writing and must set forth,
in detail, all of the following information:
      (1)   A statement identifying the provision or requirement of this
article from which the variance is requested.
      (2)   A description of the process or activity for which the variance is
requested, including the pertinent data on location, size, and the population
and geographic area affected by, or potentially affected by, the process or
activity.
      (3)   The quantity and types of materials used in the process or activity
in connection with which the variance is requested, as appropriate.
      (4)   A demonstration that issuance of the variance will not create a
public nuisance, a public health hazard, or adversely impact the surrounding
area, surrounding environment, the surrounding residents, or surrounding
property uses.
      (5)   A statement explaining why compliance with the requirements in this
article imposes an arbitrary and unreasonable hardship, why compliance cannot
be accomplished during the required timeframe due to events beyond the facility
owner or operator’s control such as permitting delays or natural disasters, or
why the proposed alternative measure is superior or preferred.
      (6)   A description of the proposed methods to achieve compliance with
the regulations and a timetable for achieving that compliance, if applicable.
      (7)   A discussion of alternate methods of compliance and of the factors
influencing the choice of applying for a variance.
      (8)   A statement regarding the person’s current status as related to the
subject matter of the variance request.
      (9)   For any request for a variance from the enclosure deadline, the
applicant must submit, in addition to the other information required by this
section, fugitive dust monitoring reports for the four (4) months prior to the
date of the variance application, and, if the variance is granted, monthly
fugitive dust monitoring reports for the duration of the variance which shall
be due 14 days following the end of the month which the report covers.
   (d)   Criteria for reviewing applications.
      (1)   In determining whether to grant a variance, the department will
consider public comments received pursuant to this section, as well as input
and comments from the Public Health Department director or designee, and will
evaluate the information provided in the application to meet the requirements
of subsection (c) of this section. Particular consideration will be given to
the following information:
         a.   Inclusion of a definite compliance program;
         b.   Evaluation of all reasonable alternatives for compliance;
         c.   Demonstration that any adverse impacts will be minimal.
      (2)   The department director shall deny the variance if the application
for the variance is incomplete or if the application is outside the scope of
relief provided by variances.
      (3)   The department director may deny a variance, may grant a variance
in whole or in part, and may attach reasonable conditions to the variance to
ensure minimization of any adverse impacts.
      (4)   Granting a variance is at the sole discretion of the department
director. A variance may be revoked at any time if the department director
finds that operation of the facility is creating a public nuisance, a public
health hazard, or otherwise adversely impacting the surrounding area,
surrounding environment, surrounding residents, or surrounding property uses.
         a.   Notice. The director shall issue a written notice to revoke a
variance to the facility owner or operator. The notice shall provide the
grounds for revocation, the effective date of the revocation, and that the
facility owner or operator may, within 20 calendar days, request in writing an
appeal hearing before the Building Board of Appeals.
         b.   Request for appeal. The facility owner or operator may request an
appeal hearing before the Building Board of Appeals for the revocation of a
variance granted pursuant to this section. The request for hearing must be in
writing and must be submitted to the City Clerk within 20 calendar days of
receiving notice of revocation.
         c.   Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the
Building Board of Appeals shall provide the facility owner or operator with
notice and an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall serve notice upon the
facility owner or operator by certified mail, not less than 20 calendar days
prior to the hearing date. The notice shall state:
            i.   The date, time, and place of the hearing.
            ii.   A statement that the facility owner or operator may present
evidence and testimony, and may be represented by an attorney.
         d.   Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the
Building Board of Appeals no later than 30 days after the day on which the
request for appeal was filed, and shall be open to the public. The Board shall
decide the appeal at the public hearing. Within 14 calendar days of the public
hearing, the Board shall provide the licensee with a copy of its decision which
shall include the specific grounds for its decision.
      (5)   Change in facility operations. If any part of the facility’s
operation that is the subject of the variance expands or changes, then, at
least 30 calendar days prior to the expansion or change in operation, the
facility owner or operator shall notify the department director and either
apply for a new variance or notify the department director of the owner or
operator’s intent to comply with the requirements that were the subject of the
variance, in which case the variance will automatically terminate. For purposes
of determining whether an existing facility has expanded or changed, the
criteria set forth in Zoning Ordinance Article 3.00 shall apply.
      (6)   Notice of variance applications; comments from the public. The
department director shall not grant any variance under this section until after
the public has had an opportunity to submit written comments on the requested
variance(s). The department director shall provide notice of all variance
applications by the following methods:
         a.   By posting on the City’s website; and
         b.   By mailed or delivered notice to all addresses located within 300
feet of the boundaries of the facility seeking the variance. Such notice shall
include information on where to access information regarding the requested
variance(s).
      The department director shall accept written comments for a period of not
less than 30 days from the date of publication of the notice. The department
director shall not make a decision until after close of the comment period.
Notice of the decision shall be posted on the city’s website.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-564.   Appeals.
   (a)   Application procedure. With the exception of appeals governed by Sec.
13-563 of this article, any facility owner or operator aggrieved by any
decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order issued by the department
pursuant to this article may appeal same to the Building Board of Appeals,
which is empowered and authorized to hear and consider such appeal, as follows:
      (1)   A person wishing to file an appeal pursuant to this section shall
file a written appeal requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds for appeal and the relief requested. Such appeal shall
be filed with the director of the department within 20 days after the decision,
ruling, interpretation, notice, or order complained of. The director shall
transmit to the board the following:
         a.   The written appeal and any papers, materials, and documents that
are included with the submittal at the time of submission.
         b.   All papers, materials, and documents associated with the
decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order being appealed.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the petition for appeal, the Building Board of
Appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
appellant written notice thereof.
   (b)   Scope and procedure of appeal.
      (1)   Scope of appeal. The appeal procedure is intended to provide
limited relief from the decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order
issued by the department pursuant to this article, where a strict application
of same creates an unnecessary hardship affecting a substantial property right.
This procedure is intended to address extraordinary, exceptional, or unique
situations that were not caused by an act or omission of the applicant or the
applicant’s predecessor in title, employee, or agent. Relief is not to be
granted merely on the basis of inconvenience or financial burden.
      (2)   The Board has the authority to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is an error in any interpretation, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the department in the enforcement, interpretation, or
administration of this article.
      (3)   Any appeal or variance from the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Sec.
32.05 of the zoning ordinance.
      (4)   Any appeal or variance pursuant to Sec. 13-519 shall be heard
pursuant to the provisions of that section.
   (c)   Fee. A non-refundable fee of $250.00, as specified in Chapter 9, Sec.
9-38 of the Code of Ordinances, shall be paid to the City Treasurer at the time
the appeal is filed.
   (d)   Hearing. At the hearing the appellant is entitled to legal
representation by an attorney, and shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order should
be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held at the next scheduled
Building Board of Appeals meeting or at a special meeting of the Board, not
later than 30 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that
upon application of the appellant or the department, the Board may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 30-day period, if in the
judgment of the Board the requesting party has submitted a good and sufficient
reason for such postponement.
   (e)   Action by Board of Appeals. After the hearing, the Board shall
sustain, modify, or withdraw the decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or
order being appealed, depending on the Board’s findings to whether the
provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the Board sustains such decision, ruling,
interpretation, notice, or order, it shall be deemed to be an order.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
DIVISION 8. PUBLIC HEARINGS, DESIGNATED FUND, SEVERABILITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
OF ORDINANCE
Sec. 13-565.   Public hearings.
   Public hearings conducted pursuant to this article shall be governed by the
Open Meetings Act, PA 267 of 1976, MCL 15.261 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-566.   Designated purposes fund.
   (a)   The designated purposes fund is created as a separate depository fund
that shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Money deposited in the designated purposes fund under subsection
(c);
      (2)   Money appropriated or allocated to the designated purposes fund by
ordinance, Council resolution, or the Code of Ordinances; and
      (3)   Donations of money to the designated purposes fund from any other
source.
   (b)   Money in the designated purposes fund at the close of a fiscal year
will remain in the fund and not revert to the general fund.
   (c)   Notwithstanding a contrary provision of this code, a penalty or fine
paid to the city for a violation of this article must be credited and deposited
in the designated purposes fund.
   (d)   The Department of Public Health and Department of Economic Development
may expend money from the designated purposes fund upon appropriation only for
activities promoting the public health and wellness of residents of the city
and to mitigate negative health impacts of pollution on residents of the city,
including, but not limited to, enforcement of this article, purchasing,
installation, use, and maintenance of air monitoring equipment, installation of
vegetation to buffer the impact of activities subject to regulation under this
article, and conducting health impact assessments.
   (e)   A grant or other donation to the designated purposes fund must be
accepted by City Council and is subject to any conditions on the grant or
donation.
   (f)   An agreement or contract for expenditure of money from the designated
purposes fund must be approved by City Council.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-567.   Applicability of other laws.
   The requirements of this article in no way affect the responsibilities of
the facility owner and operator to comply with all other applicable federal,
state, or local laws, ordinances, regulations, or code requirements, including
but not limited to those regarding the zoning, construction, operation,
maintenance, and closure of the facility, whether or not such other laws are
specifically referenced in this article.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-568.   Severability.
   If any sentence, paragraph, section, clause, article, division, or provision
of the ordinance from which this article is derives shall be declared to be
unconstitutional, void, illegal, or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such sentence, paragraph, section, clause, article, division, or
provision declared to be unconstitutional, void, or illegal shall thereby cease
to be part of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but the
remainder of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall stand and
be in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Sec. 13-569.   Effective date of ordinance.
   The terms and conditions of this article shall become effective 90 calendar
days after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this article.
(Ord. No. 24-1815, 4-23-24)
Secs. 13-570—13-580. Reserved.
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by all members
of the city police department and by the director, superintendents, assistant
superintendents and all labor foremen in the department of public works.
Charter reference— Public peace, health and safety, § 8.1.
Cross reference— Police reserve company, §
2-351 et seq.; park rules and regulations, §
15-21 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. - Statutory definitions.
   Whenever any words and phrases as used in this chapter are not defined, but
are defined in the state penal code, any such definition therein shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 14-2. - Misrepresentations as to identity.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make misrepresentations as to his
identity, whether by statement, through the use of false, forged or altered
identification or the use or presentation of identification of another, with
intent to obstruct the due execution of the law, or with the intent to hinder
or interrupt any officer in the legal performance of his duty, whether such
intent be effected or not.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 128, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 84-291, 3-20-84)
Sec. 14-3. - Seizure and forfeiture of property used in or proceeds of a crime.
   (a)   Authorized, definition. Except as otherwise excepted by law, all
personal property that is the proceeds of a crime, the substituted proceeds of
a crime, or an instrumentality of a crime is subject to seizure by and
forfeiture to the city. Instrumentality of a crime means any property, other
than real property, which contributes directly and materially to the commission
of a crime.
   (b)   Court order for seizure. Personal property subject to forfeiture may
be seized by the police department pursuant to an order of seizure issued by
the court upon a showing of probable cause that the property is subject to
forfeiture.
   (c)   Seizure without prior court process. Personal property subject to
forfeiture under this section may be seized by the police department without
process under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Incident to lawful arrest. The property is the proceeds of a crime
or an instrumentality of a crime and the seizure is incident to a lawful
arrest.
      (2)   Search warrant. The seizure is pursuant to a valid search warrant.
      (3)   Administrative inspection warrant. The seizure is pursuant to an
inspection under a valid administrative inspection warrant.
      (4)   Dangerous to health or safety. There is probable cause to believe
that the property is directly or indirectly dangerous to health or safety.
      (5)   Exigent circumstances. Exigent circumstances exist that preclude
the obtaining of a court order, and there is probable cause to believe that the
property is the proceeds of a crime or the instrumentality of a crime.
      (6)   Prior judgment. The property is the subject of a prior judgment for
forfeiture to the city, county or state.
   (d)   Procedure for seizure; forfeiture of seized or seizable property. The
corporation counsel may make application for an order authorizing the seizure
of and forfeiture of personal property. The application shall be supported by a
sworn affidavit setting forth probable cause for a forfeiture action. Upon a
showing of probable cause to believe that the property is the instrumentality
of a crime or the proceeds or substituted proceeds of a crime, the court may
issue an order authorizing the seizure and/or forfeiture of the property.
   (e)   Notice. Within seven days after personal property is seized, the
corporation counsel shall give notice of the seizure of the property and the
intent to forfeit and dispose of the property to each of the following persons:
      (1)   To the person charged with a crime.
      (2)   Each person with a known ownership interest in the property.
      (3)   Each person holding a chattel mortgage or lien appearing on the
title, filed with the secretary of state or registering agency.
      (4)   Each person with a known security interest.
      (5)   Each victim of the crime.
   The notice shall be a written notice delivered to the person or sent by
certified mail. If the name and address of the person are not reasonably
ascertainable or delivery of the notice cannot reasonably be accomplished, the
notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for
two successive weeks. Proof of written notice or publication shall be filed
with the court.
   (f)   Hearing. A person who did not have prior knowledge of, or consent to,
the commission of the crime may move to return the property on the grounds that
the property was illegally seized, that the property is not subject to
forfeiture, or that the person has an ownership or security interest in the
property and did not have prior knowledge of, or consent to, the commission of
the crime. The court shall hear the motion within 30 days after the motion is
filed.
      (1)   At the hearing the corporation counsel shall establish:
         a.   Probable cause to believe that the property is subject to
forfeiture and that the person moving for return of the property had prior
knowledge of or consented to the commission of the crime.
         b.   If the person moving for return of the property claims the
property was illegally seized, that the property was properly seized.
      (2)   If the corporation counsel fails to sustain the burden of proof,
the court shall order the return of the property.
      (3)   If a motor vehicle is the property seized, the owner of the vehicle
may move to require the seizing agency to file a lien against the vehicle and
to return the vehicle to the owner. The court shall hear the motion within
seven days after the motion is filed. If the owner of the vehicle establishes
at the hearing that he holds the legal title of the vehicle and that it is
necessary for him or his family to use the vehicle pending the outcome of the
forfeiture action, the court may order the seizing agency to return the vehicle
to the owner. If the court orders the return of the vehicle to the owner, the
court shall order the seizing agency to file a lien against the vehicle.
      (4)   The testimony of a person at a hearing held under this section is
not admissible against him in any criminal proceeding except in a criminal
prosecution for perjury. The testimony of a person at a hearing held under this
section does not waive the person's constitutional right against self-
incrimination.
   (g)   Return of property seized. Personal property seized pursuant to this
section shall be returned to the owner, or any lien filed shall be discharged
within seven days after the occurrence of any of the following:
      (1)   A warrant is not issued against a person for the commission of a
crime within seven days after the property is seized.
      (2)   All charges against the consenting legal owner relating to the
commission of a crime are dismissed.
      (3)   The consenting legal owner charged with a crime is acquitted of the
crime.
      (4)   In the case of multiple defendants, all persons charged with
committing a crime are acquitted of the crime.
      (5)   Entry of a court order for the return of the property or the
discharge of any lien.
   (h)   Notice of return of property or discharge of lien. Within seven days
after personal property is returned to the owner or any lien filed is
discharged, the corporation counsel shall give notice of such return of
property or discharge of lien to the persons who did receive or were required
to be given notice of the seizure.
   (i)   Claims against or for seized property. Within 21 days after receipt of
notice of intent to forfeit property or after first publication of such notice,
a person claiming an interest in the property may file a claim with the city
expressing their interest in the property. If a claim is filed, the corporation
counsel shall institute a civil action for forfeiture within seven days after
the expiration of the 21-day claim period. If no claim is filed within the 21-
day period, the corporation counsel shall dispose of the property in the
following manner: The city may sell property that is not required to be
destroyed by law and that is not harmful to the public. The proceeds and any
money shall be applied in the following order of priority.
      (1)   Pay any outstanding security interest of a secured party who did
not have prior knowledge of, or consent to the commission of the crime.
      (2)   Satisfy any order of restitution in the prosecution of the crime.
      (3)   Pay the claim of each person who shows that he or she is a victim
of the crime to the extent that the claim is not covered by an order of
restitution.
      (4)   Pay any outstanding lien against the property that has been imposed
by a governmental unit.
      (5)   Pay the proper expenses of the proceedings for forfeiture and sale,
including, but not limited to, expenses incurred during the seizure process and
expenses for maintaining custody of the property, advertising and court costs.
      (6)   The balance, if any, shall be paid to the city, and 75 percent of
such money shall be used to enhance enforcement of the criminal laws and 25
percent of the money shall be used to implement the crime victim's rights act.
The director of finance shall annually report to the state department of
management and budget the amounts and uses of money received.
   (j)   Jurisdiction and venue. The district court shall have equitable
jurisdiction over forfeiture proceedings and may hear and determine a
forfeiture action or a motion relating to a forfeiture action, and may issue
and enforce any order or judgment relating to a forfeiture action.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 709, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 89-451, 5-2-89)
Sec. 14-4. - Attempt to commit violation.
   Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this chapter
and, in such attempt, shall do any act towards the commission of such offense,
but shall fall in the perpetration or shall be intercepted or prevented in the
execution of same, where no express provision is made by ordinance for the
punishment of such attempt, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable under
this chapter, but in no case shall imprisonment for such violation exceed one-
half the greatest punishment which might have been inflicted if the offense so
attempted had been committed.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 708, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 84-291, 3-20-84)
Sec. 14-5. - Prohibited sale of admission tickets.
   No person shall stand or remain in any public street, alley, sidewalk or
other public place, or without written permission from the owner or his
designee, on the property of another for the purpose of selling or offering for
sale any theater tickets or tickets of admission to shows, concerts, athletic
events or public entertainment; nor shall any person sell or offer for sale any
theater tickets or tickets of admission to shows, concerts, athletic events or
public entertainment at a price greater than printed on the ticket, unless
authorized by local or state law.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 707, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 81-191, 12-1-81)
Sec. 14-6. - Cruelty to animals prohibited.
   (a)   The following words, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
   Adequate care means the provision of sufficient foot, water, shelter,
sanitary conditions, exercise, and veterinary medical attention in order to
maintain an animal in a state of good health.
   Animal shall mean a vertebrate other than a human being.
   Breeder means a person that breed animals other than livestock or dogs for
remuneration, or that is a large-scale dog breeding kennel as that term is
defined in section 1 of 1969 PA 287, MCL 287.331.
   Licensed veterinarian means a person licensed or otherwise authorized to
practice veterinary medicine under article 15 of the public health code, 1978
PA 368, MCL 333.16101 to 333.18838.
   Neglect means to fail to sufficiently and properly care for an animal to the
extent that the animal's health is jeopardized.
   Person means an individual, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, association, governmental entity, or other legal entity.
   Pet shop means a place where animals are sold or offered for sale, exchange,
or transfer.
   Sanitary conditions means space free from health hazards including excessive
animal waste, overcrowding of animals, or other conditions that endanger the
animal's health.
   Shelter means adequate protection from the elements and weather conditions
suitable for the age, species, and physical condition of the animal so as to
maintain the animal in a state of good health. Shelter, for a dog, includes one
or more of the following:
      (1)   The residence of the dog's owner or other individual.
      (2)   A doghouse that is an enclosed structure with a roof and of
appropriate dimensions for the breed and size of the dog. The doghouse must
have dry bedding when the outdoor temperature is or is predicted to drop below
freezing.
      (3)   A structure, including a garage or shed, that is sufficiently
insulated and ventilated to protect the dog from exposure to extreme
temperatures or, if not sufficiently insulated and ventilated, contains a
doghouse as provided under subparagraph (2) that is accessible to the dog.
      (4)   Structures under this subsection are subject to Chapter 4, Section
4-2 of the Code of Ordinances, which prohibits any structure for the purpose of
harboring animals from being erected within 25 feet of any dwelling, and
prohibits such structures from being erected without prior approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals and in compliance with all relevant ordinances.
   State of good health means freedom from disease and illness, and in a
condition of proper body weight and temperature for the age and species of the
animal, unless the animal is undergoing appropriate treatment.
   Water means potable water that is suitable for the age and species of the
animal and that is made regularly available unless otherwise directed by a
licensed veterinarian.
   (b)   Any owner, possessor, breeder, operator of a pet shop, or person
having the charge or custody of an animal shall not do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to provide an animal with adequate care.
      (2)   Cruelly drive, work, or beat an animal, or cause an animal to be
cruelly driven, worked, or beaten.
      (3)   Negligently allow any animal, including one who is aged, diseased,
maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled, or nonambulatory to suffer unnecessary
neglect, torture, or pain.
      (4)   Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any place,
without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless premises are
vacated for the protection of human life or the prevention of injury to a
human. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling,
walking, hiking, or hunting is not abandoned under this section when the owner
or custodian makes a reasonable effort to locate the animal.
      (5)   A person who violates this subsection (b) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by not more than 93 days imprisonment, a fine of not
more than $500, community service for not more than 200 hours, or some
combination thereof.
   (c)   A person who willfully, maliciously and without just cause or excuse
kills, tortures, mutilates, maims, or disfigures an animal or who willfully and
maliciously and without just cause or excuse administers poison to an animal,
or exposes an animal to any poisonous substance, other than a substance that is
used for therapeutic veterinary medical purposes, with the intent that the
substance be taken or swallowed by the animal, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by not more than 93 days imprisonment, a fine of not more than $500,
community service for not more than 200 hours, or some combination thereof.
   (d)   As a part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (b) or (c),
the court may order the defendant to pay the costs of the prosecution and the
costs of care, housing, and veterinary medical care for the impacted animal
victim, as applicable. If the court does not order a defendant to pay all of
the applicable costs listed in this subsection, or orders only partial payment
of these costs, the court shall state on the record for reasons for that
action.
   (e)   If a term of probation is ordered for a violation of subsection (b) or
(c), the court may order, as a condition of probation, that the defendant be
evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric or psychological counseling,
and if determined appropriate by the court, to receive psychiatric or
psychological counseling at his or her own expense.
   (f)   As a part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (b) or (c),
the court may order the defendant not to own or possess an animal for any
period of time determined by the court, which may include permanent
relinquishment of animal ownership.
   (g)   A person who owns or possesses an animal in violation of an order
issued under subsection (f) is subject to revocation of probation if the order
is issued as a condition of probation. A person who owns or possesses an animal
in violation of an order issued under subsection (f) is also subject to the
civil and criminal contempt power of the court, and if found guilty of criminal
contempt may be punished for not more than 90 days, or by a fine of not more
than $500.00, or both.
    (h)   This section does not prohibit the lawful killing of an animal
pursuant to pest or rodent control regulated pursuant to MCL 324.8301 to
324.8336, and does not apply to a veterinarian or a veterinary technician
lawfully engaging in the practice of veterinary medicine under MCL 333.18801 to
333.18838.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 701, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 00-839, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 20-1676,
7-14-20)
Sec. 14-7. - Prohibited acts in hotel or short-term rental.
   (a)   An individual or group that does one or more of the following on the
premises or property of a hotel or short-term rental, or an individual or group
that rents or leases a hotel room or short-term rental room with reason to know
that another individual or group will do one or more of the following on the
premises or property of a hotel or bed and breakfast, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, community
service, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or a combination of any of
these punishments:
      (1)   Uses or possesses a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter.
      (2)   Consumes or possesses alcoholic liquor in violation of this
chapter.
      (3)   Commits a violation of this section resulting in damage to the room
or its furnishings.
   (b)   In a case involving damage to the room, a court may order the
individual to pay restitution which may include the reasonable loss of revenue
resulting from the inability to rent or lease the room during the period of
time the room is being repaired.
   (c)   The owner or operator of the hotel or short-term rental shall post a
copy of this section in a conspicuous place adjacent to the site of
registration for a room or inside the room.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit the prosecution of an individual for
the underlying violation which occurred on the premises or property of the
hotel or short-term rental.
(Ord. No. 25-1849, 7-15-25)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 750.411g, MSA 28.643(7).
Sec. 14-8. - False representation as blind or crippled.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to falsely represent
himself as blind, deaf, dumb, crippled or physically defective for the purpose
of obtaining money or any other thing of value, or to secure aid or assistance
on account of such representation.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 104, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-9. - Disposal of property held by police.
   (a)   All stolen or other property taken or found by any police officer in
the possession of any person arrested or charged with the violation of the law;
all property or money taken on suspicion of having been feloniously obtained or
being the proceeds of crime and for which there is no other claimant than the
person from whom it was taken, except motor vehicles; all property abandoned in
the city and not claimed by the lawful owner or person entitled to possession
thereof which comes into the possession of the police department; all property
and money taken from pawnbrokers as the proceeds of crime, or from any person
otherwise incapable of taking care of himself; and all other property belonging
to persons coming into the possession of the city and for the holding and
disposition of which no provision is made shall be deposited, handled, disposed
of and accounted for in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (b)   All unclaimed or abandoned property covered by this section which is
not claimed by the lawful owner or person entitled to the possession thereof
for a period of 90 days after such property has come into the possession of the
city or its officers or agents, and for which there is no other specific method
prescribed to handle or dispose of it, shall be sold, disposed of or liquidated
by the city purchasing agent, and the proceeds shall be deposited with the city
treasurer in the general fund; provided, however, that no sale of any such
property shall be held unless a public notice of sale shall be published in the
official city newspaper at least ten days prior to such sale.
(Ord. No. 81-82, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-10. - Alarm systems.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Alarm system shall mean an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention by the police
department and/or fire department.
   False alarm shall mean an alarm signal activated by inadvertence,
negligence, or unintentional act necessitating response by the police
department and/or fire department.
   (b)   Fee for false alarms. To defray the cost of responding to false alarms
and to discourage the continuation of repeat false alarms, the owner or lessee
of the alarmed premises shall pay to the city the following sums for each
occasion that the alarm system is activated and responded to by the police
department and/or fire department, and the service called for is not needed.
   (1)   First call in a 12-month
      period   No charge
   (2)   Second through fourth call
      in a 12-month period   110.00
   (3)   Fifth and subsequent calls in 12-
      month period   275.00
   (c)   Exceptions. The following circumstances shall not constitute a false
alarm, and no fee shall be assessed:
   (1)   Alarm conditions activated by a person working on the alarm system
with prior notification to the city police department and/or fire department.
   (2)   Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or
disturbance of utility company facilities or motor vehicle-utility pole
accidents or by storm conditions.
   (d)   Appeal. Any person affected by the assessment of a false alarm fee may
request and shall be granted a review on the matter by the chief of police.
Such person shall file a request for review in the office of the chief of
police within 60 days of the assessment of the false alarm fee. The burden of
proving an alarm was not a false alarm shall be on the alarm user.
   (1)   After review of an appeal, the chief of police may sustain the
assessment of the false alarm fee or cancel the assessment. The chief shall
have the authority to wave no more than five false alarm fees within a 12-month
period.
   (2)   The alarm user seeking appeal must meet one of the review standards
listed under this subsection.
   (3)   The following standards shall be applied when reviewing an appeal
under this subsection.
      a.   Whether the exceptions listed in subsections (c) and (e) of this
section apply.
      b.   Whether the alarm was not a "false alarm", as that term is defined
in this section.
      c.   Whether there are extenuating circumstances outside the control of
the alarm user that warrant waiver, including but not limited to death,
illness, or natural disaster.
   (4)   The findings and decisions of the chief of police shall be summarized,
reduced to writing, and filed with the office of the chief of police.
   (e)   Burglar (B&E) alarms; audible signals; shut-off device. Burglar (B&E)
alarm systems equipped with audible signals shall be fitted with a shut-off
device that automatically silences the audible signal within ten minutes of
activation. Those not fitted with a shut-off device shall be subject to
deactivation by a member of the police department. The city will not be liable
for any damage caused by the deactivation nor shall the city be liable for any
subsequent losses due to the deactivation. The owner or lessee shall be subject
to a $100.00 shut-off fee, in addition to any false alarm fees, which may be
associated with emergency police response.
(Ord. No. 86-370, §§ 1-4, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 95-623, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 98-722,
4-7-98; Ord. No. 00-829, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 06-1084, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 11-1325,
5-16-11; Ord. No. 24-1829, 11-19-24)
Sec. 14-11. - Reward for arrest, conviction.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   Arrest and conviction shall mean apprehension and a finding by a
court of competent jurisdiction that the apprehended person is guilty. A plea
of guilty shall be deemed to meet this requirement. The determination of the
finding of guilt shall not be complete until the accused has exhausted all
means of judicial review of his case.
      (2)   Citizen shall mean any person not an active member of the police
department or some other recognized law enforcement agency.
      (3)   Crime shall mean the classification of offenses defined as felonies
or misdemeanors by the applicable state or local law, excluding traffic
offenses.
   (b)   Information leading to arrest and conviction. Any citizen who shall
furnish the police department with information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person for a crime shall be eligible for a reward.
   (c)   Amount of reward. Each application for reward shall be reviewed by the
city council and a reward of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 may
be paid by the council, the amount to be paid to be within the sound discretion
of the council, as a matter of grace and not of regret, based upon such factors
as the seriousness of the crime, the element of danger to the informant, and
the length of time spent in connection with the apprehension and conviction of
the wrongdoer.
   (d)   Claim for reward. Persons claiming a reward pursuant to this section
shall file a claim in writing with the city council, which claim shall set
forth the name of the party convicted and the offense for which the conviction
was obtained, the court in which the trial was held and a statement of the
information furnished or action taken which led to the arrest and conviction.
The city council may also require an appropriate certificate from the
corporation counsel, prosecuting attorney or competent police officials to the
effect that the information given or action taken by the claimant in fact led
to an arrest and conviction.
   (e)   Decision of council. The council shall be the final judge of any
discrepancies in facts presented and as to whether the claimant is entitled to
any reward at all or the amount of the reward. The decision of the council
shall be final. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the payment of a
reward in any cases or any circumstances.
(Ord. No. 81-104, §§ 1—4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-12. - Aggressive solicitation prohibited.
   (a)   As used in this section:
   Public area means an area that the public or a substantial group of persons
has access to and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings,
driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks and streets open
to the general public, and doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings.
   Solicit means using any means of communication, including, but not limited
to, spoken, written, or printed word, to request a donation or exchange of
money or any other thing of value regardless of the purpose or intended use of
the money or other thing of value.
   (b)   A person shall not solicit another person under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   In a public area, by doing any other following:
         a.   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly making physical contact
with or touching another person without that person's consent.
         b.   Approaching or following a person in a manner that is intended or
is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent apprehension or bodily
harm.
         c.   Approaching or following a person in a manner that is reasonably
likely to intimidate a person into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation.
         d.   Continuing to solicit a person after the person being solicited
has communicated that he or she does not want to be solicited.
         e.   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly obstructing the safe or
free passage of a person being solicited or requiring a person being solicited
to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the
solicitation.
         f.   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly using obscene or abusive
language or gestures that are intended or likely to cause a reasonable person
to fear imminent apprehension or bodily harm.
         g.   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly using obscene or abusive
language or gestures that are reasonably likely to intimidate a person.
      (2)   No person shall engage in any solicitation activity in the improved
portion of the roadway that impedes traffic on that roadway as defined in MCL
257.676b (the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code adopted and incorporated by reference
in Dearborn City Code section
18-850).
   (c)   A person who violates this section shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   First offense in a calendar year: the person is responsible for a
civil infraction and shall be fined $100.00;
      (2)   Second and subsequent offenses in the same calendar year: the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit a person from being charged with,
convicted of, or punished for any other violation of law, including a violation
of law arising out of the same transaction as the violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 16-1552, 10-18-16)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-1552, adopted October 18, 2016, amended §
14-12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former §
14-12, pertained to begging, and derived from Ord. No. 81-29, adopted July 21,
1981.
Sec. 14-13. - Window peeping.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into, or be found
loitering around, or within view of any window not on his own property, with
the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely
to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy, without the
occupant's express or implied consent.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(c), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)
(c).
Sec. 14-14. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-634, adopted May 2, 1995, repealed former §
14-14, which pertained to fortunetelling.
Sec. 14-15. - Loitering near place of illegal occupation or business.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly loiter in
or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(j), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(j).
Sec. 14-16. - Loitering near public buildings to seek employment of legal
services or services of sureties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter in or about
any police station, police headquarters building, jail, hospital, court
building or any other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting
employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal
recognizance.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(k), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Such persons deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(1)(k).
Sec. 14-17. - Tampering with or removing smoke detectors.
   Any person who shall, without authority of the owner, wilfully damage,
remove, destroy, disconnect, disturb or in any manner render inoperative any
heat, flame or smoke detection device, system or sensor, within the city, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 505, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-18. - Police officer's authority to enforce code on boundary streets
and highways.
   A police officer may enforce any ordinance of the City of Dearborn outside
the city when he is in the course of enforcing this chapter of the Code on a
street or highway which is on the boundary of the city as if he were in the
city.
(Ord. No. 96-657, 2-20-96)
Sec. 14-19. - Aiding and abetting.
   Every person concerned in the commission of an offense, whether he directly
commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids, or abets
in its commission may hereafter be prosecuted, indicted, tried, and on
conviction, shall be punished as if he had directly committed such offense.
(Ord. No. 98-738, 10-6-98)
Sec. 14-20. - Absconding on bond.
   Any person who shall abscond on or forfeit a bond, cash or recognizance,
given in any criminal proceedings, including sentencing, wherein a misdemeanor
is charged shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 98-739, 10-6-98)
Sec. 14-21. - Escape.
   A person lawfully imprisoned in a jail or place of confinement established
by law, awaiting examination, trial, arraignment, or sentencing, who breaks the
jail or place of confinement and escapes; who breaks the jail or place of
confinement, although no escape is actually made; who escapes; who leaves the
jail or place of confinement without being discharged from the jail or place of
confinement by due process of law; who breaks or escapes while in or being
transferred to or from a courtroom court house, or a place where court is being
held; or who attempts to break or escape from the jail or place of confinement
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 98-744, 10-20-98)
Sec. 14-22. - Tobacco products, vapor products, and alternative nicotine
products on school property; penalty.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), a person shall not
possess or use tobacco products, vapor products, and alternative nicotine
products on school property or public property within 100 feet of school
property.
   (b)   A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a civil infraction,
punishable by a fine of $50.00.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   School property means a building, facility, or structure and other
real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district.
      (2)   Tobacco product means a product that contains tobacco and is
intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, a cigarette,
noncigarette smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are defined
in section 2 of the tobacco products tax act, 1993 PA 327, MCL 205.422, and a
cigar.
      (3)   Vapor product means a noncombustible product that employs a heating
element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or
mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce
vapor from nicotine or any other substance, and the use or inhalation of which
simulates smoking. Vapor product includes an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and
a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine or other substance in a
solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. Vapor product does not include a product regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under 21 USC 351 to
360fff-7.
      (4)   Alternative nicotine product means a noncombustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine
product does not include a tobacco product, a vapor product, food, or a product
regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration
under 21 USC 351 to 360fff-7.
      (5)   Use a tobacco product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine
product means to smoke, chew, suck, inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco
product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine product.
   (d)   Subsection (a) does not apply to that part of school property
consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air stadium,
during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly
scheduled school hours.
      (2)   After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled
school hours.
   (e)   The chief of police may appoint and deputize security officers who
need not be regular employees of the city to enforce this section on school
property.
      (1)   Security officers appointed pursuant to this section are hereby
made and empowered as special police officers for the purpose of enforcement of
this section and they shall have the power and authority to issue citations for
violations of this section. When any enforcement action or measures are taken
pursuant to this section, security officers shall be subject to the supervision
and control of the police department.
(Ord. No. 03-963, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 12-1346, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 13-1398, 6-11-13;
Ord. No. 16-1537, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 19-1663, 9-24-19)
Secs. 14-23—14-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS
Sec. 14-36. - False report of crime.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to report or cause to be reported
any felony or misdemeanor, or give any information relating to any such felony
or misdemeanor, to a peace officer, police agency of this state or of a local
unit of government, 9-1-1 operator, or any other governmental employee or
contractor or employee of a contractor who is authorized to receive reports of
a crime, by telephone, in writing or by any other means of communication,
knowing that no such felony or misdemeanor has in fact been committed.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any information or report
to a peace officer, police agency of this state or of a local unit of
government, 9-1-1 operator, or any other governmental employee or contractor or
employee of a contract or who is authorized to receive information or reports,
relating to any felony or misdemeanor, which information or report is false and
which information or report such person knows to be false.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500.00 or both.
   (d)   As used in this section, "local unit of government" means:
      (1)   A city, village, township, or county.
      (2)   A local or intermediate school district.
      (3)   A public school academy.
      (4)   A community college.
(Ord. No. 81-130, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 04-1022, 12-21-04)
Sec. 14-37. - Opening or tampering with fire hydrants.
   Any person who shall, without authority of the division of water supply,
open any fire hydrant, except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire; who
shall wantonly injure or impair same; or who shall, without the authority of
the owner, wilfully break, injure, destroy or disturb any auxiliary
firefighting appliance, including fire extinguishers, sprinkler systems,
standpipe systems, and the like, within the city, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 504, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-38. - Resisting police officer.
   (a)   An individual who assaults, batters, wounds, resists, eludes or
attempts to elude, obstructs, opposes, or endangers a person who the individual
knows or has reason to know is performing his or her duties is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   Obstruct includes the use or threatened use of physical force to
prevent, restrict or delay a person from discharging his or her official
duties, or disobeying, opposing, ignoring or disregarding an order of a person
given while that person is acting within the scope of his or her official
duties.
      (2)   Person means any of the following:
         a.   A police officer of this city, this state, or of another
political subdivision of this state, including a motor carrier officer;
         b.   A police officer of a junior college, college or university who
is authorized by the governing board of that junior college, college, or
university to enforce the Code of the City of Dearborn, state law, and the
rules and ordinances of that junior college, college, or university; and
         c.   Any other person duly authorized to enforce the Code of the City
of Dearborn and/or state law.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 122, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 06-1106, 11-20-06; Ord. No. 07-1143,
11-19-07)
State Law reference— Resisting officer in discharge of duty, MCL 750.479, MSA
28.747.
Sec. 14-38.1. - Failure to obey police officers' direction or order.
   Any individual who is given direction or order by hand, voice, emergency
light, siren, or other visual or audible signal by a police officer acting in
the lawful performance of his duty, and who willfully disobeys and/or
disregards that direction or order, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 96-667, 4-16-96)
Sec. 14-38.2. - Failure to cooperate with booking process.
   Any individual who has been arrested and who fails to cooperate during the
booking process, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The "booking process" shall
include, but is not limited to, request for identification, request for
information, and fingerprinting photographing.
(Ord. No. 00-825, 6-20-00)
Sec. 14-39. - Animals utilized by police department.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully resist, obstruct, tease,
taunt, torment, strike, kick, mutilate, disable, or otherwise injure, kill, or
to interfere or meddle with any dog while such animal is being utilized by the
police department, or any officer or employee thereof, in the performance of
any function or duty of such department, or of such officer or employee.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 122(a), 7-21-81; Ord. No. 89-447, 5-2-89)
Sec. 14-40. - Obstructing, disobeying firefighters.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and
willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance
of his duties, or who shall, while in the vicinity of any fire, willfully
disobey and/or disregard any order, rule or regulation of the officer
commanding any fire department at such fire.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 503, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-41. - False alarm of fire.
   Any person who shall knowingly and willfully commit any one or more of the
following actions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
      (1)   Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public
place.
      (2)   Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical
apparatus or combination thereof, for the purpose of creating a false alarm of
fire.
      (3)   Raise a false alarm of fire orally, by telephone or in person.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 502, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.240, MSA 28.437.
Sec. 14-42. - Vehicles equipped with short wave length radio receiving sets.
   Any person who shall equip a vehicle with a radio receiving set that will
receive signals sent on frequencies assigned by the federal communications
commission of the United States of America for police purposes, or use the same
in the city unless such vehicle is used or owned by a peace officer or a bona
fide amateur radio operator holding a conditional, general, advanced or extra
class amateur license, issued by the federal communications commission, without
first securing a permit so to do from the commissioner of the state police,
upon such application as he may prescribe, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 705, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-43. - OUIL cost recovery.
   (a)   Purpose. The city finds a significant number of traffic arrests and
traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor
vehicle under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled
substance. In addition, the city finds that in traffic arrests and accidents
involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence
of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled substance, there is greater training
and investigative expense and a greater likelihood of personal injury and
property damage. As a result, an extraordinary operational and financial burden
is placed upon the police, public service, firefighting and rescue services by
persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of
alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. The purpose of this section
to enable the city to require reimbursement of emergency response costs
incurred by the city in making traffic stops, arrests, and responses to motor
vehicle accidents which involve drivers who are operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled substance, and
when assisting intoxicated individuals.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   Emergency response means:
         a.   The providing, sending and/or utilizing of public service,
police, firefighting, rescue service, or any other agent of the city at/to an
accident involving a motor vehicle or an arrest where one or more of the
drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an
alcoholic beverage and controlled substance; or
         b.   The providing, sending and/or utilizing of public service, police
firefighting, rescue service, or any other agent of the city to any scene where
a person and/or driver becomes helpless, endangered, or otherwise in need of
assistance by reason, where in whole or in part, of being under the influence
of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance; or
         c.   The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when
the driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or while visibly impaired due to
the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled substance.
      (2)   Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable
costs incurred by the city, or by a private person, corporation, or other
entity operating at the request of/or direction of the city, through the
extraordinary use of public services, when making an emergency response to the
incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue
service at the scene of the incident. These costs further include, but are not
limited to: all of the salaries, wages, workers' compensation benefits and
fringe benefits of the city personnel responding to the incident; all salaries,
wages, workers' compensation benefits and fringe benefits of the city personnel
engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation; all costs
connected with the administration and provision of breathalyzer or chemical
test related to any prosecution of the person involved in the incident; cost of
equipment operation; cost of materials obtained directly by the city; and cost
of any contract labor or materials.
   (c)   Liability of expenses. 
      (1)   Any person who, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor
and/or a controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle and becomes involved in
any circumstance which results in an emergency response as defined in section
14-43(b)(1), and is convicted of an alcohol related criminal offense or
hospitalized due to public intoxication, shall be liable for damages in the
amount of the expenses of the emergency response.
      (2)   Any person whose ability to operate a motor vehicle is visibly
impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled
substance, who operates a motor vehicle, who becomes involved in any
circumstance which results in an emergency response as defined in section
14-43(b)(1), and is convicted of an alcohol related criminal offense or
hospitalized due to public intoxication, shall be liable for damages in the
amount of the expenses of the emergency response.
   (d)   Civil liability. This section shall be construed to impose a
responsibility and liability of a civil nature on the part of the person or
driver and shall not be construed to conflict with, contravene, enlarge, or
reduce any criminal responsibility or liability, including fines, imposed on a
person or driver by a judge or magistrate under chapter 18 of the Code of the
city, entitled "traffic code," for operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled substance, or while his
ability to do so was visibly impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and/or a controlled substance.
   (e)   Enforcement. Any person described in this section as responsible or
liable for the expense of an emergency response, who fails to reimburse the
city within 30 days of receiving notice of the expense incurred by the city as
a result of an emergency response, shall be considered in default. If the
person who is liable for the debt refuses to reimburse the city, and owns real
estate within the city, the expenses shall be assessed against the real estate
in the manner provided by the City Charter (delinquent bills and assessments).
If the person or entity does not own real estate in the city, collection shall
be pursued by the office of corporation counsel.
(Ord. No. 94-585, 2-15-94)
Sec. 14-44. - Emergency service cost recovery ordinance.
   (a)   Purpose. This Section is created and adopted to ensure that the city
shall, to the extent permitted by law, recover the costs of an emergency
response from the responsible party.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   Emergency response. Means any response by the fire department,
entity operating at the request of the fire department, or any other responder
as set forth in the national incident management system (Homeland Security
Presidential Directive 5), to any call, including medical emergencies, for
assistance from any person, property owner, government agency, emergency
service provider, or other entity. Emergency response shall include, but is not
limited to, hazardous materials response and technical rescue as those terms
are defined in this section.
      (2)   Cost of the emergency response. Means the costs incurred in
responding to an emergency event, except as may be limited by a policy adopted
by the governing body. Costs include labor, equipment usage, and materials
associated with investigation, removal, repair, abatement, mitigation,
monitoring, cleanup, analysis, collection costs and attorney fees.
      (3)   Person. Means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited
liability corporation, association, consortium, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity.
      (4)   Hazardous materials response. Means any emergency response to an
event involving any chemical, substance, compound, mixture, or other material
defined as, designated as, listed as, or having the same characteristics as any
substance, compound, mixture or material listed as hazardous under federal or
state law or regulation.
      (5)   Technical rescue. Means all services rendered as part of an
emergency response to save life or property that employ the use of tools and
skills that exceed those normally needed for firefighting, medical emergency,
and rescue. Technical rescue includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Rope rescue;
         b.   Structural collapse search and rescue;
         c.   Confined space search and rescue;
         d.   Vehicle search and rescue;
         e.   Water search and rescue;
         f.   Wilderness search and rescue;
         g.   Trench and excavation search and rescue;
         h.   Machinery search and rescue;
         i.   Cave search and rescue;
         j.   Mine and tunnel search and rescue;
         k.   Helicopter search and rescue;
         l.   Tower rescue;
         m.   Animal technical rescue.
   (c)   Liability for expense of emergency response.
      (1)   Any owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any property who is
responsible for, or contributes to an emergency response shall be liable for
the expense of the emergency response.
      (2)   Any registered owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any motor
vehicle, the operation of which results in an emergency response, shall be
liable for the expense of the emergency response.
      (3)   Any public or private utility whose activities or facilities
necessitated an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the
emergency response.
      (4)   Any person owning, maintaining or operating a railroad shall be
liable for the expense of the emergency response.
      (5)   When an emergency response directly benefits more than one person
or property, each person and/or property benefitted shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of the expense of the emergency response. For
purposes of an emergency response involving a motor vehicle, occupants other
than the operator and the registered owner shall not be liable for the expense
of the emergency response.
      (6)   Cost recovery for any hazardous materials response may be pursued
in a civil action, pursuant to the Natural Resource Environmental Protection
Act (MCL 324.20135).
   (d)   Collection and billing of emergency response costs. Collection
recovery costs incurred by the fire department, including billing and
collection costs, court costs, and attorney fees, shall be assessed to a
responsible party who fails to remit reimbursement for the costs of the
provided emergency services in accordance with the billing procedures of this
section.
      (1)   Upon determination of responsibility for an emergency response, the
fire chief, or his designee, shall prepare and deliver an invoice of the
charges imposed to the responsible party or parties for payment. The
responsible party shall reimburse the fire department, as directed by the
invoice, for the charges set forth in the invoice within 30 days. The
responsible party shall be liable for any costs associated with the collection
of the unpaid balance that remains after the expiration of 30 days.
      (2)   If the responsible party refuses to reimburse the city, and owns
real estate in the city, the expenses shall not be assessed against the real
estate in the manner provided by the City Charter (delinquent bills and
assessments). If the person or entity does not own real estate in the city,
collection shall be pursued by the office of the corporation counsel.
   (e)   Severability. If any subsection, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent portion of this section, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining points of this section.
(Ord. No. 94-586, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 10-1265, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 22-1760, 8-23-
22)
Sec. 14-44A. - Medical treatment of those confined.
   Any person held in custody, confined, or incarcerated by the city,
including, but not limited to, individuals who are:
      (1)   Under arrest,
      (2)   Incarcerated,
      (3)   Imprisoned,
      (4)   Escaped from confinement,
      (5)   Under supervised release,
      (6)   On medical furlough,
      (7)   Residing in a mental health facility or halfway house,
      (8)   Living under home detention, or
      (9)   Confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute,
code provision, ordinance, or rule,
shall be solely responsible for the payment of any medical services rendered
to, and received by, that person during the course of his or her confinement
with the city, or at the city's direction. These services shall include, but
are not limited to, transportation to and from a medical treatment facility,
and any treatment deemed necessary by the prisoner's treating physician,
whether or not requested by the prisoner. The prisoner shall be required to
reimburse the city, in full, for any fees or charges incurred for such
services, if not paid directly to the medical facility or practitioner by the
prisoner or his or her insurance carrier.
(Ord. No. 11-1312, 2-7-11)
Sec. 14-45. - False impersonation of public officer.
   Any person who falsely assumes or pretends to be a sheriff, deputy sheriff,
conservation officer, coroner, constable, police officer, or member of the
Michigan state police, and shall take upon himself to act as such, or to
require any person to aid or assist him in any matter pertaining to the duty of
a sheriff, deputy sheriff, conservation officer, coroner, constable, police
officer, or member of the Michigan state police, or shall falsely take upon
himself to act or officiate in any office or place of authority, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 99-756, 2-16-99)
Sec. 14-46. - Sale or possession of badge, patch, uniform or facsimile.
   (a)   A person shall not sell, furnish, possess, wear, exhibit, display, or
use the badge, patch, or uniform, or facsimile of the badge, patch or uniform,
of any law enforcement agency unless any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person receiving or possessing the badge, patch, uniform or
facsimile is authorized to receive or possess the badge, patch, uniform, or
facsimile by the chief officer of the law enforcement agency.
      (2)   The person receiving or possessing the badge, patch, uniform or
facsimile is a member of the law enforcement agency.
      (3)   The badge is a retirement badge and is in the possession of the
retired law enforcement officer.
      (4)   The badge, patch or uniform is the badge, patch or uniform of a
deceased law enforcement officer and is in the possession of his or her spouse,
child or next of kin.
      (5)   The person receiving, possessing, exhibiting, displaying or using
the badge, patch, uniform or facsimile, is a collector of badges, patches,
uniforms, or facsimiles. A badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile possession as
part of a collection shall be in a container or display case when being
transported.
      (6)   The person is in the theatrical profession and wears the badge,
patch, uniform, or facsimile while actually engaged in following that
profession.
   (b)   A person, other than a peace officer (as defined in MCL 750.215),
shall not wear or display the emblem, insignia, logo, service mark, or other
law enforcement identification of any law enforcement agency, or a facsimile of
any of those items, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person represents himself or herself to another person as being
a peace officer.
      (2)   The wearing or display occurs in a manner that would lead a
reasonable person to falsely believe that the law enforcement agency whose
emblem, insignia, logo, service mark, or other law enforcement identification
or facsimile is being worn or displayed in promoting or endorsing a commercial
service or product or a charitable endeavor.
      (3)   As used in this section, "law enforcement identification" means any
identification that contains the words "law enforcement" or similar words,
including, but not limited to, "agent", "enforcement agent", "detective", "task
force", "fugitive recovery agent", or any other combination of names that give
the impression that the bearer is in any way connected with the federal
government, state government, or any political subdivision of a state
government. However, law enforcement identification does not include "bail
agent" or "bondsman."
      (4)   Subsection (b) does not apply to a person appointed by a court of
this state or serve as a bailiff or court officer.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. A
charge under or a conviction or punishment for a violation of this section does
not prevent a person from being charged with, convicted of, or punished for any
other violation of state law or City Code arising from the same transaction.
(Ord. No. 99-757, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 07-1115, 1-16-07)
Sec. 14-47. - Manipulation of traffic signal lights by remotely transmitted
signal prohibited; possession or use of device prohibited; exception.
   (a)   Purpose: The use of remotely transmitted signals for the manipulation
of traffic signal lights is considered a valid part of lawful emergency
response activities. Therefore, the use of such devices shall be limited to
duly authorized public safety officers and employees as part of an overall
system to protect the health, safety and welfare of this community. Other users
and uses shall be strictly prohibited.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manipulate any traffic signal
device by a remotely transmitted signal.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use any transmitter
used for the manipulation of traffic signal devices.
   (d)   This section shall not apply to the operator of an emergency vehicle
as defined by state law.
   (e)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 03-992, 11-18-03)
Sec. 14-48. - Temporary detention by a police officer of a person suspected of
criminal behavior or of violating conditions of probation; limitations.
   (a)   Any police officer may detain any person whom the officer encounters
under circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has committed, is
committing or is about to commit a crime.
   (b)   Any police officer may detain any person the officer encounters under
circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has violated or is
violating the conditions of his probation.
   (c)   The police officer may detain the person pursuant to this section only
to ascertain his identity and the suspicious circumstances surrounding his
presence. Any person so detained shall identify himself, but may not be
compelled to answer any other inquiry of any police officer.
   (d)   A person must not be detained longer than is reasonably necessary to
effect the purposes of this section, and in no event longer than 60 minutes.
The detention must not extend beyond the place or the immediate vicinity of the
place where the detention was first effected, unless the person is arrested.
(Ord. No. 05-1034, 4-4-05)
Sec. 14-49. - Firefighter; sale or possession of badge, patch, uniform or
facsimile.
   (a)   A person shall not sell, furnish, possess, wear, exhibit, display, or
use the badge, patch, or uniform, or facsimile of the badge, patch or uniform,
of any organized fire department, life support agency, or medical first
response service unless one or more of the following apply:
      (1)   The person receiving or possessing the badge, patch, uniform or
facsimile is authorized to receive or possess the badge, patch, uniform, or
facsimile by the chief officer of the organized fire department, life support
agency, or medical first response service.
      (2)   The person receiving or possessing the badge, patch, uniform or
facsimile is a member of the organized fire department or an employee of the
life support agency or medical first response service.
      (3)   The badge is a retirement badge and is in the possession of the
retired member of the organized fire department or retired employee of the life
support agency or medical first response service.
      (4)   The badge, patch or uniform is the badge, patch or uniform of a
deceased member of the organized fire department or deceased employee of the
life support agency or medical first response service and is in the possession
of his or her spouse, child, or next of kin.
      (5)   The person receiving, possessing, exhibiting, displaying or using
the badge, patch, uniform or facsimile, is a collector of badges, patches,
uniforms, or facsimiles. A badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile possessed as
part of a collection shall be in a container or display case when being
transported.
      (6)   The person is in the theatrical profession and wears the badge,
patch, uniform, or facsimile while actually engaged in following that
profession.
   (b)   A person, other than a member of an organized fire department or an
employee of a life support agency or medical first response service, shall not
wear or display the emblem, insignia, logo, service mark, or other
identification of any organized fire department, life support agency, or
medical first response service, or a facsimile of any of those items, if either
of the following applies:
      (1)   The person represents himself or herself to another person as being
a member of that organized fire department or an employee of that life support
agency or medical first response service.
      (2)   The wearing or display occurs in a manner that would lead a
reasonable person to falsely believe that the organized fire department, life
support agency, or medical first response service whose emblem, insignia, logo,
service mark, or other identification or facsimile is being worn or displayed
is promoting or endorsing a commercial service or product or a charitable
endeavor.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 07-1116, 1-16-07)
Secs. 14-50—14-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Sec. 14-61. - Assault and battery.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to attempt or offer,
with force and violence, to do a corporal hurt to another, or assault and/or
batter any other person.
(Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 101(m), 102, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.81.
Sec. 14-62. - Malicious annoyance by writing.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly send or
deliver, or to make, for the purpose of being delivered or sent; to part with
the possession of any letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene
language with or without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious
name, or with any letter, mark or other designation with the intent thereby to
cause annoyance to any person, within the city or with a view or intent to
extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 119, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.390.
Sec. 14-63. - Malicious acts.
   (a)   Any person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service
provided by a telecommunications service provider with intent to terrorize,
frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to
disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following:
      (1)   Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in
the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications
service or device.
      (2)   Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a
telecommunications service or device that a person has been injured, has
suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime or of
an accident.
      (3)   Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telecommunications device and another telecommunications device or between a
telecommunications device and other equipment provided for the transmission of
messages through the use of a telecommunications service or device.
      (4)   Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a conversation or
message through the use of a telecommunications service or device.
      (5)   Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking,
deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the
telephone call is answered.
      (6)   Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this
subdivision, "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a
person or recording device, on behalf of a person, corporation, or other
entity, soliciting business or contributions.
      (7)   Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a
telecommunications service or device of another person in a repetitive manner
that causes interruption in telecommunications service or prevents the person
from utilizing his or her telecommunications service or device.
   (b)   An offense is committed under this section if the communication either
originates or terminates in this city and may be prosecuted at the place of
origination or termination.
   (c)   The terms used in this section shall be defined in accordance with
state law, including:
   Telecommunications and telecommunications service: Any service lawfully
provided for a charge or compensation to facilitate the origination,
transmission, retransmission, emission, or reception of signs, data, images,
signals, writings, sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence
of any nature over any telecommunications system by any method, including, but
not limited to, electronic, electromagnetic, magnetic, optical, photo-optical,
digital, or analog technologies.
   Telecommunications device is defined as any of the following:
      (1)   Any instrument, device, card, plate, code, telephone number,
account number, personal identification number, electronic serial number,
mobile identification number, counterfeit number, or financial transaction
device as defined in MCL 750.157m that alone or with another device can
acquire, transmit, intercept, provide, receive, use, or otherwise facilitate
the use, acquisition, interception, provision, reception, and transmission of
any telecommunications service.
      (2)   Any type of instrument, device, machine, equipment, technology, or
software that facilitates, telecommunications or which is capable of
transmitting, acquiring, intercepting, decrypting, or receiving any telephonic,
electronic, data, internet access, audio, video, microwave, or radio
transmissions, signals, telecommunications, or services, including the receipt,
acquisition, interception, transmission, retransmission, or decryption of all
telecommunications, transmissions, signals or services provided by or through
any cable television, fiber optic, telephone, satellite, microwave, data
transmission, radio, internet based or wireless distribution network, system,
or facility, or any party, accessory, or component, including any computer
circuit, security module, smart card, software, computer chip, pager, cellular
telephone, personal communications device, transponder, receiver, modem,
electronic mechanism or other component, accessory, or part of any other device
that is capable of facilitating the interception, transmission, retransmission,
decryption, acquisition, or reception of any telecommunications, transmissions,
signals or services.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 216, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 07-1121, 2-5-07)
   State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e.
Sec. 14-63.1 - Cyber bullying prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cyber bully another person.
   (b)   The term "cyber bully" includes posting a message or statement in a
public media forum about any other person if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The message or statement is intended to place a person in fear of
bodily harm or death and expresses an intent to commit violence against the
person.
      (2)   The message or statement is posted with the intent to communicate a
threat or with knowledge that it will be viewed as a threat.
   (c)   "Public media forum" means the internet or any other medium designed
or intended to be used to convey information to other individuals, regardless
of whether a membership or password is required to view the information.
   (d)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 19-1654, 7-16-19)
Sec. 14-64. - Nonsupport of family.
   It shall be unlawful for any person of sufficient ability within the city to
refuse or neglect to support his family.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(a), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Desertion and nonsupport, MCL 750.161; person neglecting
family deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(a).
Sec. 14-65. - Stalking.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   Course of conduct means a pattern of conduct composed of a series
of two or more separate noncontinuous acts, evidencing a continuity of purpose.
      (2)   Emotional distress means significant mental suffering or distress
that may, but does not necessarily require, medical or other professional
treatment or counseling.
      (3)   Harassment means conduct directed toward a victim that includes,
but is not limited to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact, that would
cause a reasonable individual to suffer emotional distress, and that actually
causes the victim to suffer emotional distress. Harassment does not include
constitutionally protected activity or conduct that serves a legitimate
purpose.
      (4)   Stalking means a willful course of conduct involving repeated or
continuing harassment of another individual that would cause a reasonable
person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or
molested, and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened,
intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested.
      (5)   Unconsented contact means any contact with another individual that
is initiated or continued without the individual's consent, or in disregard of
that individual's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued.
Unconsented contact includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:
         a.   Following or appearing within the sight of that individual.
         b.   Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or
on private property.
         c.   Appearing at the work place or residence of that individual.
         d.   Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or occupied
by that individual.
         e.   Contacting that individual by telephone.
         f.   Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual.
         g.   Placing an object on or delivering an object to property owned,
leased, or occupied by that individual.
      (6)   Victim means an individual who is the target of a willful course of
conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment.
   (b)   Penalty. An individual who engages in stalking is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (c)   Probation. The court may place an individual convicted of violating
subsection (b) on probation for a term of not more than two years. If a term of
probation is ordered, the court may, in addition to any other lawful condition
of probation, order the defendant to do any of the following:
      (1)   Refrain from stalking any individual during the term of probation.
      (2)   Refrain from having any contact with the victim of the offense.
      (3)   Be evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric, psychological,
or social counseling and, if determined appropriate by the court, to receive
psychiatric, psychological, or social counseling at his or her own expense.
   (d)   Evidence. In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence
that the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct involving
repeated unconsented contact with the victim after having been requested by the
victim to discontinue same or a different form of unconsented contact, and to
refrain from any further unconsented contact with the victim, shall give rise
to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation of the course of conduct
caused the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened,
harassed, or molested.
   (e)   Additional penalties. A criminal penalty provided for under this
section may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any
other criminal offense arising from the same conduct.
(Ord. No. 94-588, 3-16-94)
Secs. 14-66—14-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Sec. 14-81. - Distribution of handbills.
   (a)   Purpose. To protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to
the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly
commercial handbills, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health
and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the
regulation thereof, and, to that end, the purposes of this section are
specifically declared to be as follows:
      (1)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors,
canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such
residents, if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be
solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising
matter.
      (2)   To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial
handbills.
      (3)   To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and
good morals and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by
the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the
right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the
same.
   (b)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   Commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written
matter, sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet
or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter
or literature:
         a.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing.
         b.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales.
         c.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
      (2)   Newspaper shall mean and include any newspaper of general
circulation, as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the
United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation,
and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by
general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year,
and sold to the public.
      (3)   Noncommercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or
written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, magazine, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the definitions
of a sign, a commercial handbill, or a newspaper, with the exception of
political and religious literature.
      (4)   Private premises shall mean and include any dwelling, house,
building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house, building or other structure.
      (5)   Public place shall mean and include any and all streets,
boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings.
   (c)   Distributing, throwing or scattering in public places prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial handbill in or upon any public place within this city. It shall be
unlawful for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place. It shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill
in any public place to any person willing to accept such noncommercial
handbill.
   (d)   Placing in vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing,
transmitting or distributing of any noncommercial handbill to the owner or
other occupant of any automobile, or other vehicle, who is willing to accept
the same.
   (e)   Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises. It shall be
unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
   (f)   Distribution where posted. It shall be unlawful for any person to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to
do so or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner
that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested, to have their
right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such
premises.
   (g)   Distribution on inhabited private premises. No person shall
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises. In
case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this
section, the licensee or other person, unless requested by anyone upon such
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such
inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to
secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises
or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by
federal postal laws or regulations.
   (h)   Identification of printer, distributor, etc. It shall be unlawful for
any person to distribute, deposit, scatter, hand out or circulate any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any circumstances,
which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof, the name and
address of the following:
      (1)   The person who printed, wrote, compiled or manufactured the same.
      (2)   The person who caused the same to be distributed; provided,
however, in the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such
fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers or agents
of the person sponsoring such handbill shall also appear thereon.
   (i)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to
apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers.
   (j)   Offensive handbills. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, to
hand out, distribute or transmit any sign, or any commercial or noncommercial
handbill:
      (1)   Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder;
which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by means of any artifice, scheme or violence; which
urges any unlawful conduct; or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the
public peace or good order of the community.
      (2)   Which is offensive to public morals or decency, or which contains
blasphemous, obscene, libelous or scurrilous language.
   (k)   Section cumulative. This section shall not be deemed to repeal, amend
or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or
licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants or any person
using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or
for commercial sales, not covered herein.
(Ord. No. 59-1316, §§ 1—11, 9-1-59; Ord. No. 61-1404, 10-3-61)
Sec. 14-82. - Reserved.
Sec. 14-83. - Littering, waste control.
   (a)   Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to litter or permit to
be littered on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places
within the city by throwing, depositing, tracking, dropping, dumping or
spilling any trash, paper, dirt, mud, ashes, sand, glass, leaves, garbage,
debris or other materials, or to deposit or cause the same to be deposited upon
or permit the same to be accumulated upon any premises other than those
designated as official city dumps.
   (b)   Commercial waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge any commercial or
industrial water or any polluted or contaminated waste upon the sidewalks,
streets, alleys or gutters within the city at any time.
   (c)   Enforcement. All officers of the police department and inspectors of
the department of licenses, weights and measures of the city, as well as other
city employees officially designated as ordinance police, are hereby charged
with enforcement of this section and are authorized to issue violation tickets
for any violation of this section.
   (d)   Reward. The city will pay a reward of $100.00 to any person who gives
information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person for a
violation of this section; provided, however, that no police officer or any
other employee of the city shall be eligible for a reward under the provisions
of this section. Any person who claims a reward pursuant to this section shall
file a claim in writing with the city controller, in which he shall state the
title of the court, the names of the parties and the court number of the case
in which a person was convicted of a violation of this section, and a statement
of the information which he gave which led to the arrest and conviction of such
person. The city controller may also require an appropriate certificate from
the corporation counsel or other prosecuting attorney to the effect that the
information given by the claimant led to the arrest and conviction of such
person.
   (e)   Presumptions. In a proceeding for violation of this section involving
litter from a motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the
citation, complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof
that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the
registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in
evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver
of the vehicle at the time of the violation. The driver of a vehicle is
presumed to be responsible for litter which is thrown, deposited, dropped,
dumped, spilled, placed or left from the vehicle upon public or private
property.
   (f)   Accident cleanup. It shall be unlawful for a person who removes a
vehicle wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road or street to fail
to remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road
or street as a result of the accident.
(Ord. No. 81-94, §§ 1—7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-84. - False statements.
   Any person who states, in an advertisement of his goods, that he is a
producer, manufacturer, processor, wholesaler or importer, or that he owns or
controls a factory or other source of supply of goods, when such is not the
fact or in any other manner knowingly misrepresents the character, extent,
volume or type of this business, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 813, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-85. - False advertising.
   Any person who with intent to sell, purchase or in any way dispose of or
acquire merchandise, securities, service or anything offered or sought by such
person, directly or indirectly, to or from the public for sale, purchase or
distribution, or with intent to increase the consumption thereof, or to induce
the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto or any
interest therein, makes, publishes, disseminates, circulates or places before
the public, or causes directly or indirectly to be made, published,
disseminated, circulated or placed before or communicated to the public in this
state, in a newspaper or by radio broadcast, television, telephone or
telegraph, or other mode of communication or publication or in the form of a
book, notice, handbill, poster, bill, circular, pamphlet, letter or
communication, including communication by telephone or telegraph to two or more
persons, or in any other way, in advertisement of any sort regarding
merchandise, securities, service or anything so offered to or sought from the
public, or regarding the motive or purpose of a sale, purchase, distribution or
acquisition which advertisement contains any assertion, representation or
statement or illustration, including statements of present or former sale price
or value, which is untrue, deceptive or misleading, or calculated to subject
any person to disadvantage or injury through the publication of false or
deceptive statements or as part of a plan or scheme with the intent, design or
purpose not to sell the merchandise, commodities or service so advertised at
the price stated therein, or otherwise communicated, or with intent not to sell
the merchandise, commodities or service so advertised shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to any owner, publisher, printer, agent or employee of a newspaper or
other publication, periodical or circular, or of a radio station or television
station, who in good faith and without knowledge of the falsity or deceptive
character thereof, publishes, causes to be published or takes part in the
publication of such advertisement; provided further, that with respect to use
of a telephone by subscribers or users, the provisions of this section shall
not apply to any person providing telephone service as a public utility.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 812, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-86. - Misuse of credit cards.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   Cardholder shall mean the person or organization who requests a
credit card and to whom or for whose benefit a credit card is subsequently
issued; or the person or organization to whom a credit card was issued and who
uses a credit card, whether the issuance of the credit card was requested or
not.
      (2)   Credit card shall mean any instrument or device which is sold,
issued or otherwise distributed by a business organization or financial
institution for the use of the person or organization identified thereon for
obtaining goods, property, services or anything of value on credit.
   (b)   Use of revoked or canceled card. Any person who knowingly and with
intent to defraud uses for the purpose of obtaining goods, property or services
or anything of value, a credit card which has been stolen or which has been
revoked or canceled by the issuer thereof, as distinguished from expired, and
notice of such revocation or cancellation has been received by such person
through registered or certified mail or by personal service, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 808, 809, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-87. - Unlawful use of telephone service.
   Any person who knowingly obtains or attempts to obtain telephone service or
the transmission of a telephone message of a total value of $100.00 or less, by
the use of any false or fictitious telephone credit number or telephone number,
or by the use of any telephone credit number or telephone number of another
without the authority of the person to whom the credit number or telephone
number was issued, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 810, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-88. - Bad checks, orders, etc.
   (a)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the word "credit" shall
mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the
payment of a check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for
payment.
   (b)   Evidence of intent to defraud. As against the maker or drawer thereof,
the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, within
the city, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the
usual course of business shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and
of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee
thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees,
within five days after receiving notice that such check draft or order has not
been paid by the drawee.
   (c)   Notice of protest. Where such check, draft or order is protested, on
the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof
shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall
be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient
funds or credit with such bank or other depository.
(Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 803—805, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-89. - Bad checks.
   Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or
deliver within the city any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to
apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at
the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker, or
drawer, has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its
presentation, or any person who, with the intent to defraud, shall make, draw,
utter or deliver within the city any check, draft or order for the payment of
money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and
who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for same when presentation
for payment is made to the drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to
garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful cause, and such fact was not
known to the person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the
time of so doing, shall, if the amount payable in the check is $50.00 or less,
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 802, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.131.
Sec. 14-90. - Hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, cafe—Defrauding; limitation.
   Any person who shall put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe as
a guest and shall procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without
paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement,
with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for the same, or who,
with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor, shall obtain credit
at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe for such food, entertainment or
accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought
thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. No conviction shall be had under the
provisions of this section unless complaint is made within 60 days of the time
of the violation hereof.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 806, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-91. - Same—Prima facie evidence.
   Obtaining food, lodging or accommodation by false pretense, or by false or
fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay
therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank
or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying
or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to
remove baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 807, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-92. - Larceny.
   Any person who shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, of the
property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill,
bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order
or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or
to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a
conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt,
release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record, if the property
stolen shall be of value of $200.00 or less shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 124, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 01-864, 11-20-01)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.356.
Sec. 14-92A. - Retail fraud in the third degree.
   A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate
vicinity is guilty of retail fraud in the third degree, a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500.00 or three times the value of the difference in price, property stolen,
or money or property obtained or attempted to be obtained, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine:
      (1)   While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which the property
is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less
than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting
difference in price is less than $200.00.
      (2)   While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store
that is offered for sale at a price of less than $200.00.
      (3)   With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the
property obtained or attempted to be obtained, is less than $200.00.
(Ord. No. 11-1310, 1-4-11)
Sec. 14-93. - Larceny from vacant buildings.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or unlawfully
remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment, or other property
belonging to, connected with, or used in the construction of any vacant
structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction, or to
break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully
removing, taking therefrom, or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment
or other property belonging to, connected with, or used in the construction of
such vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of
construction.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 109, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Larceny, MCL 750.356.
Sec. 14-94. - Failure to return rented property.
   Any person to whom a motor vehicle, trailer or other tangible property is
delivered on a rental or lease basis under any agreement in writing providing
for its return to particular place at a particular time, who refuses or
willfully neglects to return such vehicle, trailer or other tangible property,
after the expiration of the time stated in a notice in certified mail addressed
to the last known address of the person who rented or leased the motor vehicle,
trailer or other tangible property, and with intent to defraud the lessor, is
guilty of larceny. If the vehicle, trailer or other tangible property is of the
value of $100.00 or less, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 108, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 89-448, 5-2-89)
Sec. 14-95. - Frauds unlawful.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or
to aid or abet, or in any manner to be concerned therein.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 801, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Frauds and cheats, MCL 750.271 et seq.
Sec. 14-96. - False statements for welfare aid unlawful.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to obtain by means of a
willfully false statement or representation or by impersonation, or other
fraudulent device:
      (1)   Aid, relief or welfare assistance to which he is not entitled.
      (2)   Aid, relief or welfare assistance greater than that to which he is
entitled; or knowingly aids or abets in buying or in any way disposing of the
property of a recipient of aid, relief or welfare assistance.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 811, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— False statements to obtain public relief or assistance,
MCL 400.60, MSA 16.460.
Sec. 14-97. - Receiving, concealing, stolen property.
   (a)   A person who buys, receives, possesses, conceals, or aids in the
concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods, or property
knowing the money, goods, or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted is
guilty of a misdemeanor, if the value of the stolen, embezzled, or converted
money, goods, or property is $100.00 or less.
   (b)   A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal
property, or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector
who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering the
stolen, embezzled, or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal
right to do so or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled, or converted property
which has a registration, serial, or other identifying number altered or
obliterated on an external surface of the property, shall be presumed to have
bought or received the property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled,
or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 125, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.535, MSA 28.803.
Sec. 14-98. - Possession of burglar's tools.
   Any person who shall knowingly have in his possession any nitroglycerine, or
other explosive, thermite, engine, machine, tool (including, but not limited
to, tools commonly known as slim jims and slammers), or implement, device,
chemical or substance, adapted and designed for cutting or burning through,
forcing or breaking open any building, room, vault, safe, motor vehicle, motor
vehicle trunk or glove compartment, or other depository, or for starting the
engine of a motor vehicle or driving a motor vehicle without the regular key,
or for removing sensor tags, in order to steal any money or other property,
knowing the same to be adapted and designed for one or more of the purposes
aforesaid, with intent to use or employ the same for one or more of the
purposes aforesaid, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For the purposes of this
section, if it is established that any person had in his possession or control
a vehicle repair tool commonly referred to as a knocker set, a slammer or a
puller, consisting of a shaft with a screw attached thereto and weighted sleeve
that slides on such shaft, outside the curtilage of his own domicile and
outside the curtilage of a garage or repair shop where he was employed, it
shall be presumed that such person intended to use such vehicle repair tool for
the purpose of driving away a motor vehicle. Such presumption may be rebutted
by proof that such vehicle repair tool was in transit from one place to another
and was essential for the possessor's employment, or that the possession was
intended for a lawful purpose.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 127, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 82-258, 11-3-82)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.116, MSA 28.311.
Sec. 14-99. - Malicious destruction of property generally.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully and
maliciously destroy or injure the real or personal property of another, or the
appurtenances thereof, and where the damage done shall be $200.00 or less. A
complaint for violation of this section may be made by the property owner, his
agent, or lessee or any person with custody and control of such premises.
(Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 113, 117, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 01-865, 11-20-01)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a, MSA 28.609(1).
Sec. 14-100. - Malicious destruction of public property; reward.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously
destroy, damage, injure, mar or deface any building, monument, sign or
structure or fence, tree, shrub, plant, park or public property of any kind
which is owned, controlled, or managed by the state, county, city, any school
district within the city, or by any other unit or agency of government whose
operating budget is raised in whole or in part by public taxation, or to commit
any act of vandalism on or in any such property.
   (b)   The city will pay a reward of $100.00 to any person who gives
information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person for a
violation of this section; provided, however, that no police officer or any
other employee of the city shall be eligible for a reward under the provisions
of this section. Any person who claims a reward pursuant to this section shall
file a claim in writing with the finance director in which he shall state the
title of the court, the names of the parties and the court number of the case
in which a person was convicted of a violation of this chapter and a statement
of the information which he gave which led to the arrest and conviction of such
person. The city controller may also require an appropriate certificate from
the corporation counsel or other prosecuting attorney to the effect that the
information given by the claimant led to the arrest and conviction of such
person.
(Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 114, 115, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-101. - Graffiti on public property.
   (a)   Prohibited behavior. 
      (1)   No person under the age of 18 years shall possess, buy, transfer
possession or receive possession of spray paint. For purposes of this section
"spray paint" shall mean: any adherent, pigmented substance dispersed in
particles, by means of an atomizer or other simple mechanical instrument or
applicator.
         a.   This subsection does not apply to individuals in possession of
spray paint for use at or in the course of lawful employment, an educational
program, or for other lawful uses.
      (2)   No person shall use any paint, spray paint, pigment, marker, chalk,
dye or similar means to injure, mark, deface or destroy public or private
property, including the making of any drawing, inscription, pictograph or other
markings, commonly referred to as "graffiti."
   (b)   Abatement. 
      (1)   The owner of any property defaced shall report the existence of the
graffiti to the department of public works and the police department
immediately upon discovery.
      (2)   The owner of any property defaced through the use of spray paint or
other device shall remove or paint over such graffiti as soon as possible after
discovery of its existence so as to preclude further vandalism or decay of the
structure or immediate surroundings. Any owner removing such markings pursuant
to this section may be entitled to restitution in an amount determined by the
court for the cost of removing those markings, such restitution to be paid by
any person convicted under this section.
      (3)   Whenever the director of the building and safety department, the
director of the department of public works, or their designated representatives
determine that graffiti on any structure in the city is visible from the street
or other public or private property, the director of the building and safety
department, the director of public works, or their designated representatives
may issue an abatement notice to the property owner, or initiate a prosecution
against the responsible person violating this section, or both.
      (4)   The city official shall cause a written abatement notice to be
served upon the owner(s), occupant(s), or person(s) in control of the affected
premises, as such name(s) and address(es) appear on the last equalized property
tax assessment roll of the County of Wayne, and shall provide the property
owner, occupant or person in control ten days in which to remove the graffiti,
or the property thereafter shall be subject to graffiti abatement by the city.
The cost of abatement shall be placed on the miscellaneous assessment roll.
Notice shall be issued pursuant to section
13-5 of the Code as follows:
         a.   By personal service on the owner or occupant of the property; or
         b.   By posting the notice in a conspicuous location upon the entrance
of such premises; or
         c.   By posting the notice conspicuously on the property frontage, at
least once every 50 feet.
   The abatement notice shall be substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
   DEARBORN CODE OF ORDINANCES SECTION 14-101
   Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove
or paint over the graffiti which constitutes a public nuisance on the property
located at ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , Dearborn, Michigan,
____________ , which is visible to public view, within ten (10) days after the
date of this notice; or if you fail to do so, you will be issued an appearance
ticket and City employees or private contractors employed by the City will be
authorized to enter upon your property and remove or paint over the graffiti.
The costs of the abatement by the City's employees or its private contractors
may be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon
the land until paid.
      (5)   Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the
notice of abatement by the designated compliance date, the director of the
building and safety department, the director of the department of public works,
or their designated representatives, is authorized to issue an appearance
ticket and/or cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private
contract; the city and/or its private contractor are expressly authorized to
enter onto private property for the purpose of abating graffiti. All reasonable
efforts to minimize damage from entry on property and abatement of graffiti
shall be taken by the city and/or its private contractor, and any paint used to
obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s).
   (c)   Penalty. Any person who is convicted of violation section
14-101 shall be punished by a fine of $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or by any combination of such fine and imprisonment. In
addition to such punishment, the court may, in imposing sentence, order the
defendant to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed. If the
graffiti has previously been abated by a person other than the defendant, the
court may, in addition to any other punishment, order the defendant to pay
restitution in an amount equal to the cost of abatement.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 116, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 96-666, 4-2-96)
Sec. 14-102. - Taking or injuring gardens, trees, shrubs, vines.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully take and carry away from
any place within the city any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree,
ornamental shrub or any plant, vine, bush or vegetable there growing with
intent to deprive the owner thereof, or without right and with wrongful intent,
to detach from the ground or injure any such plant.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 105, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-103. - Damage to library materials.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or wantonly
tear, deface or mutilate or write upon, or by other means injure or mar any
book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical,
newspaper, magazine, manuscript, film, microfilm, phonograph record, recording
or exhibit or any part thereof, belonging to any public library.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 106, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-104. - Larceny from libraries.
   (a)   Any person who shall procure, or take in any way from any public
library, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph,
periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, film, microfilm, phonograph
record, recording or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the
same to his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any person who, having procured or taken from any public library any
book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical,
newspaper, magazine, manuscript, film, microfilm, phonograph record, recording
or exhibit, or any part thereof, shall thereafter convert the same to his own
use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (c)   The failure of any person to return library material in accordance
with the rules of the library shall constitute prima facie evidence of such
intent to convert or defraud, provided that the person having procured or taken
library material shall not have returned same within five days after receiving
notice that such library material was overdue.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 107, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 89-448, 5-2-89)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.364, MSA 28.596.
Sec. 14-105. - Tampering or meddling with motor vehicles; larceny of vehicle
equipment; unlawfully driving away an automobile; unauthorized use of motor
vehicle.
   (a)   Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this section who shall:
      (1)   Tampering or meddling with a motor vehicle.
         a.   Intentionally, and without authority from the owner, start or
cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or
change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position
other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of such motor
vehicle.
         b.   Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running
gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the
property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such
motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or
attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto
attached, without the permission of the owner thereof.
         c.   Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle,
with intent to injure such machines and cause the same to be removed without
the consent of the owner; provided, that this section shall not apply in case
of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local
ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the
vicinity of a fire.
      (2)   Larceny of vehicle equipment. Commit larceny by stealing or
unlawfully removing or taking any wheel, tire, air bag, catalytic converter,
radio, stereo, clock, telephone, computer, or other electronic device in or on
any motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or semitrailer.
      (3)   Violate subsection (4) and who breaks, tears, buts, or otherwise
damages any part of the motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or semitrailer
is guilty of a separate offense under this section.
      (4)   Unlawful driving away of a motor vehicle. Any person who shall,
willfully and without authority, take possession of and drive or take away, and
any person who shall assist in or be a party to such taking possession, driving
or taking away of any motor vehicle, belonging to another, shall be guilty of
violating this section.
      (5)   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle. Any person who takes or uses
without authority any motor vehicles without intent to steal the same, or who
is a party to such unauthorized taking or using, is guilty of a violation of
this section. This subsection does not apply to any person or persons employed
by the owner of said motor vehicle or anyone else, who, by the nature of his or
her employment, has the charge of or the authority to drive said motor vehicle
if said motor vehicle is driven or used without the owner’s knowledge or
consent.
   (b)   The term “motor vehicle” as used in this section shall include all
vehicles impelled on the public highways and streets of the City of Dearborn by
mechanical power, except traction engines, road rollers, and such vehicles as
run only upon rails or tracks.
   (c)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days, a fine of not more than $500, or a
combination of both.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 118, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 23-1789, 5-9-23)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.412, 750.413, 750.414,
750.416, 750.356a, MSA 28.648.
Sec. 14-106. - Trespass upon lands or premises of another.
   Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another
without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do, or after such
lands or premises have been previously posted with a conspicuous notice
forbidding any trespass thereon by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant
of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of
another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or
agent or servant of either, who, without lawful authority neglects or refuses
to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than $250, imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.   
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 704, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 20-1678, 8-25-20)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.552, MSA 28.820(1).
Sec. 14-107. - Breaking and entering, entering without authority.
   (a)   Any person who shall break and enter, or shall enter without breaking,
any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn,
granary, factory or other building, automobile, boat, ship, railroad car or
structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment
therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage
or the outbuildings belonging thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied
or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or
occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   (b)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To entering without breaking of any place which at the time of such
entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied.
      (2)   Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was
committed by a peace officer or other person authorized by law to break and
enter or otherwise enter without breaking, provided the breaking and entering
or entering without breaking was committed in the lawful performance of their
duties as a peace officer or other person authorized by law to break and enter
or otherwise enter without breaking.
      (3)   Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was
committed by someone under the direction of a person exempted from the
applicability of this section as noted in subsection (2) of this section.
   (c)   Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner,
lessee or occupant of the structure, place, or area as set out in subsection
(a) of this section, the agent thereof, or the police department. The police
department shall enforce this section.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 111, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 97-693, 2-4-97)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.115, MSA 28.310.
Sec. 14-108. - Unauthorized entrance upon private parking area.
   (a)   Any person who enters upon or loiters upon any private parking area,
either in a vehicle or on foot, without the express or implied permission of
the owner, lessee, occupant or agent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Before this section shall be effective in any parking area, suitable
signs must be first posted which would apprise the ordinarily observant person
of the restricted use of the parking area. For the purpose of this section,
implied permission shall be deemed granted to any person for the use designated
by such signs. Implied permission shall not be deemed granted to any person,
found upon any private parking area after business hours of the owner, lessee,
occupant or agent of the parking area.
   (c)   The posting of signs upon a parking area pursuant to this section
shall constitute authority by the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the
property for the police department to enforce this section.
   (d)   Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner,
lessee or occupant of the parking area, the agent thereof, or the police
department, and the police department shall enforce this section.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 703, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-109. - Prohibited use of public parks during certain hours.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, occupy, frequent, loiter
or be in any public park in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. unless otherwise posted at the park, unless a special permit for such use
or occupancy has been previously given by the director of recreation of the
city, or unless such person is participating in a scheduled recreation
department activity.
   (b)   The application for such permit shall be made in writing by any
responsible resident of the city, stating his name and address and the group of
persons he represents who will use such special permit and the proposed hours
of such use. The approval for the issuance of such special permit rests in the
sound discretion of the director of recreation.
   (c)   In addition to the police department, the provisions of this section
shall be enforced by the director, deputy director and foreman in the
department of public works of the city and by the director, deputy director,
supervisors and assistant supervisors in the department of parks and recreation
of the city.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 702, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-110. - Breaking and entering coin box.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously and
willfully, by and with the aid and use of any key, instrument, device or
explosive, blow or attempt to blow, or force or attempt to force an entrance
into any coin box, depository box, newspaper coin box, or other receptacle
established and maintained for the convenience of the public, or of any person
or persons not making payment for any articles of merchandise or service, or
for any person to extract or obtain or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom
any such money or thing of value so deposited or contained therein.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 112, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.356b, MSA 28.588(2).
Sec. 14-111. - Breaking and entering outside showcases.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to break and enter, or to
attempt to break and enter, or enter without breaking at any time any outside
showcase or other outside enclosed counter used for the display of goods, wares
or merchandise, with intent to steal, or to commit the crime of larceny
therein.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 110, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-112. - Theft detection shielding devices.
   (a)   Any person who shall knowingly use, or have in his possession, a theft
detection shielding device shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   A person commits unlawful use of a theft detection shielding device
when he knowingly manufactures, sells, offers for sale or distributes any
laminated or coated bag or device peculiar to and marketed for shielding and
intended to shield merchandise from detection by an electronic or magnetic
theft alarm sensor.
   (c)   A person commits unlawful possession of a theft detection shielding
device when he knowingly possesses any laminated or coated bag or device
peculiar to and designed for shielding and intended to shield merchandise from
detection by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor, with the intent to
commit a theft.
   (d)   A person commits unlawful possession of a theft detection device
remover when he knowingly possesses any tool or device designed to allow the
removal of any theft detection device from any merchandise with the intent to
use such tool to remove any theft detection device from any merchandise without
the permission of the merchant or person owning or holding such merchandise.
(Ord. No. 93-583, 12-21-93)
Sec. 14-113. - Unlicensed possession of tobacco products.
   (a)   No individual, partnership, fiduciary, association, corporation, or
other legal entity shall purchase, possess, acquire for resale or sell a
tobacco product as a manufacturer, wholesaler, secondary wholesaler, vending
machine operator, unclassified acquirer, transportation company, or transporter
in the State of Michigan unless licensed by the State of Michigan to do so.
   (b)   Any individual, partnership, fiduciary, association, corporation, or
other legal entity, who is in control or in possession of a tobacco product
contrary to the laws of the State of Michigan, or who offers to sell or does
sell a tobacco product to another for purpose of resale without being licensed
by the State of Michigan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 95-649, 10-17-95)
Sec. 14-114. - Counterfeit telecommunication devices.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
   Counterfeit telecommunications devices means a telecommunications device
alone or with another telecommunications device that has been altered or
programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise facilitate the use of a
telecommunications service without the authority or consent of the
telecommunications service provider. Counterfeit telecommunications device
includes but is not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler
telephone, tumbler microchip, or wireless scanning device capable of acquiring
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of a
telecommunications service without immediate detection.
   Deliver means to actually or constructively sell, give, lend, or otherwise
transfer a telecommunications device, counterfeit telecommunications device,
plans, written instructions, or materials to another person.
   Telecommunications means the origination, emission, transmission, or
reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence of intelligence of any nature over any communications systems by
any method including but not limited to electronic, magnetic, optical, digital,
or analog.
   Telecommunications device means any instrument, equipment, machine, or
device that facilitates telecommunications. Telecommunications device includes
but is not limited to a computer, computer chip or circuit, telephone, cellular
telephone, pager, personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio,
modem, or device that enables use of a modem, cables, converters, decoders,
descramblers, satellite equipment, or other devices and equipment.
   Telecommunications service means providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating any form of telecommunications through the use of telecommunications
devices or telecommunications access devices over a telecommunications system.
   Unauthorized receipt of a telecommunications service means the interception
or receipt by any means of a telecommunications service without the specific
authorization of the telecommunications service provider.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. A person shall not manufacture, possess, deliver,
offer to deliver, or advertise a counterfeit telecommunications device or
manufacture, possess, deliver, offer to deliver, or advertise a
telecommunications device intending to use the telecommunications device or
allow the telecommunications device to be used to do any of the following or
knowing or having reason to know that the telecommunications device is intended
to be used to do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain or attempt to obtain telecommunications service with the
intent to avoid or aid or abet or cause another person to avoid any lawful
charge for telecommunications service.
      (2)   Conceal the existence or place of origin or destination of any
telecommunications service.
   A person shall not deliver, offer to deliver, or advertise written
instructions, or materials for manufacture of a counterfeit telecommunications
device or for manufacture of a telecommunications device that the person
intends to be used or knows or has reason to know will be used or is likely to
be used to violate this section.
   (c)   Presumption. Evidence of one or more of the following facts shall give
rise to rebuttable presumption that the conduct that violates this section was
engaged in knowingly by the defendant with the intent to permit or obtain the
unauthorized receipt of a telecommunications service:
      (1)   The presence on the defendant's property or in the actual
possession of the defendant of one or more counterfeit telecommunications
devices.
      (2)   The defendant installed an unauthorized connection or provided
written instructions on such connection to another. An unauthorized connection
does not include any of thee following:
         (i)   An internal connection made by a person within his or her
residence for the purpose of receiving authorized cable or satellite television
service.
         (ii)   The physical connection of a cable or other device by a person
located within his or her residence which was initially placed there by the
cable or satellite television service provider.
         (iii)   The physical connection of a cable or other device by a person
located within his or her residence which the person had reason to believe was
an authorized connection.
      (3)   The telecommunications service provider placed written warning
labels on its telecommunications devices explaining that tampering with a
telecommunications device is a violation of law and a telecommunications device
in the defendant's possession has been tampered with, altered, or modified to
permit the unauthorized receipt of a telecommunications service.
      (4)   The defendant has published or advertised for sale a plan for a
counterfeit telecommunications device and the publication or advertisement
states or implies that the plan will enable the unauthorized receipt of a
telecommunications service.
      (5)   The defendant has sold, leased, or offered for sale or lease a
counterfeit telecommunications device, plan, or kit for a counterfeit
telecommunications device and during the course of the transaction for sale or
lease, the defendant stated implied to the buyer that the counterfeit
telecommunications device will permit the unauthorized receipt of a
telecommunications service.
   (d)   Penalty. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (e)   Forfeiture. A counterfeit telecommunications device used in violation
of the section is subject to forfeiture and the court may order either of the
following:
      (1)   The counterfeit telecommunications device be destroyed.
      (2)   The counterfeit telecommunications device be returned to the
telecommunications service provider if the device is owned or controlled by the
provider.
(Ord. No. 97-715, 10-21-97)
Sec. 14-115. - Possession of counterfeit bills.
   Any person who shall bring into this city, or shall have in his possession,
any false, altered, forged or counterfeit bill or note in the similitude of the
bills or notes payable to the bearer thereof, or to the order of any person
issued by or for this state, or any of its political subdivisions or
municipalities, or any bank or banking company, established in this state or in
any of the British provinces in North America, or in any other state or
country, with intent to utter or pass the same, or to render the same currency
as true, knowing the same to be false, forged or counterfeit, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 02-892, 4-16-02)
Sec. 14-116. - Green zones; certain activities prohibited.
   (a)   Purpose. Green zones have been established throughout the City of
Dearborn for the purpose of beautifying streets and public places to the
benefit of the public as whole. Green zones can be identified as grassy areas
that may contain trees, shrubs, flowers or other plantings. Green zones are
easily harmed or destroyed when not protected from inappropriate use. All green
zones within the city shall be posted as such.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a prohibited activity
in an area posted as a green zone.
   (c)   Prohibited activities. Prohibited activities in an area posted as a
green zone include, but are not limited to: football, baseball, basketball,
hockey or other recreational activities.
   (d)   Exception. Incidental use of an area posted as a green zone for the
approved purpose of planting, nature study, or other related activities, is not
prohibited.
   (e)   Any individual who violates this section shall be subject to the
following:
      (1)   First offense: the individual is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined $50.00;
      (2)   Second offense: the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined $100.00;
      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses: the individual is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 04-1003, 7-6-04)
Sec. 14-117. - Theft of motor vehicle fuel.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to request and obtain gasoline at
a gasoline station in the city and flee without paying for the gasoline with
the intention of defrauding the owner of the business.
   (b)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   The operator's or chauffeur's license of a person convicted of an
offense or attempted offense under this section shall be suspended by the
secretary of state in accordance with MCL 257.319.
(Ord. No. 08-1157, 4-21-08)
Secs. 14-118—14-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Sec. 14-131. - Breach of peace.
   Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance,
trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good
order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace, and
disorderly conduct. Violation of this section is punishable by imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 121, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 24-1817, 5-21-24)
State Law reference— Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.
Sec. 14-132. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public highways and
streets.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to consume any
alcoholic beverages on a public highway or street, or in a vehicle which is
moving, standing or parked on a public highway or street. A public highway or
street shall include parking lots open to the public generally, such as, but
not limited to, school parking lots.
   (b)   Any person who possesses or has under his control an open container
which is partially filled with any alcoholic beverage on a public highway or
street or in a vehicle which is moving, standing or parked on a public highway
or street shall be presumed to have consumed such beverage in violation of this
section.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 217, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-133. - Jostling.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be found jostling or
roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(l), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)
(l).
Sec. 14-134. - Disorderly intoxication.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a
public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of
property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(e), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL
750.167(1)(e).
Sec. 14-135. - Gatherings and meetings.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully interrupt
or disturb on any day of the week any assembly of people met for the worship of
God within the place of such meeting or out of it, or to make or excite any
disturbance or contention in any tavern, dance hall, beer garden, store or
grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any
street, lane, alley, highway, public building, ground or park or at any
election or other public meeting in the city where any persons are peaceably
and lawfully assembled.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 103, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Disturbance of religious worship, MCL 750.169, 752.525;
disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.
Sec. 14-136. - Loitering.
   (a)   In this section the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
      (1)   Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and
shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to
stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and also includes the colloquial
expression "hanging around."
      (2)   Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has
access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or for lawful purpose,
but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public.
It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or
parks.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter, loaf,
wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public
place in such manner so as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians
after having been told to move on by a police officer.
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move
on by a police officer.
      (3)   Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner,
lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or
premises.
   (c)   No person shall loiter in or about any parking lot or other area set
aside for the parking of vehicles in any park. No person shall park a motor
vehicle in any park for the purpose of displaying or exhibiting same or for the
purpose of offering same for sale or for the purpose of performing mechanical
work or cleaning, washing or polishing same and engage in any display,
exhibition, gathering, demonstration, parade or other gathering within a
parking lot or other area set aside for the parking of vehicles in any park
without a permit or written authorization by the director of recreation.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167.
Sec. 14-137. - Committing riot.
   It is unlawful and constitutes the crime of riot for five or more persons
within the city acting in concert to wrongfully engage in violent conduct and
thereby intentionally or recklessly cause or create a serious risk of causing
public terror or alarm.
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 752.541.
Sec. 14-138. - Incitement to riot.
   It is unlawful and constitutes incitement to riot for a person within the
city intending to cause or to aid or abet the institution or maintenance of a
riot to do an act or engage in conduct that urges other persons to commit acts
of unlawful force or violence, the unlawful burning or destroying of property
or the unlawful interference with a police officer, peace officer, firefighter
or a member of the state national guard or any unit of the armed services
officially assigned to riot duty in the lawful performance of his duty.
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 752.542, MSA 28.790(2).
Sec. 14-139. - Unlawful assembly.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an unlawful assembly for a person within the
city to assemble or act in concert with four or more persons for the purpose of
engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot, to be present at an
assembly that either has or develops such a purpose and to remain there with
intent to advance such purpose.
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 752.543, MSA 28.790(3).
Sec. 14-140. - Disorderly conduct on or near school property.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
   Loitering includes the definition in section
14-136 of this Code, and also includes sitting in a parked or standing vehicle,
or in a moving vehicle repeatedly driven over the same street within 100 feet
of school property.
   School property means any building owned or used by any public, private or
parochial school, all fixtures and appurtenances attached to the property, and
all personal property found in and around the property; school property also
includes the entire campus of the school, including, but not limited to, the
grounds, sidewalks, parking areas, and recreational areas.
   Student means all current students, all former students who have attended
within the past 48 months, all suspended students, and all expelled students.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. 
      (1)   Destruction of property. It shall be unlawful for any person to
damage, destroy or deface any school property.
      (2)   Disturbing the peace. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously make, or assist in making, any noise, disturbance, or
improper diversion, by which the peace, quiet, or good order of any public,
private or parochial school is disturbed.
      (3)   Profane or indecent language, conduct. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use profane, indecent, or immoral language, or engage in indecent or
immoral conduct on school property.
      (4)   Loitering on school property. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is not a regularly enrolled student, parent of a student, teacher, school
employee, or other person engaged in legitimate school-related business, to
enter any school building without the permission of the school administration.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, students,
parents, and those engaged in legitimate school business, to remain on school
property after being advised to leave the property by a principal, assistant
principal, teacher or law enforcement officer. A person so advised to leave the
school property shall not re-enter the property without the express permission
of the principal, assistant principal, teacher or law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Loitering on school property by suspended or expelled students. It
shall be unlawful for any student who has been suspended or expelled from any
public, private or parochial school to enter into any building or onto the
grounds of any school without the express permission of the principal or
assistant principal of the school. Suspended or expelled students are
prohibited from entering into or onto any school property for any reason, or at
any time, including, but not limited to, sporting events, extra-curricular
activities, or meeting students in school parking lots or other areas. The
prohibition applies to all schools, not just the school from which the student
was suspended or expelled.
      (6)   Loitering or congregating near school grounds. It shall be unlawful
for any student to loiter or congregate on public or private property within
100 feet of school property. If a student has legitimate business on private
property within 100 feet of school property, the student shall provide advance
notice to the school administration (or, if a member of the school
administration is not available, the police department) of the student's intent
to visit the private property. This section shall not apply to students
visiting a commercial business open to the general public, unless the owner or
operator of the business has posted a sign stating that students shall not
congregate on that property.
      (7)   Penalty. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 99-767, 5-12-99)
Secs. 14-141—14-155. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-156. - Prohibited methods of obtaining, possessing or dispensing
prescription drugs.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or attempt to obtain any
prescription, poisonous or deleterious drug by giving a false or fictitious
name to any pharmacist, or other authorized seller or dispenser thereof.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or transact business
as a manufacturer or wholesale distributor or establish or conduct a pharmacy
or practice pharmacy without a license or certificate from the state board of
pharmacy.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be
a lawful prescriber or licensee of the state board of pharmacy, or acting on
behalf of such, in order to obtain any prescription, poisonous or deleterious
drug.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely make, utter, publish,
pass or to alter or forge any prescription.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly have in his
possession, any false, fictitious, forged or altered prescription.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly attempt to obtain,
obtain or have in his possession any drug as a result of a false, fictitious,
forged or altered prescription.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or control for the
purpose of resale or to sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any drug,
pharmaceutical preparation or chemical which has been dispensed upon
prescription and has left the control of a pharmacist; or has been damaged or
subjected to damage by heat, smoke, fire or water or other causes and which is
unfit for human or animal use.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 706, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-157. - Controlled substances.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, as used in this section, shall have
the following meanings, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   Act shall mean the Michigan Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et
seq.).
      (2)   Controlled substance shall mean any substance other than marijuana,
the sale, possession or use of which is made unlawful by the Act.
      (3)   Deliver or delivery shall mean the actual, constructive or
attempted transfer from one person to another of a controlled substance,
whether or not there is an agency relationship.
      (4)   Manufacture shall mean the production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of a controlled substance, either
directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of the
substance or labeling or relabeling of its container.
      (5)   Sale shall include barter, exchange or gift, or offer therefor, and
each such transaction made by any person, principal, proprietor, agent, servant
or employee.
   (b)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Manufacture, deliver or possess with intent to manufacture or
deliver, sell, possess, or use any controlled substance except by such person
and/or under such conditions that would be lawful under the Act; provided,
however, that the burden shall be on such person to prove the lawfulness of his
actions under the Act.
      (2)   Manufacture, deliver or possess with intent to deliver, sell,
possess, use, or have under his control any empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic
syringe or needle, roach clip, hash pipe or any other paraphernalia adapted for
use with a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or
by any other method.
      (3)   Use, possess or have under his control any blank prescription pads
or any false, forged or altered prescriptions, the purpose of which is to
unlawfully obtain a controlled substance or paraphernalia adapted for use with
a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or by any
other method.
      (4)   Use any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge, false name or
false address, or to conceal a material fact for the purpose of obtaining any
controlled substance or paraphernalia adapted for use with a controlled
substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or by any other method.
      (5)   Use any fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit, misrepresentation or
subterfuge for the purpose of obtaining money or any other thing of value by
selling, furnishing, supplying or giving away of any controlled substance or
counterfeit controlled substance.
      (6)   Willfully and knowingly loiter in any place within the city where
controlled substances or paraphernalia used or adapted for use with controlled
substances by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection, or any other method,
are used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or otherwise illegally
kept.
   (c)   Arrest without warrant, powers of certain inspection or investigatory
agents. Any police officer or any sheriff, deputy sheriff, local or state
police officer, if he has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this
section or the Act has taken place, or is taking place, and has reasonable
cause to believe that a person has committed or is committing such violation,
may arrest that person without a warrant for that violation, irrespective of
whether the violation was committed in his presence.
   (d)   Penalty for violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this
section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of
the court.
   (e)   Instruction, rehabilitation programs. If a person is convicted of a
violation of this section, the court, as part of his sentence, during either
the period of his confinement or the period of his probation, or both, may
require him to attend a course of instruction or rehabilitation program
approved by the department of mental health on the medical, psychological, and
social effects of the misuse of drugs. The court may order him to pay a fee, as
approved by the director of mental health, for the instruction or the program.
Failure to complete the instruction or program shall be considered a violation
of the terms of his probation.
(Ord. No. 72-1757, § 6, 7-5-72; Ord. No. 79-1920, § 1, 2-20-79; Ord. No. 80-
1970, 1-2-80; Ord. No. 95-635, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 00-841, 1-16-01)
Sec. 14-158. - Marijuana.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, as used in this Section, shall have
the following meanings, unless the con text otherwise requires:
   Cultivate shall mean to propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure, or
separate parts of the marijuana plant by manual or mechanical means.
   Deliver or delivery shall mean the actual, constructive or attempted
transfer from one person to another of marijuana, whether or not there is an
agency relationship.
   Marijuana shall mean the substance or material identified and defined as
"Marihuana" in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL
333.27951, et seq. It means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis,
growing or not; the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin, including marijuana concentrate
and marijuana-infused products. For purposes of this act, marijuana does not
include:
      (1)   The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the
resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed
of the plant that is incapable of germination;
      (2)   Industrial hemp; or
      (3)   Any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or
oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
   Marijuana accessories shall mean any equipment, product, material, or
combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
   Marijuana concentrate shall mean the resin extracted from any part of the
plant of the genus cannabis.
   Person shall mean an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership of any type, trust, or other legal entity.
   Process or Processing shall mean to separate or otherwise prepare parts of
the marijuana plant and to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare marijuana concentrate or marijuana-infused products.
   Remuneration shall mean payment, compensation, and the act of paying or
compensating.
   Sale shall include barter, exchange, or otherwise offer for remuneration.
   (b)   Lawful acts. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c) and (d),
the following acts by a person 21 years of age or older are not unlawful:
      (1)   Except as permitted in subsection (b)(2), possessing, using or
consuming, internally possessing, purchasing, transporting, or processing 2.5
ounces or less of marijuana, except that not more than 15 grams of marijuana
may be in the form of marijuana concentrate.
      (2)   Within the person's residence, possessing, storing, and processing
not more than ten ounces of marijuana and any marijuana produced by marijuana
plants cultivated on the premises and cultivating not more than 12 marijuana
plants for personal use, provided that no more than 12 marijuana plants are
possessed, cultivated, or processed on the premises at once.
      (3)   Assisting another person who is 21 years of age or older in any of
the acts described in this section.
      (4)   Giving away or otherwise transferring without remuneration up to
2.5 ounces of marijuana, except that not more than 15 grams of marijuana may be
in the form of marijuana concentrate, to a person 21 years of age or older, as
long as the transfer is not advertised or promoted to the public.
      (5)   Possession of more than the amount of marijuana allowed under this
section and the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL
333.27951, et seq. is prohibited as indicated in subsections (c) and (d) below.
   (c)   Unlawful acts and penalties. Unless otherwise authorized by the State
of Michigan or City of Dearborn to conduct such activities, it shall be
unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate, navigate, or be in physical control of any motor vehicle,
aircraft, snowmobile, off-road recreational vehicle, or motorboat while under
the influence marijuana (See Dearborn Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article
II, Division 6). A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a
misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in jail, a fine not to exceed $500, or
both;
      (2)   Transfer of marijuana or marijuana accessories to a person under
the age of 21;
         a.   A person 21 years or older who violates this subsection is
responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in jail, a fine not
to exceed $500, or both.
         b.   A person under 21 years of age who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration, or
possesses with
         the intent to deliver, no more than the amount of marijuana allowed,
is responsible as follows:
            i.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
or community service, forfeiture of the marijuana, and completion of 4 hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
            ii.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
or community service, forfeiture of marijuana, and completion of 8 hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
         c.   A person under 21 years of age who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration, or
possesses with the intent to deliver, more than the amount of marijuana
allowed, is responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in jail,
a fine not to exceed $500, or both.
      (3)   Be under the age of 21 and possess, consume, purchase, or otherwise
obtain, cultivate, process, transport, or sell marijuana and/or marijuana
accessories;
         a.   A person who violates this subsection and possesses, cultivates,
delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person 21 years of age or
older, or possesses with the intent to deliver, no more than the amount of
marijuana allowed, is responsible as follows:
            i.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
or community service, forfeiture of the marijuana, and completion of 4 hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
            ii.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
or community service, forfeiture of marijuana, and completion of eight hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
         b.   A person, regardless of age, who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration, or
possesses with the intent to deliver, more than the amount of marijuana
allowed, is responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in jail,
a fine not to exceed $500, or both.
      (4)   Separate or attempt to separate plant resin by butane extraction or
another method that utilizes a substance with a flashpoint below 100 degrees
Fahrenheit in any public place, motor vehicle, or within the curtilage of any
residential structure. A person, regardless of age, who violates this
subsection is responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in
jail, a fine not to exceed $500, or both;
      (5)   Consume marijuana in a public or smoke marijuana where prohibited
by the person who owns, occupies, or manages the property, except for purposes
of this subsection, (c)(5), a public place does not include an area the city
has designated as an authorized area of consumption that is not accessible to
persons under the age of 21;
         a.   A person 21 years of age or older who violates this subsection
and possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a
person 21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver no
more than the amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible for a civil
infraction punishable by a fine of $100 and forfeiture of the marijuana.
         b.   A person, regardless of age, who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person
21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver more than the
amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up
to 93 days in jail, a fine not to exceed $500, or both.
         c.   A person under 21 years of age who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person
21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver no more than
the amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible as follows:
            i.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
or community service, forfeiture of the marijuana, and completion of four hours
of drug education or counseling.
            2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100 and
forfeiture of the marijuana.
            ii.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
or community service, forfeiture of marijuana, and completion of eight hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
      (6)   Cultivate marijuana plants if the plants are visible from a public
place without the use of binoculars, aircraft, or other optical aids or outside
of an enclosed area equipped with locks or other functioning security devices
that restrict access to the area.
         a.   A person 21 years of age or older who violates this subsection
while possessing and/or cultivating no more than 12 marijuana plants, is
responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a fine of $100 and forfeiture
of the marijuana.
         b.   A person, regardless of age, who violates this subsection while
possessing and/or cultivating more than 12 marijuana plants, is responsible for
a misdemeanor punishable by no more than 93 days in jail, a fine not to exceed
$100, or both.
         c.   A person under 21 years of age who violates this subsection while
possessing and/or cultivating no more than 12 marijuana plants, is responsible
as follows:
            i.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
or community service, forfeiture of the marijuana, and completion of four hours
of drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
            ii.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
or community service, forfeiture of marijuana, and completion of eight hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
      (7)   Consume marijuana while operating, navigating, or being in physical
control of any motor vehicle, aircraft, snowmobile, off-road recreational
vehicle, or motorboat, or smoke marijuana within the passenger area of a
vehicle upon a public way;
         a.   A person, regardless of age, who violates this subsection is
responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days in jail, a fine not
to exceed $100, or both.
      (8)   Possess marijuana accessories or possess or consume marijuana on
the grounds of a public or private school where children attend classes in
preschool programs, kindergarten programs, or grades 1 through 12, in a school
bus, or on the grounds of any correctional facility.
         a.   A person 21 years of age or older who violates this subsection is
responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up to 93 days in jail, a fine not
to exceed $500, or both.
         b.   A person under 21 years of age who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person
21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver no more than
the amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible as follows:
            i.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
or community service, forfeiture of the marijuana, and completion of four hours
of drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
            ii.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
or community service, forfeiture of marijuana, and completion of eight hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
         c.   A person under 21 years of age that violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person
21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver more than the
amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by up
to 93 days in jail, a fine not to exceed $500, or both.
      (9)   Possess more than 2.5 ounces of marijuana within a person's place
of residence unless the excess marijuana is stored in a container or area
equipped with locks or other functioning security devices that restrict access
to the contents of the container or area.
         a.   A person 21 years of age or older who violates this subsection
and possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a
person 21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver no
more than the amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible for a civil
infraction punishable by a fine of $100 and forfeiture of the marijuana.
         b.   A person, regardless of age, who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person
21 years age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver more than the
amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by no
more than 93 days in jail, a fine not to exceed $500, or both.
         c.   A person under 21 years of age who violates this subsection and
possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person
21 years of age or older, or possesses with the intent to deliver no more than
the amount of marijuana allowed, is responsible as follows:
            i.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
or community service, forfeiture of the marijuana, and completion of four hours
of drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $100
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
            ii.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
punishable as follows:
               1.   If less than 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
or community service, forfeiture of marijuana, and completion of eight hours of
drug education or counseling.
               2.   If at least 18 years of age, punishable by a fine of $500
and forfeiture of the marijuana.
      (d)   Additional penalties. Except as otherwise indicated in subsection
(c) above, a person who commits any of the following acts, and is not otherwise
authorized by the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCI
333.27951 et. seq., or the City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances, may be punished
as follows:
         (1)   Possession of not more than 5 ounces of marijuana, not more than
30 grams of marijuana concentrate, or not more than 24 marijuana plants. A
person who possesses not more than twice the amount of marijuana allowed,
cultivates not more than twice the amount of marijuana allowed, delivers
without receiving remuneration to a person who is at least 21 years of age not
more than twice the amount of marijuana allowed, or possesses with intent to
deliver not more than twice the amount of marijuana allowed, is punishable as
follows:
            a.   For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
and may be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and forfeiture of the
marijuana;
            b.   For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction
and may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 and forfeiture of the
marijuana;
            c.   For a third or subsequent violation, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000 and
forfeiture of the marijuana.
         (2)   Possession of more than 5 ounces of marijuana, more than 30
grams of marijuana concentrate, or more than 24 marijuana plants.  Except as
otherwise indicated in subsection (c) above, a person who possesses more than
twice the amount of marijuana allowed, cultivates more than twice the amount
allowed, or delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person who is at
least 21 years of age more than twice the amount of marijuana allowed, is
punishable as follows:
            a.   A violation is punishable as a misdemeanor, with a fine not to
exceed $500; and
            b.   A person shall also be subject to imprisonment for up to 90
days in the discretion of the court if the violation was habitual, willful, and
for a commercial purpose, or if the violation involved violence.
      (e)   Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951
et. seq., and all future amendments, revisions, and or changes to the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act when they are effective in this state
are incorporated and adopted by reference.
(Ord. No. 72-1756, § 5, 7-5-72; Ord. No. 77-1862, 5-17-77; Ord. No. 19-1637, 1-
29-19; Ord. No. 20-1677, 8-25-20)
Sec. 14-159. - Indecent or obscene conduct.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any
indecent or obscene conduct in any public place.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(f), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f),
MSA 28.364(1)(f).
Sec. 14-160. - Criminal sexual conduct.
   (a)   A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct if he or she engages in
sexual contact with another person and if any of the following circumstances
exists:
      (1)   Force or coercion is used to accomplish the sexual contact.
      (2)   The actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally
incapable, mentally incapacitated, or physically helpless.
   (b)   Criminal sexual conduct is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both.
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 750.520e, MSA 28.788(5).
Sec. 14-161. - Urinating or defecating in public.
   No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place or in any other place
in view of the public not specifically designated for that purpose or under
circumstances in which his or her conduct is likely to be viewed by others,
whether or not the urination or defecation actually occur.
(Ord. No. 06-1065, 4-3-06)
Secs. 14-162—14-175. - Reserved.
   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 19-1638, adopted Jan. 29, 2019, repealed Div. 1A, §§
14- 651—14-175.2 in its entirety. Div. 1A pertained to medical marijuana
cultivation, use and distribution, and derived from Ord. No. 11-1316, adopted
March 7, 2011, Ord. No. 13-1388, adopted March 19, 2013, and Ord. No. 13-1395,
adopted April 30, 2013.
DIVISION 2. - PROSTITUTION
Sec. 14-176. - Prostitution generally.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer
or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to secure or offer
another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or
moral perversion.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in or near
any place frequented by the public or any public place for the purpose of
inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of
prostitution or moral perversion.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly
transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or
an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly
receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building
for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral
perversion, or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or
building for any such purpose.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to direct or offer
to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any
lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 101(b)(i), 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq., MSA 28.703 et seq.
Sec. 14-177. - Houses of ill fame—Keeping, maintaining.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain a
house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or
lewdness.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 207, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.452, MSA 28.707.
Sec. 14-178. - Same—Patronizing.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to patronize,
frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation
or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to accept the solicitation of or
solicit a prostitute for the practice of fornication, prostitution or lewdness.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 208, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Admitting to place for purpose of prostitution, MCL
750.449, MSA 28.704; engaging or offering to engage services of female, MCL
750.449a, MSA 28.704(1).
Sec. 14-179. - Same—Leasing premises.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to lease to another any
house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any of the uses or
purposes set forth in sections
14-177 and
14-178, or to knowingly permit house, room or other premises to be used or
occupied for such purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 209, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.454, MSA 28.709.
Sec. 14-180. - Soliciting and accosting.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, male or female, 17
years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place
or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to
commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall
not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties
as an enforcement officer.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 211, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.448, MSA 28.703.
Secs. 14-181—14-195. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - GAMBLING
Sec. 14-196. - Gambling place and equipment.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, within the
city, to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building
or room, or any part thereof, or any place with apparatus, books, or any device
for registering bets; buying or selling pools upon the result of a game,
competition, political competition, appointment, or election, or any purported
event of like character; to register bets, buy or sell pools, to be concerned
in buying or selling pools; or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises
owned, occupied, or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes
aforesaid.
(Ord. No. 81-29, §§ 403, 405, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.304, MSA 28.536.
Sec. 14-197. - Gambling and frequenting prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deal in, play or engage in gaming
such as faro, roulette, dice, cards, or other device or game of chance, hazard
or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise for the
purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing, or to knowingly attend
or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is
taking place.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 401, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-198. - Cappers, steerers, loiterers.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or occupation of a
roper, steerer, doorman, or capper (so-called) for any gambling room, gaming
house, or place where gaming is carried on, or for any gambling, game of
chance, trick or device, or for any place where gambling or games of chance may
be permitted or allowed or are being carried on. It shall be unlawful for
persons to knowingly frequent, attend, or be found present in any of such
places.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 402, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq., MSA 28.533 et seq.
Sec. 14-199. - Keeping gaming room for hire, gain or reward.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain for
hire, gain or reward, a gaming room or gambling table or any game of skill or
chance, or partly of skill and partly of chance, used for gaming; to knowingly
suffer a gaming room or gaming table, or any such game to be kept, maintained
or played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by him; or for
any person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such
gaming room, gaming table or game within the city.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 404, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.303, MSA 28.535.
Sec. 14-200. - Policy or pool tickets and confiscation of articles of gaming.
   It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to be in possession of
any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda, or any combination
thereof, bet slips, numbers slip or slips, or of any article associated and/or
connected with commercial gambling. Any and all such articles may be
confiscated and destroyed by the police department, or used in evidence in any
prosecution for violation of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 406, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.306, MSA 28.538.
Secs. 14-201—14-215. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CHEMICAL AGENTS
Sec. 14-216. - Definitions.
   As used in this division, "chemical agent" means any substance containing a
toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing
toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, nitrous oxide, glue,
acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon
derivatives.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 126, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 00-840, 1-16-01)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 14-217. - Unlawful acts.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Possess or use any whip cream dispenser (Whippet can), seltzer
bottle, dispensing tank, dispensing cartridge, nitrous oxide cartridge or other
chemical agent as an inhalant or to use in conjunction with an inhalant.
      (2)   Sell any whip cream dispenser (Whippet can), seltzer bottle,
dispensing tank, dispensing cartridge, nitrous oxide cartridge or other
chemical agent to any person under the age of 18 years.
      (3)   Intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical agent or
intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any chemical agent into his
respiratory or circulatory system, for the purpose of causing the condition of
intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of
the senses or nervous system. This shall not prohibit the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
      (4)   This division shall not apply to nitrous oxide that has been
denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for human consumption or to any of the
following:
         a.   A person licensed under the food processing act of 1977, MCL
289.801 to 289.810, or chapter VII of the food law of 2000, MCL 289,7101 to
289.7137, who sells or otherwise distributes the device as a grocery product.
         b.   A person engaged in the business of selling or distributing
catering supplies only or food processing equipment only, or selling or
distributing compressed gases for industrial or medical use who sells or
otherwise distributes the device in the course of that business.
         c.   A pharmacist, pharmacist intern, or pharmacy as defined in
section 17707 of the public health code, MCL 333.17707, who dispenses the
device in the course of his or her duties as a pharmacist or pharmacist intern
or as a pharmacy.
         d.   A health care professional.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 126, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 00-840, 1-16-01)
Sec. 14-218. - Penalty.
   Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 126, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 00-840, 1-16-01)
Sec. 14-219. - Aiding and abetting, penalty.
   Any person who assists, aids, abets or encourages any person to violate the
provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 00-840, 1-16-01)
Secs. 14-220—14-235. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - PORNOGRAPHY
Sec. 14-236. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Audience shall mean one or more persons who are permitted to view a
performance for valuable consideration or in or from a public place.
   Display publicly shall mean the exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or
in any other fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private,
material or a performance in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its
content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a
public place or vehicle.
   Disseminate shall mean to manufacture, issue, publish, sell, lend,
distribute, transmit, broadcast, exhibit or present material or to offer or
agree to do the same, or to have in one's possession with intent to do the
same.
   Material shall mean any printed matter, visual representation or sound
recording, and includes but is not limited to books, magazines, motion picture
films, pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings, three-
dimensional forms, sculptures and phonograph, tape or wire recordings.
   Minor shall mean any person under 18 years of age.
   Nudity shall mean uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, human genitals
or pubic area, the human female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
For the purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if
the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered.
   Pander shall mean advertising or propagandizing in connection with the sale
of material, the offering of a service, or the presentation or exhibition of a
performance by appealing to the prurient interest of potential customers.
   Performance shall mean any live or reproduced exhibition, including, but not
limited to any play, motion picture film, dance or appearance presented to or
performed before an audience.
   Pornographic shall mean relating to pornography.
   Pornography shall mean any material or performance if all of the following
elements are present:
      (1)   Considered as a whole, by the average person, applying the
contemporary community standards of the city, it appeals to the prurient
interest.
      (2)   It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct.
      (3)   It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
   Pornography for minors shall mean any material or performance if all of the
following elements are present:
      (1)   Considered as a whole, by the average person, applying the
contemporary community standards of the city, with respect to what is suitable
for minors, it is presented in such a manner as to appeal to a minor's prurient
interest.
      (2)   It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive way,
nudity or sexual conduct as hereinafter defined.
      (3)   It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value
for minors.
   Prurient interest shall mean desire or craving for sexual stimulation or
gratification. In determining "prurient interest," the material or performance
shall be judged with reference to average persons, unless it appears from the
character of the material or performance that it is designed to appeal to the
prurient interest of a particular group of persons, including, but not limited
to, homosexuals, or sadomasochists. In that case, it shall be judged with
reference to the particular group for which it was designed.
   Public nudity shall mean knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public
place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not
limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's
genitals or anus with less than fully opaque covering.
   Public place or vehicle shall mean any of the streets, alleys, parks,
boulevards, schools or other public property in the city, or any dance hall,
rental hall, theater, amusement park, building, liquor establishments, store,
depot, place of public accommodation, or other private property generally
frequented by the public for the purposes of education, recreation, amusement,
entertainment, sport, shopping or travel; or any vehicle for public
transportation, owned or operated by government, either directly or through a
public corporation or authority, or owned or operated by any nongovernmental
agency for the use, enjoyment or transportation of the general public.
   Sadomasochistic abuse shall mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a sexually revealing or bizarre
costume, or the condition of such person being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained, in an apparent act of sexual stimulation or
gratification.
   Sexual conduct shall mean:
      (1)   Masturbation.
      (2)   Sexual intercourse, whether genital-genital, oral-genital, oral-
anal or anal-genital.
      (3)   Any erotic fondling or touching of the covered or uncovered
genitals, buttocks, pubic area, or any part thereof, the breasts of the female,
whether the conduct described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition
is engaged in alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between
humans and animals or humans and inanimate objects.
      (4)   Actual or simulated displays or exhibition of the human pubic area
or genitals or any part thereof.
      (5)   Sexual excitement.
      (6)   Sadomasochistic abuse.
   Sexual excitement shall mean the facial expressions, movements, utterances
or other responses of a human male or female, whether alone or with others,
whether clothed or not, who is in an apparent state of reactions of humans
engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 203, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-237. - Promoting pornography.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography. A person
commits the offense of promoting pornography, if knowing its contents and
character, he:
      (1)   Disseminates or causes to be disseminated any pornographic material
in or from a public place or vehicle, or for valuable consideration; has in his
possession any pornographic material with intent to so disseminate; or
knowingly allows the use of any business, building, vehicle or place owned,
leased, conducted or managed by him, for such dissemination of pornographic
material;
      (2)   Sells an admission ticket or pass to premises where there is being
exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or a performance which is
pornographic;
      (3)   Admits, by accepting a ticket or pass, a person to premises where
there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or a performance
which is pornographic;
      (4)   Produces, presents, directs, or knowingly allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle, or place, owned, leased, conducted or managed by
him for a pornographic performance before an audience;
      (5)   Participates in that portion of a live performance before an
audience which makes it pornographic; or
      (6)   Panders, displays publicly, or disseminates door to door, any
pornographic material or performance, or causes such pandering, public display,
or door to door dissemination.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, possession of two or more identical
copies of any pornographic material by any person engaged in the business of
disseminating material shall be prima facie evidence of possession with intent
to disseminate for valuable consideration.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 204, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-238. - Promoting pornography for minors.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography for minors.
A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors, if, knowing
its contents and character, he:
      (1)   Disseminates or causes to be disseminated to a minor, material
which is pornography for minors, or knowingly allows the use of any business,
building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by him for the
dissemination to a minor of material which is pornography for minors;
      (2)   Exhibits to a minor, a motion picture film or other performance
which is pornography for minors;
      (3)   Sells to a minor an admission ticket or pass to any building,
vehicle, or place where there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited a
motion picture film or other performance which is pornography for minors;
      (4)   Admits a minor to any building, vehicle or place where there is
being exhibited or is about to be exhibited a motion picture film or other
performance or material which is pornography for minors;
      (5)   Produces, presents, directs or knowingly allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by him
for the presentation of a performance which is pornography for minors, before
an audience which includes a minor; or
      (6)   Displays publicly, or disseminates door to door, any material or
performance which is pornography for minors, or causes such public display or
door to door dissemination.
   (b)   Subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section do not apply to a
parent, guardian or other person in loco parentis to the minor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 205, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-239. - Affirmative defense.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this division if
the pornographic material was disseminated by a person who was acting in his
capacity as:
      (1)   A teacher of an accredited course of study related to pornography
at a state approved educational institution;
      (2)   A licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the treatment of
a patient;
      (3)   A participant in the criminal justice system, such as a legislator,
judge, prosecutor, law enforcement official or other similar or related
position; or
      (4)   A supplier to any person described in subsections (1) through (3)
above.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 206, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-240. - Public nudity prohibited.
   Public nudity, as defined by this article, shall be prohibited within the
boundaries of the city.
Secs. 14-241—14-244. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA AND DANGEROUS PRODUCTS
Sec. 14-245. - Intent.
   (a)   The city finds that synthetic marijuana, consisting of plant or other
material treated with chemicals or other substances that have not been approved
for human consumption, is being marketed and sold as herbal incense and is
being used in the same manner and for the same purposes as marijuana, with that
use having become increasingly popular, particularly among teens and young
adults. Furthermore, those selling and/or marketing synthetic marijuana know or
reasonably should know that synthetic marijuana is not being used as herbal
incense but is being used to cause intoxication and/or hallucination among
those consuming it.
   (b)   The city further finds based on information and reports from poison
control centers, hospitals, emergency room doctors, and police agencies, that
individuals who use synthetic marijuana experience dangerous side effects
including convulsions, tremors, seizures, hallucinations, unconsciousness,
anxiety attacks, dangerously elevated heart rates, increased blood pressure,
vomiting, and disorientation, evidencing that these herbal incense products are
harmful if consumed and present an imminent and significant public health
danger to persons consuming such products and other persons coming into contact
with them.
   (c)   The city further finds that, notwithstanding the high potential for
abuse, and lack of any accepted medical use, the ability of the state to
prohibit all forms of synthetic marijuana as a controlled substance has been
frustrated due to the changing nature of the chemicals used in the
manufacturing process.
   (d)   The city further finds that in addition to synthetic marijuana, there
may be other products or materials containing chemicals or substances that,
while not approved for human consumption, are or may be marketed and sold in a
form that allows for such consumption and which, upon consumption, may result
in the same serious side effects and public health dangers as synthetic
marijuana.
   (e)   Based on these findings, this division is adopted for the purpose and
with the intent to protect the public health and safety of the city and its
residents from the threat posed by the availability and use of synthetic
marijuana and other dangerous products by prohibiting persons from trafficking
in, possessing, and using them in the city.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
Sec. 14-246. - Definitions and adoption by reference.
   As used in this division, the following words and phrases have the meanings
indicated.
   Act means the controlled substance provisions in Article 7 of the Public
Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7101—MCL 333.7545, as amended
which is hereby adopted by reference as part of this division.
   Chemical agent means any chemical or organic compound substance, or agent
that is not made, intended and approved for consumption by humans.
   Consumable product or material means a product or material, that regardless
of packaging disclaimers or disclosures that it is not for human consumption or
use, is in a form that readily allows for human consumption by inhalation,
ingestion, injection, or application, through means including but not limited
to smoking, or ingestion by mouth with or without mixing with food or drink.
   Controlled substance means a substance included as a controlled substance in
schedules 1 through 5 of the Act or a substance temporarily scheduled or
rescheduled as a controlled substance as provided in the Act.
   Controlled substance analogue has the same meaning as defined in the Act,
which is a substance, the chemical structure of which is substantially similar
to that of a controlled substance in schedules 1 and 2 of the Act.
   Dangerous product means a consumable product or material containing a
dangerous substance.
   Dangerous substance means: (i) a chemical agent that under section 2451 of
the Act, MCL 333.2451, has been determined by the state or county health
officer to be or present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans
when present in a consumable product or material; and (ii) a chemical agent in
a consumable product or material unless that chemical agent is conspicuously
identified and described in writing on the packaging of the product, and has
not been previously determined by the city or other governmental authority to
be or present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when present
in that type of consumable product or material.
   Synthetic cannabinoid means a chemical compound, substance or agent
identified in the synthetic cannabinoid appendix* that is part of this
division, as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council.
   Synthetic marijuana means a consumable product or material that contains a
synthetic cannabinoid or other dangerous substance, which on the date this
division was added to the Code, included herb and herbal products marketed and
most commonly known as K-2 and Spice.
   Traffic and trafficking means to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell,
transfer, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, or
transfer.
   Transfer means to dispose of a controlled substance to another person
without consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
Editor's note— The synthetic cannabinoid appendix was not included in the
codification of this division.
Sec. 14-247. - Trafficking prohibitions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to traffic, or knowingly allow
trafficking on property owned or controlled by that person, in any of the
following:
      (1)   A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance
or controlled substance analogue.
      (2)   A dangerous product.
      (3)   Synthetic marijuana.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
Sec. 14-248. - Possession and use prohibitions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use, or knowingly
allow the possession and use on property owned or controlled by that person, in
any of the following:
      (1)   A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance
or controlled substance analogue.
      (2)   A dangerous product.
      (3)   Synthetic marijuana.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
Sec. 14-249. - Probable cause evidentiary presumption.
   In recognition that the presence of a controlled substance, controlled
substance analogue, synthetic cannabinoid, or dangerous substance in a
consumable product or material may require laboratory testing that cannot be
done at the time a violation of this division is believed to have occurred, for
purposes of determining the existence of probable cause, it shall be presumed
that a consumable product or material contains one or more of those substances
if it is being or has been marketed or sold for a price that is substantially
higher than the price at which the same quantity of a similar and comparable
product or material that is known to not contain such substances can be
purchased.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
Sec. 14-250. - Penalties.
   A violation of this division is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
Sec. 14-251. - Severability.
   Should any section, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this division
be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity
of the division as a whole or any part thereof other than the part invalidated.
(Ord. No. 12-1360, 6-19-12)
_____
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID APPENDIX 
   Synthetic Cannabinoids include all of the following chemical compounds,
substances and agents. "AM Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds,
substances or agents created by Alexandros Makriyannis or his research group
and identified as AM-087; AM-251; AM-281; AM-356; AM-374; AM-381; AM-404; AM-
411; AM-630; AM-661; AM-678; AM-679; AM-694; AM-855; AM-881; AM-883; AM-905;
AM-906; AM-919; AM-926; AM-938; AM-1116; AM-1172; AM-1220; AM-1221; AM-1235;
AM-1241; AM-1248; AM-2201; AM-2212; AM-2213; AM-2232; AM-2233; AM-2102; AM-
4030; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially
similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that
require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
"CP Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents
identified as CP-47, 497; (C6)-CP-47, 497; (C7)-CP-47, 497; (C8)-CP-47, 497;
(C9)-CP-47, 497; CP-50, 556-1; CP-55, 244; CP-55, 940; CP-945, 598; and other
substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those
listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a
prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
"HU Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents
synthesized at the Hebrew University and identified as HU-210; HU-211; HU-243;
HU-308; HU-320; HU-331; HU-336; HU-345; and other substances with a structure
and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not
include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with
state and federal law.
"JWH Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents
created by John W. Huffman or his research group and identified as JWH-007;
JWH-015; JWH-018; JWH-019; JWH-030; JWH-047; JWH-048; JWH-051; JWH-057; JWH-
073; JWH-081; JWH-098; JWH-116; JWH-120; JWH-122; JWH-133; JWH-139; JWH-147;
JWH-148; JWH-149; JWH-161; JWH-164; JWH-166; JWH-167; JWH-171; JWH-175; JWH-
176; JWH-181; JWH-182; JWH-184; JWH-185; JWH-192; JWH-193; JWH-194; JWH-195;
JWH-196; JWH-197; JWH-198; JWH-199; JWH-200; JWH-203; JWH-205; JWH-210; JWH-
213; JWH-229; JWH-234; JWH-249; JWH 250; JWH-251; JWH-253; JWH-258; JWH-300;
JWH-302; JWH-307; JWH-336; JWH-350; JWH-359; JWH-387; JWH-398; JWH-424; and
other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to
those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a
prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
_____
Secs. 14-252—14-255. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-256. - Airtight containers.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, either inside
or outside of any building, structure or dwelling in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any
other container of any kind which has an airtight, snap latch or other locking
device thereon, without first removing the snap latch or other locking device,
or the doors from such icebox, refrigerator or other container.
(Ord. No. 81-85, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-257. - Imitation guns—Possession.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess, whether concealed
or displayed, in a motor vehicle in an area of the vehicle accessible to the
occupants thereof an imitation, replica, facsimile or toy version of any
firearm with intent to brandish, use, aim or point such imitation firearm to
frighten, panic, threaten, harass or annoy any other person. Carrying or
concealment of any such firearm under or near the driver's seat, glove box or
dashboard shall be a prima facie rebuttable inference of such intent.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 613, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 88-411, 4-5-88)
Sec. 14-258. - Same—Display.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, possess, brandish, aim, point
or exhibit to any other person a replica or facsimile of a firearm in such
manner as to frighten, threaten, harass, panic or annoy any other person. A
"replica or facsimile of a firearm" shall mean any device or object which is a
replica, facsimile, imitation or toy version of any firearm, including but not
limited to toy guns, movie or stage props, air guns, starter pistols,
inoperative firearms, models, replicas or any other device designed or used to
imitate a firearm.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 612, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 88-411, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 00-826, 7-5-
00)
Sec. 14-259. - Manufacture, sale, possession of certain weapons or other
dangerous devices.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for
sale or possess any billy, metallic knuckles, bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot,
karate stick, or sand bag.
   (b)   A person shall not manufacture, sell, offer for sale, or possess a
device, weapon, cartridge, container, or contrivance designed to render a
person temporarily or permanently disabled by the ejection, release, or
emission of a gas or other substances. This subsection shall not apply to a
self-defense spray. Self-defense spray means a device to which all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The device is capable of carrying, and ejects, releases, or emits
one of the following:
         a.   Not more than 35 grams of any combination of orthochloroben-
zalmalononitrile and inert ingredients.
         b.   A solution containing not more than ten percent oleoresin
capsicum.
      (2)   The device does not eject, release, or emit any gas or substance
that will temporarily or permanently disable, incapacitate, injure, or harm a
person with whom the gas or substance comes in contact, other than the
substance described in subsections (1)a. or (1)b.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided, a person who uses a self-defense spray
device or foam to eject, release, or emit orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile or
oleoresin capsicum at another person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (d)   Subsection (c) does not prohibit the reasonable use of self-defense
spray or foam device containing not more than two percent oleoresin capsicum by
a person in the protection of a person or property under circumstances which
would justify the person's use of physical force.
   (e)   If a person uses a self-defense spray device during the commission of
a crime to eject, release, or emit orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile or oleoresin
capsicum or threatens to use a self-defense spray device during the commission
of a crime to temporarily or permanently disable another person, the judge who
imposes sentence upon a conviction for that crime shall consider the
defendant's use or threatened use of the self-defense spray device as a reason
for enhancing the sentence.
   (f)   A person shall not sell a self-defense spray or foam device to a
minor. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 610, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 96-660, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 07-1117, 1-
16-07; Ord. No. 12-1364, 9-11-12)
Sec. 14-260. - Confiscation of firearms.
   All weapons, guns, pistols, firearms, knives, dirks, razors, stilettos or
any other sharp edged or pointed instruments, or weapons carried, possessed or
used contrary to section
14-259, are hereby declared forfeited to the city.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 611, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-261. - Possession, carrying a dangerous weapon.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or control,
except in his own domicile, or carry or use in any manner any knife having a
blade over three inches, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp edged
or pointed instrument or weapon; provided, however, that such person shall not
be in violation of this section if his possession of such knife, dagger, dirk,
razor, stiletto or any other sharp edged or pointed instrument is necessary for
his employment, trade or occupation; if he is engaged in or is proceeding to or
returning from a place of hunting, trapping or fishing and whenever required,
is also carrying a currently valid license issued to him by the state
department of conservation; if such person is a duly enrolled member of the Boy
Scouts of America or a similar organization or society, and such possession is
necessary to participate in the activities of such organization or society; or
if such knife, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp edged or
pointed instrument is required under circumstances that tend to establish that
its possession is for a lawful purpose not, however, to include self-defense or
amusement.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 609, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 03-971, 7-15-03)
State Law reference— Carrying firearm or dangerous weapon, MCL 750.226, MSA
28.423.
Sec. 14-262. - Steel jaw traps.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use a steel-jaw (leg-
hold) trap for purposes of detaining, catching or trapping wild life or
domestic animals.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 608, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-263. - Carrying firearm.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or to have in possession in
or upon any vehicle a firearm unless the same is unloaded in both barrel and
magazine and carried in the luggage compartment of the vehicle. It shall be
unlawful to carry a firearm on any public street or in any public place unless
it is unloaded and in a case. This section shall not apply to a person holding
a valid license to carry a firearm except where the firearm is carried in
nonconformance with any restrictions upon such license.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 603, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-264. - Reckless, wanton use or negligent discharge of firearm.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to recklessly, heedlessly,
wilfully or wantonly use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due
caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 602, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-265. - Fireworks.
   (a)   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Act means Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq. and the Fireworks
Safety Act Emergency Rules drafted by the Michigan Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs and filed with the Secretary of State on March 9, 2012.
   Agricultural and wildlife fireworks means fireworks devices distributed to
farmers, ranchers, and growers through a wildlife management program
administered by the United States Department of the Interior or the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources.
   APA refers to American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland.
   Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are
similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition but not intended for
consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not
labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR
172.101.
   Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and
1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer
fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. Examples of consumer fireworks
include bottle rockets and roman candles.
   Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27
CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.
   Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting
pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks
consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks, and special effects.
   Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that
phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
   Person means an individual, agent, association, charitable organization,
company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal
representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal or
commercial entity.
   Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical
compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and
designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal
effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical,
or opera production or live entertainment.
   (b)   Use, ignition, or discharge of consumer fireworks. 
      (1)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer or display
fireworks, except as permitted in this section.
         a.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of
subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) shall be responsible for a civil infraction and
shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of $1,000.00, $500.00 of which will be
remitted by the court to the local law enforcement agency responsible for
enforcing this section pursuant to section 7 of MCL 28.457.
      (2)   Except as prohibited in this subsection, a person is permitted to
ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on the following days and during
the following hours only:
         a.   Between 11:00 a.m. on December 31 and until 1:00 a.m. on January
1.
         b.   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding Memorial Day.
         c.   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on June 29, June 30, July 1,
July 2, July 3, and July 4.
         d.   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on July 5, if that day is a
Friday or Saturday.
         e.   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding Labor Day.
      (3)   No person shall ignite, discharge, or use fireworks on public
property, school property, church property, or the property of another person
without that organization's or person's express permission to use those
fireworks on those premises. A person that violates this subsection is
responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of
not more than $500.00.
      (4)   A person shall not willfully cause, by way of ignition, discharge,
use, or any other means, fireworks to enter upon the lands or premises of
another without the express permission of the owner or occupant, or agent or
servant of the owner or occupant of the lands or premises. A person that
violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction and may be
ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00.
         a.   A person who pleads or is found responsible for this civil
infraction shall be presumed responsible for any resulting property damage and
shall be required to pay full restitution to the property owner.
      (5)   An individual shall not discharge, ignite, or use consumer
fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic
liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance. A person that violates this sub-section shall be guilty
of a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than
$1,000.00.
         a.   “Alcoholic liquor” means that term as defined in section 1d of
the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1d.
         b.   “Controlled substance” means that term as defined in section 8b
of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.8b.
      (6)   No minor shall buy or use consumer fireworks, at any time.
   (c)   Council resolution required for certain uses. The Council, upon
application in writing on forms provided by the Michigan Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, and in accordance with the provisions of MCL
28.466, may by resolution allow for the use of agricultural or wildlife
fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, consumer fireworks, or
special effects manufactured for outdoor pest control or agricultural purposes,
or for public or private display within the City by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, or other organizations or individuals approved
by the City, if the applicable provisions of this section and PA 256 of 2011
are met.
      (1)   Application; deadline. Application pursuant to this subsection
shall be made on forms provided by the Michigan Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs and submitted to the Fire Marshall Bureau at least 30 days
before the date of the planned display.
      (2)   License. If the Council issues a resolution allowing the use of
fireworks pursuant to this subsection, the City Clerk shall issue a license to
the applicant subject to the terms and conditions of the resolution. Such
license is subject to payment of a nonrefundable $200.00 fee.
      (3)   License limitations. After a permit has been granted under this
subsection, a license holder may only sell, possess, or transport fireworks for
the purposes described in the permit. A license granted under this subsection
is not transferable and shall not be issued to a minor.
      (4)   Insurance or bond required. As part of the initial application, and
before a resolution is adopted and license for articles pyrotechnic or display
fireworks ignition issued, the applicant shall provide proof of an insurance
certificate that shall be subject to approval of the legal department as to
company, form, and coverage.
      (5)   Fire department review. As part of the initial application, and
before a resolution is adopted and license issued under this subsection, the
City's Fire Marshall Bureau shall rule on the competency and qualifications of
an articles pyrotechnic and display fireworks operator, as furnished by the
operator on the operator's application form, in accordance with the
requirements provided under NFPA 1123, and on the time, place, and safety
aspects of the display of articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks.
      (6)   Consumer fireworks exception. The private use of consumer fireworks
is not subject to the requirements of this subsection, unless the display of
consumer fireworks is done before an audience and in a setting and manner
similar to that of articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks. Examples include,
but are not limited to, organizations using consumer fireworks to present an
event or show before a captive audience.
    (d)   Severability. The various parts, sections and clauses of this
ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be
affected.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 501, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 12-1359, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 13-1404,
7-23-13; Ord. No. 14-1432, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 19-1642, 2-26-19; Ord. No. 22-
1756, 8-23-22)
   State law reference—MCL 28.451 et seq.
Sec. 14-266. - Throwing stones or missiles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to throw any stone,
brick or any other missile at any motorbus, automobile, any type of railroad
car, streetcar or other motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 120, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-267. - Aiming firearm.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally,
without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 601, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.233, MSA 28.430.
Sec. 14-268. - Aiming and discharging firearm.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to discharge without
injury to another person any firearm, while intentionally, without malice,
aiming at or toward any person.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 604, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.234, MSA 28.431.
Sec. 14-269. - Injury by discharge of firearm.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maim or injure any
other person by the discharge of any firearm pointed or aimed unintentionally,
without malice, at any such person.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 605, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.235, MSA 28.432.
Sec. 14-270. - Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the
influence of an alcoholic liquor or any exhilarating or stupefying drug, to
carry, have in possession or control, use in any manner, or discharge any
firearm.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 606, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.237, MSA 28.434.
Sec. 14-271. - Hunting within city prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to hunt wild game, or in
any manner carry any gun, weapon or firearm within the city for the purpose of
hunting any wild game or fowl at any time.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 607, 7-21-81)
State Law reference— Game law, MCL 311.1 et seq., MSA 13.1321 et seq.
Sec. 14-272. - Possession/use of laser pointing device.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser
beam directly or indirectly on another person or animal in such a manner as to
harass, annoy, or injure said person or animal.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
possess a laser pointing device. A person shall not be in violation of this
section if his possession of a laser pointing device is necessary for his
employment, trade or occupation and it is necessary for the pointer to be
carried on his person.
(Ord. No. 98-749, 12-15-98)
Sec. 14-273. - Individuals licensed to carry a concealed pistol; pistol-free
areas.
   (a)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 to carry a concealed
pistol, or an individual who is exempt from licensure under this Act, shall not
carry a concealed pistol on the premises of any of the following:
      (1)   A school or school property except that a parent or legal guardian
of a student of the school is not precluded from carrying a concealed pistol
while in a vehicle on school property, if he or she is dropping the student off
at the school or picking up the student from the school.
      (2)   A public or private child care center or day care center, public or
private child caring institution, or public or private child placing agency.
      (3)   A sports arena or stadium.
      (4)   A bar or tavern licensed under the Michigan liquor control code of
1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1101—436.2303, where the primary source of income of
the business is the sale of alcoholic liquor by the glass and consumed on the
premises. This subdivision shall not apply to an owner or employee of the
premises.
      (5)   Any property or facility owned or operated by a church, synagogue,
mosque, temple, or other place of worship, unless the presiding official or
officials of the church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other place of worship
permit the carrying of a concealed pistol on that property or facility.
      (6)   An entertainment facility that the individual knows or should know
has a seating capacity of 2,500 or more individuals or that has a sign above
each public entrance stating in letters not less than one inch high a seating
capacity of 2,500 or more individuals.
      (7)   A hospital.
      (8)   A dormitory or classroom of a community college, college, or
university.
   (b)   Subject to subsection (d), an individual shall not carry a portable
device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology on any of the premises
described in subsection (a).
   (c)   As used in subsection (a), "premises" does not include the parking
areas of the places identified under subsection (a).
   (d)   Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   An individual licensed under this act who is a retired police
officer or retired law enforcement officer.
      (2)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is employed
or contracted by an entity described under subsection (a) to provide security
services and is required by his or her employer or the terms of a contract to
carry a concealed firearm on the premises of the employing or contracting
entity.
      (3)   An individual who is licensed as a private investigator or private
detective under the professional investigator licensure act, MCL
338.821—338.851.
      (4)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is a
corrections officer of a county sheriff's department.
      (5)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is a motor
carrier officer or capitol security officer of the department of state police.
      (6)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is a member
of a sheriff's posse.
      (7)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is an
auxiliary officer or reserve officer of a police or sheriff's department.
      (8)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is a parole
or probation officer of the department of corrections.
      (9)   A state court judge or state court retired judge who is licensed
under this act.
      (10)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 and who is a court
officer.
   (e)   An individual who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction or misdemeanor as follows:
      (1)   For the first offense, the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and may be fined not more than $500.00. The court shall order the
individual's license to carry a concealed pistol suspended for six months.
      (2)   For a second offense, the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. The court shall order the
individual's license to carry a concealed pistol revoked.
(Ord. No. 01-856, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 01-856, amended 1-14-02; Ord. No. 12-1365,
9-11-12)
Sec. 14-274. - Individuals licensed to carry a concealed pistol; carrying while
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   (a)   Acceptance of a license under 2000 PA 381 constitutes implied consent
to submit to a chemical analysis under this section. This section also applies
to individuals who are exempt from licensure under this Act.
   (b)   An individual shall not carry a concealed pistol while he or she is
under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or while
having a bodily alcohol content prohibited under this section. A person who
violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a
crime as follows:
      (1)   If the individual was under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a
controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance, or had a bodily alcohol content of .10 or more grams per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine,
the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or $100.00, or both. The court shall order the concealed
weapon licensing board that issued the individual a license to carry a
concealed pistol to permanently revoke the license.
      (2)   If the individual had a bodily alcohol content of .08 or more but
less than .10 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine, the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or $100.00 or both. The
court may order the concealed weapon licensing board that issued the individual
a license to carry a concealed pistol to revoke the license for not more than
three years.
      (3)   If the individual had a bodily alcohol content of .02 or more but
less than .08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine, the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and may be fined not more than $100.00. The court may order the
concealed weapon licensing board that issued the individual the license to
revoke the license for one year.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit an individual licensed under 2000 PA
381 to carry a concealed pistol who has any bodily alcohol content from
transporting that pistol in the locked trunk of his or her motor vehicle or
another motor vehicle in which he or she is a passenger or, if the vehicle does
not have a trunk, from transporting that pistol unloaded in a locked
compartment or container that is separated from the ammunition for that pistol
or on a vessel if the pistol is transported unloaded in a locked compartment or
container that is separated from the ammunition for that pistol.
   (d)   A police officer that has probable cause to believe an individual is
carrying a concealed pistol in violation of this section may require the
individual to submit to a chemical analysis of his or her breath, blood or
urine.
   (e)   Before an individual is required to submit to a chemical analysis
under subsection (d), the police officer shall inform the individual of all of
the following:
      (1)   The individual may refuse to submit to the chemical analysis, but
if he or she chooses to do so, all of the following apply:
         a.   The officer may obtain a court order requiring the individual to
submit to a chemical analysis.
         b.   The refusal may result in his or her license to carry a concealed
pistol being suspended or revoked.
      (2)   If the individual submits to the chemical analysis, he or she may
obtain a chemical analysis described in subsection (d) from a person of his or
her own choosing.
   (f)   The collection and testing of breath, blood, and urine specimens under
this section shall be conducted in the same manner that breath, blood and urine
specimens are collected and tested for alcohol and controlled-substance-related
driving violations under the Michigan Vehicle Code.
   (g)   If a person refuses to take a chemical test authorized under this
section, the police officer shall promptly report the refusal in writing to the
concealed weapon licensing board that issued the license to the individual to
carry a concealed pistol.
   (h)   If a person takes a chemical test authorized under this section and
the test results indicate that the individual had any bodily alcohol content
while carrying a concealed pistol, the police officer shall promptly report the
violation in writing to the concealed weapon licensing board that issued the
license to the individual to carry a concealed pistol.
   (i)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Alcoholic liquor" means that term as defined in section 105 of the
Michigan Liquor Control Code, MCL 436.1105.
      (2)   "Controlled substance" means that term as defined in section 7104
of the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7401.
(Ord. No. 01-857, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 12-1365, 9-11-12)
Sec. 14-275. - Individuals licensed to carry a concealed pistol; proper conduct
during encounters with police.
   (a)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 to carry a concealed
pistol shall have his or her license to carry that pistol in his or her
possession at all times he or she is carrying a concealed pistol or a portable
device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology.
   (b)   An individual who is licensed under 2000 PA 381 to carry a concealed
pistol and who is carrying a concealed pistol or a portable device that uses
electro-muscular disruption technology shall show both of the following to a
police officer upon request by that police officer:
      (1)   His or her license to carry a concealed pistol.
      (2)   His or her driver's license or Michigan personal identification
card.
   (c)   An individual licensed under 2000 PA 381 to carry a concealed pistol
and who is carrying a concealed pistol or a portable device that uses electro-
muscular disruption technology and who is stopped by a police officer shall
disclose to the police officer that he or she is carrying a pistol or a
portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology concealed upon
his or her person or in his or her vehicle.
   (d)   An individual who violates subsection (a) or (b) is responsible for a
civil infraction and may not be fined more than $100.00.
   (e)   An individual who violates subsection (c) is responsible for a civil
infraction and may be fined as follows:
      (1)   For the first offense, by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by the
individual's license to carry a concealed pistol being suspended for six months
or both.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent offense, by a fine of not more that
$1,000.00 and by the individual's license to carry a concealed pistol being
revoked.
   (f)   In an individual is found responsible for a civil infraction under
this section, the court shall notify the department of state police and the
concealed weapon licensing board that issued the license of that determination.
   (g)   A pistol or a portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption
technology carried in violation of this section is subject to immediate seizure
by a police officer. If a police officer seizes a pistol or a portable device
that uses electro-muscular disruption technology under this subsection, the
individual has 45 days in which to display his or her license or documentation
to the chief of police, or his designee. If the individual displays his or her
license or documentation to the chief of police, or his designee, within the
45-day period, the chief shall return the pistol or a portable device that uses
electro-muscular disruption technology to the individual unless the individual
is prohibited by law from possessing a firearm. If the individual does not
display his or her license or documentation before the expiration of the 45-day
period, the pistol or a portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption
technology is subject to forfeiture as provided under state law. A pistol or a
portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology is not subject
to immediate seizure under this subsection if both of the following
circumstances exist:
      (1)   The individual has his or her driver's license or Michigan personal
identification card in his or her possession when the violation occurs; and
      (2)   The police officer verifies through LElN that the individual is
licensed under 2000 PA 381 to carry a concealed pistol.
(Ord. No. 01-858, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 12-1365, 9-11-12)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-858, adopted Aug. 21, 2001, enacted a new §
14-272, individuals licensed to carry a concealed pistol; proper conduct during
encounters with police. Said section has been renumbered at the discretion of
the editor as §
14-275 as set out herein, to better fit the format of the Code.
Sec. 14-276. - Portable basketball hoops, portable hockey goals, and other
recreational apparatus.
   (a)   Purpose. Persons using portable basketball hoops, portable hockey
goals, and other recreational apparatus in public streets risk injuring
themselves and others, and impede the flow of vehicular traffic. The purpose of
this section is to eliminate the risk of injuries and minimize the interruption
of the flow of traffic associated with portable basketball hoops, portable
hockey goals, and other recreational apparatus by prohibiting their use in
public streets.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to locate a portable basketball hoop, portable
hockey goal, or other recreational apparatus on any public street or easement.
      (1)   The city may remove any such apparatus located in the public street
or easement without notice to the owner and impound it. Standard impound fees
will apply.
   (c)   Any individual who violates this section shall be subject to the
following:
      (1)   First offense: the individual is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined $100.00;
      (2)   Second and subsequent offenses: the individual is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 07-1133, 8-20-07)
Secs. 14-277—14-290. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - AIR GUNS, SLINGSHOTS, BOWS AND ARROWS
Sec. 14-291. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Airgun shall mean any gun, rifle, pistol or device by whatever name known
which is designed to expel or shoot a projectile or missile by the action of
compressed air or of a spring or elastic, but does not mean any gun or device
regulated by the provisions of Act No. 372 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1927 (MCL 28.421 et seq., MSA 28.91 et seq.), as amended, or Act No. 328 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 750.1 et seq., MSA 28.191 et seq.), as
amended, or Act No. 10 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1952 (MCL 752.841 et
seq., MSA 28.436(11) et seq.), and does not mean a slingshot.
   Bow and arrow shall mean any weapon or device consisting of a strip of wood
or other plastic material with a cord connecting its two ends when bent, by
means of which an arrow is propelled.
   Dealer shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling at retail or
trading or renting any airgun, slingshot or bow and arrow.
   Slingshot shall mean any device or instrument used for throwing stones or
other missiles, sometimes consisting of a short strap with strings fastened to
its ends or with a string fastened to one end and with a light stick to the
other, or sometimes consisting of a short strap with two rubber bands or
elastic fastened to a crotched stick or metal framework; in the first type of
device, the strap is whirled around until by loosening one end the missile is
let fly by centrifugal force, while the other type of slingshot having a rubber
band or elastic, the missile is placed inside the strap and after stretching
the rubber band or elastic, the strap is let go.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-292. - Possession in public.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or in a motor
vehicle which such person is operating or in which he is a passenger, while on
any public street, road, highway, alley, park or other public place, any
airgun, slingshot or bow and arrow, unless such airgun or slingshot is carried
unloaded or unless such airgun, slingshot, or bow and arrow is carried in a
suitable case or securely wrapped up in a package.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-293. - Dangerous use prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit to be used on any
private or public grounds or in any private or public building, either an
airgun, a slingshot or a bow and arrow, when the projectile, missile or arrow
from such use can be fired, discharged or propelled in such a manner as to
endanger persons or property or to permit the projectile, missile or arrow to
travel or be hurled or propelled outside the limits of the grounds, space or
building in or upon which such device is being used.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-294. - Transfer to minor.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or dealer to give, sell, rent, lend or
otherwise transfer any airgun, slingshot or bow and arrow to any person under
18 years of age, except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian
and ward or adult instructor and pupil exists between such person and the
person under 18 years of age.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-295. - Permission of violation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, dealer, parent, guardian or adult
instructor knowingly to permit or allow any minor under 18 years of age to
possess, use, operate, or discharge an airgun, slingshot or bow and arrow in
any manner or place contrary to the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-296. - Discharge in public place.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, use or operate any airgun,
slingshot or bow and arrow on or across any street, highway, sidewalk, alley,
public land, public park or any public place except upon a properly
constructed, operated and controlled target range.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-297. - Lawful possession.
   It shall be lawful for any person to have in his possession either an
airgun, slingshot or bow and arrow, if either or any of such devices are:
      (1)   Kept within his residence;
      (2)   If carried in a public place, must be unloaded and in a suitable
case or in a securely wrapped package, or if a bow and arrow, the string on one
end of the bow may be detached from the arrow;
      (3)   Used by persons who are duly enrolled as members of any club team
or society organized for athletic, recreational or educational purposes, which
maintains as a part of such organization's facilities an indoor or outdoor
target range which is operated under the supervision, guidance and instruction
of a responsible adult; or
      (4)   Used in or on any private grounds, space or building so that when
such article is fired, discharged or propelled, it will not endanger persons or
property, and the projectile, missile or arrow being shot or discharged from
such device will not pass or travel outside the limits of such grounds, space
or building.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-298. - Penalty; confiscation.
   (a)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be
subject to have confiscated, and every police officer in the city is hereby
authorized to confiscate and take into his possession, any airgun, slingshot,
bow and arrow or other similar device and hold such device as evidence pending
the outcome of any court case brought or filed in connection with any such
violation.
   (b)   Any and all airguns, slingshots, bows and arrows, or other similar
devices taken from the possession of any such person who is later convicted of
violating any of the provisions of this division shall be confiscated as a
nuisance and destroyed or disposed of by the police department.
(Ord. No. 81-87, § 8, 11-4-81)
Secs. 14-299—14-315. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-316. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency.
   No person shall by any act or by any word, in the city, encourage,
contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17
years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in MCL
712A.1, MSA 27.3178(598.1), as amended, whether or not such child shall be
adjudicated a ward of the probate court.
(Ord. No. 81-106, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-317. - Curfew.
   No minor under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or congregate upon any
public street, highway, alley, park or in any public place in the city between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, or between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday, unless the minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian, or any adult delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany such child.
(Ord. No. 81-105, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-684, 10-10-96)
State Law reference— Curfew for minors, MCL 722.751 et seq., MSA 28.342(1) et
seq.
Sec. 14-318. - Leaving children unattended prohibited; vehicles; public places.
   (a)   A person who is responsible for the care of welfare of a child shall
not leave that child unattended in a vehicle.
   (b)   A person who is responsible for the care or welfare of a child shall
not leave that child unattended in or on any public building, public street,
sidewalk, highway, alley or park.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   Child means an individual less than six years of age.
      (2)   Unattended means alone or without the supervision of an individual
13 years of age or older who is not legally incapacitated.
      (3)   Vehicle means that term as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code,
MCL 257.79.
(Ord. No. 06-1089, 6-19-06)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-684, adopted Oct. 19, 1996, deleted §
14-318, which pertained to curfew for children under 14 and §
14-319 which pertained to curfew for children under 17. See the Code
Comparative Table.
Sec. 14-319. - Reserved.
Sec. 14-320. - Aiding underage children to violate law.
   No person shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any person
under the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-105, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 14-321. - Alcoholic beverage control—Purchase, possession, consumption by
a minor.
   (a)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to
possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as
provided in this section. A minor who violates this section is responsible for
a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as follows:
      (1)   For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00. A court may order a minor
under this subsection to participate in substance use disorder services as
defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230,
and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services,
and may order the minor to perform community service and to undergo substance
abuse screening and assessment at this or her own expense as described in
subsection (d). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only
once under this subsection.
      (2)   If a violation of this section occurs after one prior judgment, the
minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this subsection is
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days but only if the minor has
been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to
successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by
the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, and may be ordered to
participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment
and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6230 of the public health
code, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (d).
      (3)   If a violation of this section occurs after two or more prior
judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this
subsection is punishable by imprisonment of not more than 60 days but only if
the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service
ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, and may be ordered to
participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment
and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6230 of the public health
code, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection
(d).
   (b)   If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
subsection (a)(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2), the court, without
entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a determination in a
juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has committed the offense and
with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the
individual on probation upon terms and conditions that include, but are not
limited to, the sanctions set for in subsection (a)(3), payment of the costs
including minimum state costs as provided for in MCL 712A.18m (probate code),
and MCL 769.1j (code of criminal procedure), and the costs of probation as
prescribed in MCL 771.3. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or
upon a finding that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another
court, the court may enter and adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a
juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense,
and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and
conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss
the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without
adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a
conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of this section or for
purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of
a crime, including the additional penalties imposed for second or subsequent
convictions or juvenile adjudications under subsection (a)(2) and (3). There
may be only one discharge or dismissal under this subsection as to an
individual. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while
proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation under this
subsection. The secretary of state shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea
and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. This record shall be
furnished to any of the following:
      (1)   To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request for the
purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection.
      (2)   To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law
enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement
agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions:
         a.   At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the
department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an
applicant for reemployment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor,
or the law enforcement agency.
         b.   The record is used by the department of corrections, the
prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee
has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets
criteria for employment.
   (c)   A misdemeanor violation of subsection (a) successfully deferred,
discharge, and dismissed under subsection (b) is considered a prior judgment
for the purposes of subsection (a)(3).
   (d)   The court may order the person convicted of violating subsection (a)
to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the
substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in section 100a of the mental
health code, 1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, in order to determine whether the
person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or
drug education and alcohol or drug treatment program. A court may order an
individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or
placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection (a) to submit to a
random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian,
or custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular
preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation.
   (e)   The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's
license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (a) as provided in
section 319 of the Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.319.
   (f)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the
person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not
consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be
administered without a court order, but a police officer may seek to obtain a
court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding
or criminal prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content.
   (g)   A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18
years of age who is not emancipated under MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly
consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consumed, possess, or purchase
alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent or
parents, custodian or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation
if the name of the parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonable ascertainable
by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be
made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that
the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age
and not emancipated under MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The notice may be made by any
means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not
limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If a person
less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), then
his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided
in this subsection.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic
liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his employment if
employed by a person licensed by this act, by the commission, or by an agent of
the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her
personal consumption.
   (i)   The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of
subsection (a):
      (1)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily
presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment
for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the
Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a
minor.
      (2)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the
following criteria:
         a.   Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
         b.   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or
agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of
sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to
750.520g, committed against a minor.
      (3)   A minor who initiates contact with a police officer or emergency
medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for
a legitimate health care concern.
   (j)   This section shall not be construed to limit civil or criminal
liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for
a violation of this act.
   (k)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited post secondary educational institution in an
academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member
is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the consumption is solely
educational and is a necessary ingredient of the course.
   (l)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this
act.
   (m)   Subsection (a) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or
both of the following:
      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with prior
approval of the local prosecutor's office as a part of an employer-sponsored
internal enforcement action.
      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the liquor control
commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action except
that any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by
a minor is under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the
local police agency and is part of the undercover operation. The state police,
the liquor control commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit a
minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation
of subsection (a).
   (n)   The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not
recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover
operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a).
   (o)   In a criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (a)
concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative
defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location
where that consumption is legal.
   (p)   As used in this section, "any bodily content" means either of the
following:
      (1)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as
a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 218, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 97-694, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 04-1023,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 17-1597, 10-10-17)
Sec. 14-322. - Same—Fraudulent identification.
   Any person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or a minor
who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $100.00, or both. The secretary of state shall suspend the
operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating this
section as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.319.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 219, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 87-382, 3-3-87; Ord. No. 04-1023, 12-
21-04)
Sec. 14-323. - Same—Furnishing to minors.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell or furnish
alcoholic liquor to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A
person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is
less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether
the person is less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the
defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before
furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle
operator's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal
selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and
identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action under this section.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 215(1), 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-324. - Same—Transportation.
   No person under the age of 21 years, within the city, shall knowingly
transport or possess, in a motor vehicle, alcoholic liquor unless the person is
employed by a licensee under the Michigan Liquor Control Act, the liquor
control commission, or an agent of the liquor control commission, and is
transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the
person's control during regular working hours and in the course of the person's
employment.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 215, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-325. - Minors prohibited in certain places.
   (a)   No minor child under 18 years of age within the city shall be
permitted, unless accompanied by parent or legal guardian, to remain in any
saloon, barroom, or other place where any spirituous or intoxicating liquor or
any wine or beer, or any beverage, liquor or liquors containing any spirituous
or intoxicating liquor, beer or malt liquor is sold, given away or furnished
for a beverage; or in any place of amusement known as dance houses or halls,
concert saloons or variety theatres. All such establishments shall be posted
with signs bearing the legend: "Minor under 18 unaccompanied by parent or
guardian prohibited." Nor shall any such minor at any time or under any
circumstances be present at or in any house of prostitution, in any room or
hall occupied or used for hire, gain, or reward for the purpose of cards, dice
or gaming, gambling, pool-selling or betting in any manner whatever; provided,
however, that no minor child under 18 years of age within the city shall be
employed in any capacity in any saloon, barroom or any other public place where
any spirituous or intoxicating liquor, wine or beer is sold or furnished for
consumption on the premises.
   (b)   Any proprietor, keeper or manager of any such place who shall permit
such minor to remain in any such place, and any person who shall encourage or
induce in any way such minor child to enter such place or to remain therein
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-29, § 212, 7-21-81)
Sec. 14-326. - Presence of minors in public places during school hours.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any child under 16 years of age or enrolled
in a day school program other than a college or university, to remain in any
restaurant, shopping mall, theater or other public place of entertainment, or
any other public place, public sidewalks or park, unless it is part of an
organized school program, including open campus lunch periods, during the
school hours of such child.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian, or other adult
person having the care or custody of a minor to knowingly permit such minor to
violate this section.
   (c)   This section does not apply to minors in public places accompanied by
a parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. No. 94-611, 12-6-94)
Secs. 14-327—14-340. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
Sec. 14-341. - Definitions.
   As used in this division:
   Delinquent acts means those acts which violate the laws of the United
States, or the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city or those
acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court as defined by MCL
712A.2, but does not include traffic violations.
   Illegal drugs means controlled substances obtained without a legal
prescription.
   Juvenile delinquent means those minors whose behavior interferes with the
rights of others or menaces the welfare of the community.
   Minor means any person under the age of 17 years residing with a parent.
   Parent means mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the
care or custody of a minor or any person acting in the parents stead who has
custody or control of the minor.
(Ord. No. 92-537, § 1, 7-21-92)
Sec. 14-342. - Parental duties.
   (a)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise
reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act.
   (b)   Included (without limitation) in the continuous duty of reasonable
parental control are the following parental duties:
      (1)   To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal
firearms locked in places are inaccessible to the minor;
      (2)   To know the curfew ordinances of the city, §§
14-317—14-320, and to require the minor to observe the curfew ordinance;
      (3)   To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to
forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission;
      (4)   To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be
absent;
      (5)   To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from
maliciously or wilfully destroying real, personal or mixed property which
belongs to the city, or is located in the city;
      (6)   To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally
possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile
delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or
private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary.
(Ord. No. 92-537, § 2, 7-21-92)
Sec. 14-343. - Notification of parents; record of notification.
   (a)   Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any
delinquent act within the city, the parent of the minor shall be immediately
notified by the police department, advising the parent of such arrest or
detention, the reason therefor, and the parent's responsibility under this
division.
   (b)   A record of such notifications shall be kept by the youth bureau of
the police department.
(Ord. No. 92-537, § 3, 7-21-92)
Sec. 14-344. - Parental violation and penalty.
   (a)   If a minor commits a delinquent act, the parent shall be guilty of a
violation of this division if it is proven that any act, word or nonperformance
of parental duty by the parent encouraged, contributed toward, caused or tended
to cause the commission of the delinquent act by the minor.
   (b)   Upon the first conviction of a violation of this division, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00 nor more than $100.00.
   (c)   Upon the second conviction of a violation of this division, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and,
in addition, shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent
participate in, through completion, a court approved, community based treatment
program (such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training,
etc.) or, in the discretion of the court, be imprisonment for a period of not
less than 15 days nor more than 30 days.
   (d)   Upon the third or subsequent violation and conviction, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, and,
in the discretion of the court, imprisoned for a period of not less than 15
days nor more than 90 days.
(Ord. No. 92-537, § 4, 7-21-92)
Sec. 14-345. - Juvenile adjudication.
   (a)   Purpose. Two primary goals of the juvenile system are to prevent the
juvenile offender from going on to commit other crimes and to prevent the
offender from entering the adult criminal justice system. In order to achieve
these goals, it is imperative that a parent or legal guardian be present at,
assist with, and participate in, each step of the juvenile adjudication
process. The purpose of this section is to insure that a parent or legal
guardian participate as required by the process.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian to:
      1.   Fail to appear at any step of the juvenile proceeding.
      2.   Fail to assist with the presenting the juvenile for any program
ordered as part of an informal diversion program, formal diversion program, or
court ordered program.
      3.   Fail to provide supervision of the juvenile to prevent further acts
of delinquency.
(Ord. No. 03-982, 9-2-03)
DIVISION 3. SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION VIOLATIONS
Sec. 14-346. - Failure to comply with reporting.
   (a)   No person required to register under Public Act No. 295 of 1994, MCL
28.721 et seq., shall fail to comply with the reporting requirements defined by
MCL 28.725a.
   (b)   A person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment
for not more than 93 days.
(Ord. No. 19-1639, 1-29-19)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, MCL 28.725a.
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 85-330 was adopted at a referendum, by the
electorate on Nov. 5, 1985.
Charter reference— Referendum procedure, § 9.12 et seq.
State Law reference— Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL
123.51 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 15-1. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of parks and park
property owned or maintained by the city in order that all residents and their
guests may enjoy and make use of such parks and park property, and to protect
the rights of those owning property adjacent to such parks.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 2, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Department shall mean the city department of recreation.
   Director shall mean the director of the department of recreation.
   Major park shall refer to the following public parks and buildings and
facilities thereon: Town Hall Park, Civic Center Park and Ford Field Park.
   Neighborhood park shall refer to all other parks, public buildings,
recreation and playground areas and buildings and facilities thereon not
designated as a "major park."
   Park shall mean any public park, or recreation or playground area, or
building or facility thereon, within the city, owned or maintained by the city
as a public park, or recreation or playground area, whether or not such areas
have been formally dedicated to such purpose.
   Park ranger shall mean an ordinance officer assigned to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   Permit shall mean the written permission that must be obtained from the
director or his designated agent to carry out a given activity in a park.
   Vehicle shall mean any motor driven device designed to transport persons or
property.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 3, 11-7-85; Ord. No. 05-1048, 7-5-05)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 15-3. - Ejection from park.
   In addition to general criminal penalties, any person found violating any
provisions of this chapter may be ejected from the park and/or have their
permit confiscated and park privileges suspended for a period to be determined
by the director.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 20, 11-7-85; Ord. No. 05-1048, 7-5-05)
Secs. 15-4—15-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 15-21. - Hours; exception.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, occupy, frequent, loiter
or be in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless
otherwise posted at the park or unless a special permit for such use or
occupancy has been previously given by the director of recreation of the city
therein, or unless such person is participating in a scheduled recreation
department activity. At the closing hour of the parks, all persons within the
parks shall immediately depart therefrom. No person, having been directed to
leave the park at the closing hour by any city employee, shall fail to depart
therefrom immediately.
   (b)   Exception. The parking of vehicles after 10:00 p.m. by customers and
employees of area businesses shall be permitted in specified areas of Ford
Field Park, subject to the posted regulations. After 10:00 p.m., these
individuals may enter Ford Field Park for the parking of vehicles only.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 8, 11-7-85; Ord. No. 04-1000, 4-20-04)
Sec. 15-22. - Unlawful conduct.
   No person while in or about the parks shall engage in any conduct
threatening, endangering or impairing the safety, health or comfort of others,
or shall indulge in profane or indecent language, any improper or indecent
conduct, or any unduly boisterous or offensive conduct of any character.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 9, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-23. - Noise.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of loud or
unusual noise in any park which disturbs the peace and quiet of any park or
which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness in such park.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 10, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-24. - Picnic areas and use.
   (a)   The director shall designate those areas of a park where picnicking is
permitted. No person shall picnic other than in a designated area.
   (b)   Picnickers shall not leave a picnic area before all trash in the
nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is either
removed from the park or placed in a disposal receptacle.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 11, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-25. - Alcoholic beverages.
   No person shall bring into, consume or sell alcoholic beverages in a park,
except:
      (1)   Alcoholic beverages may be sold by persons operating under a
concession from the city, subject to the regulation and control of the
director.
      (2)   Alcoholic beverages can be consumed at family or group picnics or
functions, provided a permit for such consumption is obtained.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 12, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-26. - Camping.
   No person shall camp in a park without first obtaining a camping permit from
the director or his designated agent.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 13, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-27. - Fires.
   (a)   No person shall start or maintain in any park any outdoor fire except
in designated picnic areas. Fires shall be limited to cooking fires started and
maintained only in a stove, fireplace or barbecue pit maintained by the
department or in a portable camp stove.
   (b)   No person starting or maintaining any fire in a park shall leave the
area where the fire is located without first completely extinguishing the fire
or placing hot coals in a receptacle provided by the department and designated
for that sole purpose.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 14, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-28. - Animals and pets; exception.
    (a)   No domestic animals or pets, with the exception of verified service
dogs, shall be permitted in a park, other than the Dearborn Dog Park, unless a
written permit is obtained from the director.
   (b)   Exception: Dogs shall be permitted in Crowley Park, Geer Park, Oxford
Park, Penn-Vassar Park, Schemansky Park, Summer-Stephens Park, and Ten Eyck
Park, subject to the conditions and requirements of this section and applicable
federal, state, and local laws.
   (c)   Use in parks identified in subsection (b).
      (1)   Dogs must be on a leash of suitable strength and no longer than six
feet in length and held by the owner or other responsible person.
      (2)   Dog handlers shall immediately pick-up and properly dispose of pet
waste.
      (3)   Dogs are restricted to the track and area immediately adjacent to
the track of each permitted park, and are not allowed in public buildings or
other park areas, including but not limited to areas under and immediately
adjacent to play structures and play equipment; the playing surface and area of
ball fields, soccer fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, outdoor ice
rinks, and sledding hills; pavilions and stages; pool areas; and in areas
designated for City permitted events and functions.
      (4)   Dog owners/handlers must stop any accompanied dog from digging and
must fill any holes caused by an accompanied dog.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any owner/handler to bring a dog that has
a contagious condition, disease, parasites, or fresh wound into the parks.
   (d)   Bites, scratches, and aggression in parks identified in subsection
(b).
      (1)   All bites and scratches by a dog in the parks must be reported to
the Dearborn Police Department. It shall be unlawful for any owner/handler to
fail to report a bite or scratch by an accompanied dog of another person or
another dog within 24-hours of the incident.
      (2)   All dog bites shall be reported in accordance with Sec.
4-31 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances, entitled "Dog Bite Reporting
Requirements."
      (3)   Dogs showing aggression towards people or other dogs must be
removed from the parks listed in subsection (b) immediately. It shall be
unlawful for any owner/handler to fail to immediately remove any dog showing
aggression from the park. Dogs that exhibit aggressive behavior are not allowed
in the parks at any time.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any dog deemed to be a
vicious dog or a dangerous dog by any state or local government or agency into
the parks listed in subsection (b).
   (e)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
following:
         a.   First offense: The person is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined $100.00;
         b.   Second offense: The person is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined $250.00;
         c.   Third offense: The person is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined $500.00; and
         d.   Fourth and subsequent offenses: The person is guilty of a
misdemeanor as defined in section
1-9.
      (2)   In addition, any person found violating any provisions of this
section may be ejected from the park and/or have their permit confiscated and
park privileges suspended for a period to be determined by the director of
recreation.
   (f)   The owner of a dog shall be liable for damages for any and all
injuries to a person or property caused by such dog, to be determined and
collected in appropriate civil proceedings, and nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to impose any liability upon the city, its agents or employees,
for damages caused by such dog in accordance with section
4-22 and state law, MCL § 287.321, et. seq. and MCL § 287.351.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 15, 11-7-85; Ord. No. 16-1550, 10-4-16; Ord. No. 17-1575,
3-21-17; Ord. No. 19-1666, 11-26-19)
Sec. 15-29. - Games.
   No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games
involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows,
javelins, kites or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of
recreation. The playing of organized games such as football, baseball and the
like is prohibited except on fields, courts or areas designated for such use.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 16, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-30. - Operation of vehicles.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle in a park except upon designated
paved or improved park roads or driveways, or in and upon designated areas or
trails set aside for use by such vehicles, unless directed by a law enforcement
officer or recreation employee to do so, or by official signs or markings.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle within the park in excess of 15
miles per hour, except upon those roads or driveway where official signs or
markings designate a different speed limit.
   (c)   All applicable state and local vehicle and traffic laws and ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect in any park, and shall be enforced by
any law enforcement officer.
   (d)   There shall be no loitering within a parked car for any purpose.
   (e)   No person shall park a vehicle on park property other than in areas
designated for parking that type of vehicle.
   (f)   No vehicle shall be left parked on park property after park closing
hours without obtaining a permit from the director, except as provided for in
subsection
15-21(b).
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 17, 11-7-85; Ord. No. 04-1000, 4-20-04)
Sec. 15-31. - Contributions.
   No person shall solicit contributions in a park for any purpose.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 18, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-32. - Merchandising, advertising and signs.
   No person in a park shall:
      (1)   Expose or offer for sale or hire any article, thing or service, nor
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any article, thing or service, unless a permit has been obtained
from the director.
      (2)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise place any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription in a park, unless done pursuant to regulations
promulgated by the director.
(Ord. No. 85-330, § 19, 11-7-85)
Sec. 15-33. - Designated playing fields, courts.
   No person shall enter onto a designated playing field or court while a
sporting event is in progress.
(Ord. No. 05-1048, 7-5-05)
Sec. 15-34. - Motorized vehicles.
   Motorized vehicles are not permitted in any city park. "Motorized vehicle"
shall include, but not limited to: gopeds, mopeds, pocket bikes, motorized go-
carts and motorized skateboards.
(Ord. No. 05-1048, 7-5-05)
Sec. 15-35. - Enforcement.
   All officers of the police department, as well as city employees designated
as ordinance officers or park rangers, are hereby charged with enforcement of
this chapter and are authorized to issue violation tickets for any violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 05-1048, 7-5-05)
Sec. 15-36. - Smoking in parks and other city-owned property; regulations.
   (a)   For the purposes of this article, smoke or smoking means possessing a
cigarette, e-cigarette, cigar, hookah, or pipe that contains tobacco or any
other product that is lighted or burning; lighting a cigarette, e-cigarette,
cigar, hookah, or pipe that contains tobacco or any other product; or exhaling
smoke from burning tobacco or any other burning product that is contained in a
hookah, pipe, cigar, cigarette and/or e-cigarette.
   (b)   Community and neighborhood parks. Smoke or smoking is prohibited
within 15 feet of the outermost edge of any play structure that has been
erected in a community or neighborhood park.
      (1)   Community and neighborhood parks are:
         •   Ford Community and Performing Arts Center;
         •   Crowley;
         •   Hemlock;
         •   Ford Field;
         •   Lapeer;
         •   Ford Woods;
         •   Levagood;
         •   Anthony;
         •   Argyle-Williamson;
         •   Bennington;
         •   Edison;
         •   Schemansky;
         •   Oak;
         •   Geer;
         •   Oxford;
         •   Penn-Vassar;
         •   Summer Stephens;
         •   Ten Eyck;
         •   Whitmore Bolles;
         •   York.
   (c)   Mini-Parks with play equipment. Smoke or smoking is prohibited within
any mini-park that has play equipment.
      (1)   Examples of mini-parks are: Cherry Hill, Dearborn High, Martha-
Myrtle, Tannahill, Palmer-Jerome, Riverdale and Morningside.
   (d)   Smoke and/or smoking is prohibited on the city-owned property known as
West Village Commons Plaza.
   (e)   A violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction, which
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 and costs. In the
discretion of the court, community service may be ordered in lieu of a $50.00
fine and costs.
(Ord. No. 16-1532, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 17-1586, - -17)
Secs. 15-37—15-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DEARBORN DOG PARK
Sec. 15-51. - Location; purpose.
   The Dearborn Dog Park is located at 16301 Michigan Avenue, Dearborn and is
available for use by Dearborn residents only. The dog park is located in the
green space south of the Henry Ford Centennial Library parking lot.
   The dog park is a location set aside for dogs and their owners to exercise
and play off leash in a controlled (i.e., fenced) environment.
   Users of the dog park do so at their own risk. Dog behavior can be
unpredictable around other dogs and strangers. Dog owners/handlers are strictly
liable for any damage or injury caused by their accompanied dog(s).
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Sec. 15-52. - Dog park season.
   (a)   The dog park shall be open daily from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The dog
park may close periodically for routine maintenance.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or
play in the dog park when it is closed. However, if anyone applies for
permission to carry out an activity in the dog park during the hours it is
closed, and the director of the recreation and parks department determines that
such activity will not create a disturbance or public nuisance, the director
shall have the authority to issue a special permit for such activity.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Sec. 15-53. - Dog park use, generally.
   (a)   A permit is required to use the dog park.
   (1)   Registration to obtain a permit can be completed by mail or in person
at the city clerk's office. Once payment is received, a key fob and dog tag
will be issued allowing access to the dog park. Permits shall be issued to
Dearborn residents only and shall expire annually on March 1.
      a.   Permit fees will be waived for verified service dogs.
   (2)   A copy of the Dearborn Dog Park Rules and Regulations can be obtained
at the Ford Community and Performing Arts Center or at the city clerk's office.
   (b)   Dogs under six months of age are not allowed in the dog park.
   (c)   Only dogs accompanied by an owner/handler at least 16 years of age are
permitted to be in the dog park.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dog weighing 30 pounds
or more into the designated "small dog area" of the dog park.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dog weighing less than
30 pounds into the designated "large dog area" of the dog park.
   (f)   An owner/handler may not accompany more than two dogs in the dog park
at any one time.
   (g)   Dogs must wear collars (no pronged, pinched, or spiked collars) or
harnesses bearing a current City of Dearborn dog license and a dog park tag at
all times while in the dog park.
   (h)   Dog owners/handlers must be in possession of a leash or other means of
physical restraint at all times. Dogs must be on leash to and from the dog park
access points.
   (i)   Dog owners/handlers must limit their use of electronic devices so that
the use does not interfere with their ability to actively monitor their dog's
behavior.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16; Ord. No. 17-1579, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 24-1816, 4-23-
24; Ord. No. 24-1828, 10-22-24)
Sec. 15-54. - Care of the dog park.
   (a)   Dog owners/handlers are required to remove and properly dispose of all
animal waste immediately. It shall be unlawful to leave the dog park without
first cleaning up and disposing of all animal waste left by an accompanied dog.
   (b)   Dog owners/handlers must stop any accompanied dog from digging and
must fill any holes caused by an accompanied dog. It shall be unlawful for a
dog owner/handler to leave the dog park without first filling any holes caused
by an accompanied dog.
   (c)   Dog owners/handlers/visitors are responsible for properly using all of
the elements provided in the dog park including, but not limited to, the
fencing, the gates, the benches, the fountains, the exercise apparatus, etc.,
and will be responsible for the costs to repair any element that is not
properly used.
   (d)   Dog owners/handlers/visitors are responsible for reporting any
activity that violates any provision of this article. Violations shall be
reported to the police department or at the Ford Community and Performing Arts
Center.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Sec. 15-55. - Dog park health rules.
   (a)   Full current immunizations (rabies, DHLLP or DAPPL, and bordatella) of
all dogs are required.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any owner/handler to bring a dog that has a
contagious condition, disease, parasites, or fresh wound into the dog park.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Sec. 15-56. - Bites, scratches, and aggression in the dog park.
   (a)   All bites and scratches by a dog in the dog park must be reported to
the Dearborn Police Department. It shall be unlawful for any owner/handler to
fail to report a bite or scratch by an accompanied dog of another person or
another dog within 24-hours of the incident.
      (1)   All dog bites shall be reported in accordance with section
4-31 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances, entitled "Dog Bite Reporting
Requirements."
   (b)   Dogs showing aggression towards people or other dogs must be removed
from the dog park immediately. It shall be unlawful for any owner/handler to
fail to immediately leash and remove any dog showing aggression from the dog
park. Dogs that exhibit aggressive behavior are not allowed in the dog park at
any time.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any dog deemed to be a
vicious dog or a dangerous dog by any state or local government or agency into
the dog park.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Sec. 15-57. - Children in the dog park.
   Dog handlers must be 16 years of age or older. Children under 16 are not
allowed in the dog park unless accompanied by an adult.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16; Ord. No. 17-1579, 5-23-17)
Sec. 15-58. - Unlawful possession.
   (a)   While in the dog park, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For any person to possess food for humans or dogs, including dog
treats.
      (2)   For any person to possess/use tobacco products, herbal products,
alcoholic beverages, or glass containers.
      (3)   For any person to possess dog toys.
      (4)   For any person to possess or unleash an animal other than a dog.
      (5)   For any person to possess/use a skateboard, skates, a bicycle, a
scooter or any other wheeled apparatus. The operation of a non-motorized
wheelchair or motorized mobility device by a person with physical disabilities
is exempt from this sub-section.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Sec. 15-59. - Penalties.
   (a)   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
following:
      (1)   First offense: The person is responsible for a civil infraction and
shall be fined $100.00;
      (2)   Second offense: The person is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined $250.00; and
      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses: The person is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be expelled from the dog park.
   (b)   In addition, any person who fails to comply with dog park rules and
regulations may be subject to expulsion from the dog park, revocation of their
dog park permit, and/or dog impound.
      (1)   Any person who is expelled from the dog park, whose dog park permit
is revoked, or whose dog is impounded under this subsection may appeal the
action to the recreation and parks commission, whose decision shall be final.
(Ord. No. 16-1551, 10-4-16)
Chapter 16 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Sewage disposal, water supply and solid waste management
system authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq., MSA 5.2769(51) et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. - General authority.
   The department of public works, established by charter, shall have vested in
it all powers provided by state law, the city charter and this chapter to
provide for the removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials
accumulated or stored in the city and to enforce the terms, provisions and
penalties of this chapter. The director of public works shall prepare and file
a solid waste management plan, as required by law.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 1, 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-2. - Police powers.
   The director of public works and those assistants and employees designated
in writing by the director shall be authorized to issue warning violations and
bring court complaints, civil or criminal, for violations of the provisions of
this chapter. When enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the director of
public works and the assistants and employees shall be and are hereby
constituted ordinance officers and shall have all the powers conferred upon
ordinance officers by the general laws of this state for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 2, 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-3. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Acceptable waste shall mean solid waste, but excluding unacceptable waste.
   Act 641 shall mean Act No. 641 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL
299.401 et seq.), as amended, and the administrative rules promulgated
thereunder from time to time by the state department of natural resources.
   Facility or facilities shall mean either the material recovery facility
(MRF) or the landfill, or when used in the plural, means both the MRF and the
landfill.
   Hazardous waste shall mean:
      (1)   Any material or substance which, by reason of its composition or
characteristics, is:
         a.   Toxic or hazardous waste, as defined in either the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq., or section 6(e) of the Toxic Substances
Control Act, 15 USC 2605(e), or any laws of similar purposes or effect, and any
rules, regulations or policies promulgated thereunder; or any laws of similar
purpose or effect, and any rules, regulations or policies promulgated
thereunder;
         b.   Special nuclear or byproducts materials within the meaning of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954;
      (2)   Any waste managed under Act No. 64 of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 1979 (MCL 299.501 et seq.), as amended, being MCL 299.501 et seq., and known
as the Hazardous Waste Management Act;
      (3)   Any other materials which the state department of natural resources
or any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine from time to time is ineligible for disposal in the landfill, whether
by reasons of being harmful, toxic or dangerous or otherwise.
   MRF shall mean a material recovery facility.
   Person shall mean any area used for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street address,
postal address, tax roll description or other similar identification has been
assigned to or is in use by a person having control of the area.
   Recyclable materials shall mean commingled and/or presorted materials that
are designated to be separated from solid waste prior to the collection of
solid waste from a site of generation and delivered to the MRF, including but
not limited to: plastics, glass, cans and newspapers.
   Rubbish shall mean the miscellaneous waste material resulting from
housekeeping and ordinary mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturers and
offices and stores.
   Site of generation shall mean any premises in the city in or on which solid
waste or recyclable materials is generated by any person.
   Solid waste shall mean waste which may be disposed of in a type two sanitary
landfill, pursuant to Act 641 and any regulations, rules or policies
promulgated thereunder.
   Unacceptable waste shall mean:
      (1)   Hazardous waste.
      (2)   "Unacceptable waste" shall include drums, barrels, containers,
explosives, including but not limited to dynamite, hand grenades, blasting
caps, shotgun shells, fireworks, gasoline, kerosene, turpentine, waste oil,
ether, batteries, naphtha, acetone, solvents, paints, alcohol, hydraulic oil,
petroleum, caustics, sewage or process wastewaters, leachate, sewage sludge,
foundry sand, dusty type material, flammable or volatile liquids, any other
liquids, chemical liquid wastes, acids, paste or sludge, asbestos, infectious,
pathological, chemotherapeutic, biological and other medical waste, ashes of
any kind including but not limited to fly ash or incinerator ash, radioactive
materials, human or animal remains, agricultural and farm machinery and
equipment, tar, tree stumps or tree limbs over three inches in diameter, tires,
and vehicular bodies, and any other material determined from time to time to be
unacceptable by the landfill.
   Waste hauler shall mean any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the
business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste
and recyclable materials generated within the city. "Waste hauler" specifically
includes the contractor hired by the city to collect, process and dispose of
solid waste and recyclable materials.
   Yard waste shall mean fallen leaves, cut grass or other organic debris that
may be composted.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 3, 6-19-90)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 16-4. - Construction; rules and regulations.
   It is the intent of the city that this chapter be liberally construed for
the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of collecting,
processing and disposing of solid waste and recyclable materials. The director
of public works is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as from
time to time appear to him to be necessary to carry out this intent; provided,
however, that such rules shall not be in direct conflict with this chapter or
other ordinances of the city.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 4, 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-5. - Containers—Required, specifications.
   Between collections of solid waste and recyclable materials by the city or a
licensed waste hauler, each person who is an owner, lessee or occupant of any
site of generation shall store such materials as follows:
      (1)   Receptacles. Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using any
building, house or structure for any purpose whatsoever where refuse
accumulates shall utilize and maintain city-approved 96- or 64-gallon refuse
containers of sufficient number and size in order to store such refuse tending
to accumulate on such premises. Refuse, recycle or yard waste containers that
fail to meet the requirements of this section may be claimed as refuse and,
after due notice to the parties responsible for such container, shall be
collected as refuse by the department of public works.
   Yard waste will be collected as part of the curbside service of waste
removal. Yard waste shall be placed in 32-gallon waste containers provided and
maintained by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee, or placed in approved
paper compost bags. Individuals placing yard waste in 32-gallon containers
shall place the city "yard waste" sticker on the container.
   Separate and apart from the refuse cart program, it is the intent of the
city to continue curbside service of bulk waste removal. As part of this
service, every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using any building, house or
structure may place up to five bulk items (e.g. chair, refrigerator) per week
at the curbside for removal.
      (2)   Domestic refuse carts. Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee
receiving domestic refuse collection service shall utilize the 96-gallon or 64-
gallon refuse cart provided by the city. Disposable paper or plastic bags
containing refuse placed outside of the carts provided by the city will not be
picked up.
   Occasionally, if necessary, each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee may put
additional bagged trash into a covered 32-gallon container for pick-up. Each
owner who puts out an additional container more than once for any two of three
months will be required to lease an additional 96-gallon refuse cart at cost.
No additional collection charge will apply to the additional refuse cart.
      (3)   Domestic recycle carts. Recyclable materials, other than yard
waste, shall be stored in the 96- or 64-gallon recycle carts provided by the
city for pickup.
      (4)   Commercial refuse containers. Each owner, occupant, tenant or
lessee receiving commercial refuse collection service provided by the city
shall use the 96- or 64-gallon cart provided by the city. Commercial
establishments that generate more than two 96-gallon carts of refuse weekly
must contract for refuse dumpster service at their own expense. Commercial
establishments that generate more than two 96-gallon carts of refuse on a
weekly basis and are deemed by the city unable to reasonably provide for refuse
dumpster service may use the 96- or 64-gallon refuse cart service provided they
contract with the city's authorized refuse collection vendor.
   Rubbish that is so large that it cannot be contained in receptacles, must be
securely tied in compact bundles not to exceed four feet in length and 50
pounds in weight, and placed in a location convenient for collection.
      (5)   Apartment complexes. For the purpose of this section, apartments
are deemed commercial establishments. Apartment complexes of four units or less
shall have city-provided refuse collection. A 96- or 64-gallon trash and
recycling cart will be provided by the city for each unit. Apartment complexes
exceeding four units are required to provide their own trash collection
service. If it is determined by the city that utilization of such dumpster
service is unreasonable due to site limitations, the apartment complex may use
the 96- or 64-gallon refuse cart service provided they contract with the city's
authorized refuse collection vendor.
      (6)   Schools and churches. For the purpose of this section, schools and
churches are deemed commercial establishments and shall have city-provided
refuse collection at the same volume as provided commercial businesses. A 96-
or 64-gallon refuse cart will be provided by the city for each school and
church. Any church or school that generates more than two 96-gallon refuse
carts of refuse weekly must contract for refuse dumpster service at their own
expense. Any church or school that generates more than two 96-gallon carts of
refuse on a weekly basis and are deemed by the city unable to reasonably
provide for refuse dumpster service may use the 96- or 64-gallon refuse cart
service provided they contract with the city's authorized refuse collection
vendor.
      (7)   Storage of containers. All refuse containers shall be located
within private property lines and not in the alley, or upon public property,
except that in the case of existing structures which extend to the alley line,
such containers may be placed in a public alley, after written permission has
been granted by the department of public works. No person shall disturb the
contents of waste receptacles or bundles, nor shall persons leave receptacles
or contents thereof in a condition other than this provides. All receptacles
must be maintained in a sanitary condition.
      (8)   Penalties. An individual who violates this section will be issued
one written warning. Thereafter, an individual who violates this section is
responsible for a civil infraction or misdemeanor as follows:
         a.   For the first offense, the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined $100.00.
         b.   For a second or subsequent offense committed within one year from
the date of a previous conviction, the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined $300.00.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 5(b), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 03-926, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 10-1288,
8-16-10)
Sec. 16-6. - Same—Location for collection.
   (a)   All solid waste and recyclable materials from a site of generation
intended for removal from the premises shall be placed in one or more
containers and shall be placed on the grass easement in front of the premises
or, in the case of an adjacent through alley, at the edge thereof. No refuse or
recycle carts shall be placed in the public street. Such containers shall be
placed at that location prior to 7:00 a.m. on the day scheduled for collection
from the premises but in no case shall any containers be placed on the easement
or edge of the alley, as the case may be, prior to 5:00 p.m. of the day
preceding the scheduled collection day. Containers must be removed from the
easement or edge of the alley prior to midnight on the scheduled collection
day. Such containers shall be placed in the manner indicated on the refuse or
recycle cart. The department of public works shall have the authority to
designate the location of refuse and recycle carts.
   (b)   An individual who violates this section will be issued one written
warning. Thereafter, an individual who violates this section is responsible for
a civil infraction or misdemeanor as follows:
      (1)   For the first offense, the individual is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined $100.00.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent offense committed within one year from
the date of a previous conviction, the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined $300.00.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 5, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 03-939, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 10-1288, 8-
16-10)
Sec. 16-6a. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1433, adopted August 24, 2014, provided: "This
emergency ordinance shall be automatically repealed on the 61 st day after its
enactment unless it is reenacted as an ordinance in accordance with the City
Charter." The section pertained to unlawful transportation of refuse;
antiscavenging.
Sec. 16-7. - Recycling program.
   (a)   Mandatory recycling. All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants
of any site of generation shall separate recyclable materials, excluding yard
waste, from solid waste and place them in the recycle cart.
   (b)   Mandatory composting. All persons who are owners, lessees, or
occupants of any site of generation shall separate yard waste from solid waste
and place the yard waste for pickup on the scheduled collection day. This
provision shall become effective 30 days after notice to persons who are
owners, lessees or occupants of any site of generation of the city's contractor
assuming such pickup responsibilities.
   (c)   Antiscavenging. Recyclable materials shall become the property of the
city at the time the recyclable materials are placed on the easement or edge of
the alley, as the case may be. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person other than the city or its licensed waste hauler to collect, remove, or
pick up, or cause to be collected, removed, or picked up any such recyclable
materials.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 6, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 10-1288, 8-16-10)
Sec. 16-8. - Disposal restriction generally.
   No person shall dispose of any solid waste or recyclable materials generated
within the city other than by means of the city's collection service, if
applicable, or a waste hauler duly licensed. This provision shall not prevent a
person from transporting solid waste from the person's private property to a
transfer station.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 7(a), 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-9. - Collection of domestic waste.
   (a)   All domestic solid waste and recyclable materials complying with the
terms and conditions provided for herein will be collected by the department of
public works or the contractor hired by the city to collect, process and
dispose of solid waste and recyclable materials; provided, however, that the
city shall not be responsible for damage to receptacles.
   (b)   The department of public works may issue a license/permit to any
person to collect and transport solid waste and recyclable materials, provided
all the rules and regulations applicable thereto are strictly observed.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 7(b), 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-10. - Collection of commercial waste.
   Reasonable and ordinary quantities of commercial waste, both garbage and
rubbish, to the extent of two 96-gallon refuse carts per week, from any
establishment or business as herein after described, will be collected at a
uniform charge by the department of public works.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 7(c), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 10-1288, 8-16-10)
Sec. 16-11. - Waste hauler license.
   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
delivering or disposing of solid waste or recyclable materials generated within
the city without first obtaining a waste hauler license. Waste hauler licenses
shall be issued upon application to the city clerk on forms provided therefor
and upon payment of a license fee to the city. The contractor hired by the city
to collect, process and dispose of solid waste and recyclable materials shall
be considered to have complied with this requirement by satisfying contract
specifications concerning licensing.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 7(d), 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-12. - Conditions of waste hauler license.
   It shall be an express condition of each waste hauler license that the waste
hauler shall comply with all the following:
      (1)   All provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   All applicable federal, state, county and local laws, statutes,
rules and regulations, including but not limited to thereunder, pertaining to
the collection, transportation, delivery, and disposal of solid waste,
recyclable materials and yard waste.
      (3)   All applicable provisions of the agreement and the rules and
regulations adopted from time to time by the landfills for the administration
and operation of the facilities.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 7(e), 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-13. - Transportation.
   (a)   Vehicles or trailers conveying rubbish must be of such construction
and so operated that contents shall not spill upon the public streets or alleys
or otherwise create a nuisance.
   (b)   All rubbish, solid waste and recyclable materials transported through
the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall be enclosed in
watertight, closed metal boxes approved by the department, and all such boxes
or receptacles shall be purified as often as, and in such manner as, the
director of public works or his agents may direct.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 8, 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-14. - Litter.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, sort, scatter, throw, drop
or leave any waste, rubbish or garbage on any public or private place in the
city.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 9, 6-19-90)
Sec. 16-15. - Dumping on public, private property.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit or cause
or permit to be thrown, dumped or deposited any bottles, glass, crockery, cans,
scrap metal, junk, waste paper, garbage, old automobiles, or parts thereof;
refuse of whatever nature, rubbish, either domestic or commercial or any
noxious things on or along any public highways, streets, alleys or public
places; within the limits of any highway, street or alley right-of-way; on land
or waters adjoining a public highway or street without the consent of the
owners of such land and the director of public works. It shall be unlawful for
any person to throw, dump or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, dumped or
deposited any such refuse or thing hereinabove referred to over the sides or
approaches of any bridge or culvert or into any stream, canal, ditch,
watercourse or body of water; provided, however, any person maintaining or
living in a household shall be permitted to place or deposit any such refuse or
thing hereinabove referred to in a suitable container or containers either in
the front or in the rear of his home in a public way preparatory to being
collected by the city.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed to have committed a nuisance, and the motor vehicle, or other type of
conveyance, which was used in committing such nuisance shall be seized by the
police and shall be impounded and held until such time as the nuisance shall
have been abated by cleaning up and removing from the city or property
disposing of all such material constituting such nuisance. All charges or
expense incurred by the police in abating such nuisance shall be paid to the
police department, including towage and storage of any such vehicle, before
such vehicle will be released to its rightful owner.
(Ord. No. 90-495, § 10, 6-19-90)
Secs. 16-16—16-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - RETURNABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
Sec. 16-31. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Beverage shall mean a soft drink, soda water, carbonated natural or mineral
water or other nonalcoholic carbonated drink; and beer, ale or other malt drink
of whatever alcoholic content.
   Beverage container shall mean an airtight metal glass, paper or plastic
container, or a container composed of a combination of these materials, which,
at the time of sale, contains one gallon or less of a beverage.
   Dealer shall mean a person who sells or offers for sale to consumers within
this state a beverage in a beverage container, including an operator of a
vending machine containing a beverage in a beverage container.
   Distributor shall mean a person who sells beverages in beverage containers
to a dealer within this state, and includes a manufacturer who engages in such
sales.
   Manufacturer shall mean a person who bottles, cans or otherwise places
beverages in beverage containers for sale to distributors, dealers or
consumers.
   Nonreturnable container shall mean a beverage container upon which no
deposit, or a deposit of less than $0.10 has been paid, or is required to be
paid upon the refund, or a refund of less than $0.10 is payable by a dealer or
distributor in this state of that beverage in beverage containers. A beverage
container certified by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission shall not be
deemed a nonreturnable beverage container if the deposit is at least $0.05, and
the requirements of the first sentence of the definition of "returnable
container" are met in all other respects.
   Operator of a vending machine shall mean equally its owner, the person who
refills it and the owner or lessee of the property upon which it is located.
   Returnable container shall mean a beverage container upon which a deposit of
at least $0.10 has been paid, or is required to be paid upon the removal of the
container from the sale or consumption area, and for which a refund of at least
$0.10 in cash is payable by every dealer or distributor in this state of that
beverage in beverage containers. A beverage container certified by the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission shall also be deemed a returnable container if the
deposit is at least $0.05, and the requirements of the preceding sentence are
met in all other respects.
   Sale or consumption area shall mean the premises within the property of the
dealer or of his lessor where the sale is made, within which beverages in
returnable containers may be consumed without payment of a deposit, and, upon
removing a beverage container from which, the customer is required by the
dealer to pay the deposit.
   Within this state shall mean within the exterior limits of the state and
includes the territory within these limits owned by or ceded to the United
States of America.
(Ord. No. 80-2, § 1, 7-1-80)
Sec. 16-32. - Container regulations.
   (a)   A dealer shall not, within this city, sell, offer for sale or give to
consumers a nonreturnable container or a beverage in a nonreturnable container.
   (b)   A dealer who regularly sells beverages for consumption off the
dealer's premises shall provide on the premises, or within 100 yards of the
premises on which the dealer sells or offers for sale a beverage in a
returnable container, a convenient means whereby the containers of any kind,
size and brand, sold or offered for sale by the dealer, may be returned by and
the deposit refunded in cash to, a person whether or not the person is the
original customer of that dealer, and whether or not the container was sold by
that dealer.
   (c)   A dealer shall not refuse to accept from a person an empty returnable
container of any kind, size and brand sold by that dealer, nor refuse to pay to
the person its full refund value in cash, except as provided in subsections (d)
and (f) of this section.
   (d)   A dealer who does not require a deposit on a returnable container when
the contents are consumed in the dealer's sale or consumption area shall not be
required to pay a refund for accepting that empty container.
   (e)   A distributor shall not refuse to accept from a dealer an empty
returnable container of any kind, size and brand sold by that distributor, nor
refuse to pay to the dealer its full refund value in cash, except as provided
in subsection (f) of this section.
   (f)   Every beverage container sold or offered for sale by a dealer within
this state shall clearly indicate by embossing or by a stamp, or by a label or
other method securely affixed to the beverage container, the refund value of
the container and the name of this state. A dealer or distributor may, but is
not required to, refuse to accept from a person an empty returnable container
which does not state thereon the refund value of the container and the name of
this state. This subsection shall not apply to a refillable container having a
refund value of not less than $0.10 which has a brand name permanently marked
on it. Each container of this type shall clearly indicate by a method securely
affixed to the container that the container is returnable for deposit.
   (g)   A dealer within this state shall not sell, offer for sale or give to
consumers a metal beverage container, any part of which becomes detached when
opened.
(Ord. No. 80-2, § 2, 7-1-80)
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Charter reference— Streets and alleys, § 8.2.
Cross reference— Street address numbers, §
5-71; fees for cutting of public curbs, §
9-236 et seq.; sidewalk cafes, §
9-361 et seq.; street vendors, §
12-231 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 17-1—17-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1182, adopted Oct. 6, 2008, amended Art. II in its
entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. II
derived from Ord. No. 89-450, §§ 1, 2, and 4—6a, adopted May 2, 1989; and Ord.
No. 03-979, adopted Aug. 19, 2003.
Sec. 17-26. - Purpose.
   It is determined by the City of Dearborn that the right of all citizens to
make reasonable use of the streets and sidewalks must be preserved to the
greatest extent possible.
   It is further found that certain areas of the city suffer from serious
traffic congestion, both vehicular and pedestrian and that in order to assure
essential movement of persons and vehicles and to protect the rights of all
members of the public, traffic laws and regulations have been enacted and must
be enforced uniformly.
   It is further found that, during rush hour, areas of the city suffer from
extreme traffic congestion, requiring the strict enforcement of traffic laws
and regulations in order to protect the rights of all persons to move upon the
city streets.
   It is further found that various groups, associations and organizations
desirous of holding all public parades, marches and processions, wish to be
exempted from complying with the laws and regulations relating to traffic
controls, including but not limited to one-way street patterns, traffic lights,
traffic signals and signs, and various standard rules for the operation of
persons and motor vehicles.
   It is further found that such organizations, groups or associations often
desire and/or require police escorts to assure clear and safe passage for the
parade, march or procession.
   It is further found that it is the policy of the City of Dearborn to permit
waiver of enforcement of traffic laws and regulations relating to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic in certain conditions where such a waiver or variance in
normal procedures would not unreasonably obstruct or interfere with free
ingress and egress to and from public and private property or to and from
various areas of the city and will not present an unreasonable hazard to the
public. It is also found that a reasonable, short-term obstruction of ingress
and egress may be required for public safety on certain occasions.
   It is further found that the planning for, scheduling of personnel for, and
the carrying out of all necessary preparations for, and executions of, parades,
marches and processions in regard to which requests are made for waiver or
variance of laws or regulations relating to pedestrian or vehicular traffic
restriction of parking on the parade route, change of traffic patterns, or
provision of police escorts, require advance notice to the City of Dearborn and
require the expenditure of public funds.
   It is further found that unless adequate preparation is made and adequate
personnel are provided, it is both unsafe and impractical for parades, marches
or processions to move in or about the City of Dearborn's streets and sidewalks
unless in strict compliance with all laws and regulations relating to the
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Sec. 17-27. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   Assembly shall mean any event designed, promoted or conducted in order to
encourage the gathering of 15 or more people upon public property at a
specified location and shall include any, ceremony, show, demonstration,
exhibition, street dance, pageant, party, circus, concert, sporting event, game
or similar activity, except that a residential block party (section
17-110 et seq.) shall not be considered an assembly for the purposes of this
article, nor shall any event taking place entirely on property designated as a
city park.
   Chief of police includes any representative designated by the chief of
police.
   Exempted property shall mean public property where no special event permit
is required. In the City of Dearborn, exempted property means: The city-owned
land adjacent to the Ford Community and Performing Arts Center, the Police and
Court buildings, and the Henry Ford Centennial Library. Such use shall avoid,
to the degree possible, disruption of other normal or scheduled activities at
those facilities.
   Parade shall mean a procession of any kind, having a common purpose or goal,
which moves from place to place upon public property along a specified route
and shall include any march, race, walk-a-thon, bike-a-thon, demonstration, or
similar activity. The following processions are not included in the definition
of "parade":
      (1)   Processions composed wholly of the military or naval forces of the
United States or the State of Michigan;
      (2)   Processions incidental to a funeral;
      (3)   Processions composed of one or more governmental officials or
candidates accompanied by security personnel to which such officials or
candidates are entitled by virtue of their office or candidacy.
   Public property shall mean any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or parking lot
owned, controlled or managed by the city.
   Special event shall mean any assembly, or parade held on public property as
defined in this article. "Special event" shall not include events for which all
participants use sidewalks, observe traffic safety and safety regulations and
do not interfere with the safe and orderly movement of pedestrians, vehicles
and funeral processions.
   Sponsor shall mean the person who has applied for a permit under this
article. The sponsor shall be the person to whom the permit is issued.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 11-1317, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-
13; Ord. No. 15-1457, 3-17-15)
Sec. 17-28. - Permit required; procedure.
   (a)   Any person desiring to sponsor a special event on any street of the
city shall first obtain a permit therefore from the chief of police.
      (1)   Written application for such permit should be made to the chief of
police at least 30 days in advance in order to insure timely appeal of a denial
of the application.
      (2)   All applications for permits shall be processed by the chief of
police so long as they are received at least 15 working days in advance of the
proposed date of the event.
      (3)   However, when the proposed event designates a route that passes
through a business district, extends over an area which involves more than five
intersections (not including alleys) anticipates a number of participants
exceeding 250, the applicant shall apply at least 30 days in advance of the
proposed date.
      (4)   The chief of police may grant a permit to an applicant who applies
less than 15 working days in advance if the chief of police determines that the
permit application requires no substantial investigation or preparation of the
route.
   (b)   Application shall be made on a form provided by the chief of police
and shall include (if applicable):
      (1)   The name, business address, home address, business phone number and
home phone number of the applicant (who shall be a natural person), the sponsor
of the event, and the event organizer (the person responsible for managing and
organizing the details of the event);
      (2)   The relationship of the applicant to the sponsor;
      (3)   Proof of the applicant's authority to act on behalf of the sponsor;
      (4)   A description of the route of the event;
      (5)   The names of all of the streets to be used;
      (6)   The number of participants anticipated;
      (7)   The starting time and expected finishing time of the event;
      (8)   A proposed plan to provide necessary parking, security, crowd
control, traffic control, sanitation facilities, noise control, and clean-up of
the area of the event;
      (9)   Any other information requested in order to enable the chief of
police to verify the information required in this subsection.
   (c)   Application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit application fee of $50.00.
   (d)   The chief of police may issue a permit immediately upon approval of
the permit application and execution and receipt of the indemnification
agreement or certificate of insurance if required by section
17-33.
   (e)   The chief of police shall, as appropriate, transmit copies of any
special event permit issued to the mayor's office, the fire department, the
department of public works, the finance department, the legal department, and
any other effected departments.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Sec. 17-29. - Exceptions.
   (a)   The time limitations prescribed above for the filing of a permit
application may be waived by the chief of police if the applicant can show that
the proposed special event is for the purpose of spontaneous communication of
topical ideas that could not have been foreseen in advance of the required
period or that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant prevented
timely filing of the application.
   (b)   No permit shall be required if a special event occurs on exempted
property as defined in this article.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Sec. 17-30. - Criteria for issuance.
   The chief of police shall issue a special event permit when, from
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, it appears that:
      (1)   The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the special event;
      (2)   The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of
so great a number of police officers to properly police the special event and
the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
      (3)   The conduct of the special event will not prevent normal ambulance
service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the special
event and contiguous areas;
      (4)   The conduct of the special event will not interfere with the
movement of firefighting equipment;
      (5)   The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a
disturbance;
      (6)   The special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route; and
      (7)   Approval has been obtained from the owners of all property on which
the special event is scheduled to occur; and
      (8)   The applicant for a permit, the sponsor of the event, and the event
organizer have not violated the terms of any previous special event permit,
have not caused undue traffic congestion and/or police problems under any
previous special event permit, and are current on any fees charged in
conjunction with any previous special event permit.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Sec. 17-31. - Notice of denial; appeal.
   (a)   If the chief of police denies an application for a special event
permit, notice of denial shall be mailed to the applicant. Such notice shall
state the reasons for the denial of the permit.
   (b)   Denial of an application for a special event permit may be appealed to
the city council. The appeal shall be filed within five business days after the
notice of denial is received.
      (1)   The city council shall consider such appeal and may either concur
in the action of the chief of police or overrule such action and order that the
permit be approved. If the city council orders that a permit be approved, it
shall have the authority to impose only such conditions as are recommended by
the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Sec. 17-32. - Payment of city services.
   (a)   The sponsor of a special event who accepts a permit thereby consents
to the formation of a contract between the sponsor and the city for payment of
costs for city services and equipment as set forth in this section.
   (b)   Within 21 days of the conclusion of the special event, the city will
send the sponsor a bill for the actual amount of the direct and reasonable
costs incurred by the city to provide additional police and public works
services for the special event.
   (c)   Within 14 days after the date of the bill, the sponsor shall pay to
the city the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city to provide
additional police and public works services for the special event.
   (d)   The requirements of this section shall be waived if the applicant can
show that the proposed special event is a constitutionally protected event.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Sec. 17-33. - Insurance or indemnification requirement; exception.
   The applicant, the sponsor of the event, and the event organizer shall
provide one of the following:
      (1)   An insurance certificate that (1) shall be subject to the approval
of the legal department as to company, form and coverage; (2) evidences general
liability coverage that is primary to and non-contributory with all other
insurance and self-insurance maintained by the city, naming the city as an
additional insured; (3) evidences an endorsement to include a waiver of
subrogation in favor of the city; and (4) protects the city from any and all
claims and risks in connection with any activity performed pursuant to the
special event permit and/or any use and occupancy of the property authorized by
the special event permit.
      (2)   An executed hold harmless agreement that (1) shall be subject to
the approval of the legal department; and (2) indemnifies, defends, and holds
the city, its elected officials, officers, boards, commissions, employees and
agents harmless from any and all claims, actions, suits, proceedings, damages,
costs, and expenses (including reasonable attorney fees) whatsoever arising out
of the use and occupation of the public property authorized by the special
event permit and any act or omission of the sponsor holder or any of its
officers, employees, agents, licensees, or the invitees of any of the same
(collectively referred to as "actors") or arising out of or relating to any
concurrent act or omission of any of the above-referenced actors and the city
or any city officer, elected official, employee or agent. Nothing herein shall
be construed as requiring the sponsor to indemnify the city against liability
for bodily injury or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole
negligence of the city or any of its officers, elected officials, employees, or
agents. The indemnification obligation set forth in this subsection shall
survive the expiration or early termination of the special event permit.
      (3)   The requirements of this section shall be waived if the applicant
can show that the proposed special event is a constitutionally protected event.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 13-1413, 11-26-13)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-1413, adopted November 26, 2013, renamed §
17-33 from indemnification agreement to insurance or indemnification
requirement; exception
Sec. 17-34. - Revocation of permit.
   (a)   The chief of police may revoke a special event permit if an emergency
arises which makes it impossible to assign the necessary personnel to the event
and still provide the personnel required elsewhere to protect the public, or if
information is received after the permit is issued from which the chief of
police reasonably concludes that the permit should not have been approved.
   (b)   If participants violate any conditions contained in a special event
permit, the chief of police or the police officer assigned by the chief of
police as the officer in charge of overseeing personnel necessary to police the
event may, after warning the participants and providing them with an
opportunity to follow the permit conditions, revoke the permit.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08)
Sec. 17-35. - Unlawful to sponsor or participate in a special event without a
permit.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor a special event unless a
permit has been issued for the event, or for any person to participate in such
an event with the knowledge that the sponsors of the event have not been issued
the required permit or with the knowledge that a permit has been issued and
subsequently revoked.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08)
Sec. 17-35A. - Parade safety.
   (a)   Ladders, scaffolding or any type of platform or portable elevating
devices are prohibited on the street of any parade route between the curbs or
on the sidewalks. Such devices shall also be prohibited between the curbs or on
the sidewalks of any street intersecting with the parade route.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to place or cause to
be placed, any type of obstruction, including, but not limited to ropes, tents,
scaffolds, barricades or vehicles, which may act as an impediment to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic on any right-of-way along a parade route without first
securing permission from the council.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a parade participant to
place or carry any type of banner, sign, or placard within the parade route.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or spray an object at or
to any participant, vehicle or animal in a parade.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride on or use
skates, skateboards, roller blades, bicycles, unicycles, or any other type of
cycles within 50 feet of any parade route.
(Ord. No. 11-1317, 3-21-11)
Sec. 17-36. - Film making.
   (a)   Purpose. The state has adopted legislation that encourages the
production of movies and TV shows, the creation of film industry
infrastructure, and the hiring of Michigan workers for the wide range of jobs
that exist in the film making industry. The goal of the legislation is to
benefit the economy statewide.
   The city encourages the production of motion pictures and television within
its boundaries. This section provides the basis for the rules and regulations
governing filming, video taping and related activity within the city. This
section is intended to ensure that filming/video taping is done consistent with
public health and safety and the protection of property.
   (b)   [Waivers.] The chief of police, or his designee, in his discretion,
may waive the requirements of this article and may authorize the use of any
city street, right-of-way, park, public area, or public building/structure, for
use in the filming, taping, or production of any film project, including but
not limited to movies, television, commercials or training films.
      (1)   The chief of police or his designee shall have full control over
the general location, hours, and use of public streets, buildings, equipment
and personnel while being used for filming, taping, or production purposes.
      (2)   The chief of police or his designee shall have the full and
absolute right to prohibit and/or order the cessation of filming, taping and/or
the production of any project if such acts are determined to be detrimental to
public health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   The chief of police or his designee may negotiate charges for
direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city to provide additional police
and public works services needed to respond to the film making request.
      (4)   The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to impose
additional regulations under this section for the protection of public safety
and welfare.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08)
Sec. 17-37. - Penalty.
   A violation of this article shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor offense.
(Ord. No. 08-1182, 10-6-08)
Secs. 17-38—17-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - CURB CUTS
Sec. 17-51. - Permit required; fee.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, alter or change any concrete or
other curb in or upon any city street or city road without first having
obtained a permit therefor. In all cases such a permit shall only authorize
such work to be done by a licensed contractor upon payment to the city
treasurer of a permit and inspection fee, as established by section
12-6.
(Ord. No. 81-124, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-52. - Specifications; approval.
   All cuts shall be made according to specifications provided by the
department of building and safety. All cuts shall be approved by an inspector
after the setting of concrete forms and prior to the placing of concrete. All
curb cuts for any one opening of more than 35 feet must be approved by the
department of building and safety and the city engineer. All requests for
permits for curb cutting of over 35 feet for any one opening must be
accompanied with three copies of a sketch showing the proposed curb opening and
the adjacent property involved.
(Ord. No. 81-124, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-53. - Apron between curb, sidewalk.
   No permit to cut any curb shall be issued by the department of building and
safety unless and until the applicant shall agree in such application, as a
condition to the issuance of the permit, to install a concrete apron between
the curb and the sidewalk within 30 days after completion of the cut. Failure
to comply within the time limited therefor shall be and constitute a violation
hereof, subject to the penalties prescribed in section
1-9.
(Ord. No. 81-124, § 2, 11-4-81)
Secs. 17-54—17-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - STREETS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 17-71—17-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - OBSTRUCTIONS
Sec. 17-96. - Scope.
   The naming of any article or thing in this division as an obstruction or
encroachment shall not be construed as limiting the scope of this division to
such particular articles or things, but all materials and things of every kind
and nature located in any street, alley or public place, constituting an
obstruction or encroachment thereof, shall be deemed a violation of this
division, unless a permit therefore has been obtained in accordance with the
terms of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-57, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-97. - Prohibited generally.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley or other public place within the
city with animals, boxes, barrels, posts, poles, fences, buildings, building
material or thing whatsoever, except as herein otherwise provided, and no
person shall permit to remain or maintain, by encroachment or otherwise, in any
street, alley or public place, any building, structure, posts, poles, fences,
gasoline pumps, oil pumps, tanks, air services, awnings, marquees, stairways,
coal chutes, areaways, gratings, excavations, vehicles or signs.
(Ord. No. 81-57, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-98. - Minimum specifications.
   Any items placed within the public right-of-way, particularly unpaved walk
area, shall not be permitted unless the following specifications or conditions
are observed:
      (1)   No obstruction shall be permitted or so located unless at least 30
inches high above grade level.
      (2)   No obstruction shall be permitted closer than 24 inches from the
curb line.
      (3)   The space between obstruction and lot line side of sidewalk shall
never be less than 48 inches.
      (4)   Obstruction shall never be permitted to exceed 20 percent of paved
walk areas.
      (5)   All such obstructions, if permitted, shall be of a decorative
nature and should not advertise or suggest the wares or services provided by
adjacent businesses.
(Ord. No. 81-57, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-99. - Permitted obstructions.
   (a)   Permits may be granted under this division for the following:
      (1)   The erection of signs, awnings and marquise when attached to and
supported by a substantial structure on privately owned property if not
projecting beyond curb line.
      (2)   Coal chutes, if provided with tight cover without openings when the
same do not project above the sidewalk level nor extend below the sidewalk
grade more than three feet, nor project out into public property more than 18
inches.
      (3)   Temporary obstruction of a sidewalk in front of a business building
for the purpose of erection or alteration of such building, as provided for in
the building code.
      (4)   Moving buildings or other structures upon streets and alleys,
provided, however, that the application for a permit to move buildings along
public thoroughfares shall first be approved by the chief of police and chief
of the fire department.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued under this section by the director of public
works, the city engineer, or one of their designees, unless the applicant shall
pay to the city treasurer the sum of $100.00, and in addition thereto shall
file a sufficient bond, in amount to be approved by the director of public
works, the city engineer, or one of their designees, conditioned to indemnify
the city against all losses and damages that may result from the use of the
permit granted, or by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such
permit is issued, his agents, servants and employees.
(Ord. No. 81-57, § 3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 15-1489, 9-22-15)
Sec. 17-99.1 - Temporary obstructions.
   (a)   Permits may be issued by the director of public works, the city
engineer, or one of their designees, under this division for the following:
      (1)   The temporary obstruction of a public right-of-way for construction
related activities.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued under this section unless the applicant
shall pay to the city treasurer the sum of $100.00, and in addition thereto
shall file a permit application which shall indemnify the city against all
losses and damages that may result from the use of the permit granted, or by
the reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit is issued, his
agents, servants, and employees.
(Ord. No. 15-1489, 9-22-15)
Sec. 17-100. - Permits; application, review, etc.
   An application for a permit to place items within the public right-of-way
shall be made to the director of public works. The proposed design shall be
reviewed by the city engineer, city planner and city beautiful commission and a
recommendation made to the director of public works prior to issuance of a
permit. If a state or county road or right-of-way is affected, the applicant
shall submit in writing the approval of the appropriate jurisdiction for the
proposed project prior to issuance of a permit.
(Ord. No. 81-57, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-101. - Gasoline tanks, pumps.
   No person shall occupy any part of any street, alley or other public place
in the city for the installation, operation or maintenance of any gasoline tank
or pump or any other device dispensing flammable liquids or oils of any nature.
(Ord. No. 81-57, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-102. - Snow removal.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   Person shall not include the state, a political subdivision of the
state, an employee of the state or a political subdivision of the state
operating within the scope of his duties.
      (2)   Safety vision means an unobstructed line of sight enabling a driver
to travel upon, enter, or exit a roadway in a safe manner.
   (b)   A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice or slush
onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which
obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than offroad
vehicles.
   (c)   A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice, or
slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which
obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle.
   (d)   A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or
slush on any roadway, highway or sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.677a.
Secs. 17-103—17-109. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2A. - BLOCK PARTIES
Sec. 17-110. - Definitions.
   The following words, phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Block party shall mean or refer to an organized group of residents gathered
in a specified area on a public street or right of way within a neighborhood,
not to exceed two blocks.
   Sponsor shall mean or refer to a designated resident within the specified
block party area of the neighborhood who shall be held responsible for the
activities within that area for the duration of the block party.
(Ord. No. 04-1001, 4-20-04)
Sec. 17-111. - Permit required.
   It shall be unlawful to organize or participate in any block party in the
city unless a permit has first been obtained from the city clerk’s office.
(Ord. No. 04-1001, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 16-1565, 1-17-17)
Sec. 17-112. - Application for permit.
   An application for a permit for any block party regulated under this article
shall be made to the city clerk’s office, at least 48 hours prior to the event,
on a form provided therefor. The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor organizing such
party.
      (2)   Location of the block party, including those streets to be
barricaded and the cross streets involved.
      (3)   Date(s) and time(s) for the party and alternate date(s) in the
event of inclement weather.
      (4)   Date and location of any past block party organized or participated
in by sponsor.
      (5)   A petition signed by at least 50 percent of the people who reside
on the streets requested to be barricaded. A form for the petition must be
obtained from the city clerk’s office.
(Ord. No. 04-1001, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 16-1565, 1-17-17)
Sec. 17-113. - Permit fees.
   The license fee, listed in Section
12-6 of Chapter 12, must be paid before the license is issued.
(Ord. No. 04-1001, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 16-1565, 1-17-17; Ord. No. 22-1724, 2-8-
22)
Sec. 17-114. - Barricades required.
   (a)   Barricades obtained from the department of public works must be
utilized to secure streets. The sponsor will be charged $60.00 per barricade if
the barricades are not returned or returned in a damaged condition.
   (b)   Barricades must be returned to the department of public works within
five days of the date of issuance. Failure to do so will result in a $60.00
charge to the block party sponsor for each missing barricade. Failure to pay
any invoice generated to cover the cost of missing or damaged barricades within
30 days will accrue interest at the established city rates. Any such charges
that remain uncollected as of December 31 of the year in which the invoice was
generated shall be reported by the Finance Director to the Council to be
collected by special assessment, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 15 of the Charter of the city.
(Ord. No. 04-1001, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 16-1565, 1-17-17)
Sec. 17-115.   Access to streets.
   (a)   Street access shall not be blocked by motor vehicles, picnic tables,
trash receptacles, etc.
   (b)   Street access must remain available for emergency vehicles at all
times.
   (c)   Non-participating residents must be allowed access to their property
at all times.
   (d)   All streets must be cleared and re-opened for traffic no later than
midnight on the day of the party.
(Ord. No. 16-1565, 1-17-17)
Sec. 17-116.   Revocation of permit.
   The chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to revoke a
block party permit if it is deemed to be in the best interest of the residents
of the city.
(Ord. No. 16-1565, 1-17-17)
Secs. 17-117—17-120. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION OF PIPES, MAINS, CONDUITS, POLES
Sec. 17-121. - Permits required.
   No person shall lay, construct, maintain, operate or use pipes, mains,
conductors or lines of pipes or other appliances including service connections
in any street, alley, easement, public or private property in the city for the
purpose of supplying or selling manufactured or natural gas for illuminating
and fuel purposes, nor shall any person lay conduits, erect poles or place
thereon or therein wires or conductors for the purpose of furnishing telephone
or telegraph service or electric power including service connections in or over
any street, alley, easement, public or private property in the city without
having first obtained a permit therefor from the department of building and
safety.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-122. - Application for, approval of permit.
   Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this division shall
file a proper application therefor with the department of building and safety,
upon forms prescribed and furnished by the department, and shall attach thereto
detailed plans and specifications showing the nature, object and location of
the work for which such permit is desired. If such plans and specifications are
approved by the department of building and safety, and, in the case of
underground work, by the office of the city engineer, the permit shall issue in
accordance with the application filed.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-123. - Fees.
   The council shall, by resolution, fix and determine the various fees and
charges incidental to the issuance of any permit required under the provisions
of this division, upon the recommendation of the director of the department of
building and safety, except the annual maintenance permit. No permit shall
issue as herein provided unless any fee or fees previously incurred shall have
been paid to the treasurer upon demand therefor and a receipt therefor
obtained.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-124. - Liability for damage or injury.
   (a)   The person to whom a permit shall be granted under this division shall
do no injury in any street, avenue, alley, lane, sidewalk, park or other public
place; to any shade trees, shrubs, lawns, concrete paving or sidewalk, or other
like improvement; in any manner disturb or interfere with any sewer, water
main, pipe or conduit, any other public or private appliances now or hereafter
laid or constructed by any authorized person; shall fully indemnify and save
harmless the city from any and all claims and damages for which the city might
be made or become liable to pay by reason of the construction, maintaining or
repairing or operating the poles, conduits, wires, mains, pipes or any
apparatus connected therewith, or otherwise arising from the use or possession
of any of the rights and privileges granted or from any neglect on the part of
such person or of his employees to comply with the provisions of this division
or other applicable ordinances of the city; and especially shall indemnify the
city and assume all liability and damages which may arise, come or occur to the
city from any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work herein
mentioned, or the neglect of any person to comply with the provisions of this
division or other ordinances relative to the use of streets or other public
places, especially as to the putting up of lights or barriers at or around
excavations.
   (b)   The acceptance by any person of any permit under the provisions of
this division shall be in agreement by it to pay to the city any sum of money
for which the city may become liable from or by reason of such injury. Such
person shall be given written notice of any and all formal claims, suits and
demands filed with the city within 30 days after receipt of same and shall be
given an opportunity to defend same.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-125. - Poles and transmission lines.
   All poles and structures for power and/or communication transmission lines
erected under a permit issued under this division shall be firmly set in the
ground so as not to create any obstruction to sidewalks, service walks,
sidedrives, approaches, etc. Any pole erected in parking areas must be of the
approved type and at locations approved by the building and safety department;
provided, however, areas having an industrial zoning classification are exempt
from this provision.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-126. - Mains, conduits, or wires in ground.
   All operating and conducting mains, conduits and wires used for the purpose
of transmitting electrical energy which are laid below the surface of the
ground shall be insulated and protected in parallel with the property lines
thereof, and at such locations therein and at such depth as shall be approved
by the city engineer. It is especially required that all service connections
used by the permittee under this section shall be connected only with the
nearest main source of supply laid in the alley or in the street nearest to the
building into which it is desired to conduct such service.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-127. - Excavations.
   (a)   At least 48 hours before opening or excavating in any street, alley or
any public place for the above or for any other purpose, except in cases of
emergency, and except for service connection installations, the permittee shall
notify the department of public works in writing of such intent, stating the
number of the permit and the date of the issuance thereof.
   (b)   In the opening and refilling of all such openings and excavations, the
relaying of the pavement and other work necessary to the complete restoration
of the street, pavement, sidewalk or grounds to an equally good condition as
when disturbed, shall be under the supervision of the department of public
works.
   (c)   No street, avenue or public place shall be allowed to remain open or
encumbered for a longer period than authorized to execute the work for which
the same has been opened, and the department of public works may extend the
period allowed for the completion of such work for such time as they may deem
necessary and advisable upon proper application therefor.
   (d)   The earth removed in making such excavation shall be restored;
provided, however, where pavement has been broken, no debris, broken concrete
or noncompatible substances shall be used in such refilling, and the pavement
shall be relaid by the permittee in as good a condition as before the making of
such excavation, and thereafter be maintained in as good a condition as the
surrounding pavement until the street or alley or public place shall be allowed
to remain open or such street, alley or public place be encumbered for a longer
period than it shall be necessary to execute the work for which the same is
made.
   (e)   The cost of restoring the earth or other cost arising from such
excavations and the relaying of the pavement, and the repairs thereto caused by
the opening of any such street, alley or public place, shall be at the expense
of the permittee, and such work shall be done under the supervision of the
department of public works. The expense of such supervision shall be paid by
the permittee on presentation of bills certified by the director of building
and safety. Any expense to which the city shall be put from the neglect of
company or its employees in the doing of any work, or the doing of the same in
any unworkmanlike manner, of the digging of ditches or holes and erection of
poles, or restoring the earth or any excavation or relaying or replacing of any
pavement shall be paid in like manner by the permittee on presentation of the
bill of costs certified by the director of building and safety. It shall be the
duty of the permittee in each instance to pay promptly all bills for labor and
material, supervision, etc., incurred by the city in relaying and restoring any
pavement or surface disturbed by the permittee and, if such bills properly
certified by the director of building and safety remain unpaid for the space of
30 days after the presentation to the permittee, thereafter the permittee shall
not be entitled to receive any permit under this division, provided while such
permittee remains in default in the payment of any bills, as hereinabove
provided.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-128. - Supervision generally.
   The department of public works shall have the supervision of the
construction of all lines of wires erected in pursuance of this division, and
all connections made with any building or buildings. In the stringing of lines
of wires or the laying of any conduits, the council shall prescribe and
determine the street or streets in which it shall be lawful to erect or
construct lines of wires above ground or lay conduits in the ground for street
lighting purposes, and no person shall erect any pole or train any wire for
such lines above or in the ground in any street, alley or highway, unless the
same is authorized by such permit.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-129. - Underground conduits may be required.
   Whenever the director of public works shall deem it for the public interest,
he may require as a condition to the issuing of any permit that the wires shall
be laid in underground conduits. Service drops to commercial buildings
requiring additional poles to service on the building, if less than 30 feet of
building, shall be run underground.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-130. - Permit not vested right.
   Any rights acquired under any permit issued under this division shall cease
whenever the council shall so direct, and all poles and wires, conduits, mains,
pipes or other appliances shall thereupon be removed or relocated, upon proper
permit so to do, at the expense of the person erecting, laying or controlling
the same.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-131. - Removal of conduits, mains, etc.
   When any wires erected or any conduits, mains or other appliances laid or
constructed under the provisions of this division or which may have been
erected, laid or constructed prior to the adoption hereof interfere in any way
with the use, improvement or alteration of any street, alley, lane, park or
other public place by the city, the council may direct the removal of the same,
or such alteration in relation thereto as will obviate or prevent such
interference, and failure to so remove or alter the same shall be considered a
violation of the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-132. - Emergencies.
   In case of emergencies such as, but not limited to, repairs to gas mains,
repairs to service and service connections or any breakdown of the utility
company service, no permit will be required to place the service in operation.
Copies of the utility company work orders or repairs shall be submitted to the
department of building and safety as soon as possible after repairs are made.
Permit and inspection fees will be billed to the utility company at the end of
each month.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-133. - Appeal.
   Any person denied a permit under this division may appeal from such denial
to the building board of appeals by filing a written application with the
secretary of the board not less than ten days subsequent to the denial of their
application for a permit and shall in the application for appeal fully and
particularly set forth the nature and grounds upon which their appeal is based.
The board shall, within ten days after the filing of such notice of appeal,
grant a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be held not less than two days nor
more than 15 days after the filing of such notice of appeal; provided, however,
that no filing fee shall be required for such appeal. Upon the hearing of such
appeal, the board shall either grant or deny the permit as originally applied
for.
(Ord. No. 81-101, § 15, 11-4-81)
Secs. 17-134—17-150. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CURB SERVICE
Sec. 17-151. - Definition.
   For the purposes of this division, the phrase "curb service" shall mean the
use of the public streets by a person engaged in business in any store,
temporary or permanent stand or box, building, structure or the like, for the
sale or solicitation of sales of goods, wares or merchandise.
(Ord. No. 81-60, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-152. - Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the public streets in the city
for the purpose of furnishing curb service.
(Ord. No. 81-60, § 1, 11-4-81)
Secs. 17-153—17-170. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALKS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 17-171—17-195. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS AND APRONS FOR SIDE DRIVES
Sec. 17-196. - Definition.
   For the purposes of this division, the words "apron for side drive" shall
mean and refer to solid concrete slabs laid between the curb and the sidewalk
over which vehicles may be driven in entering or leaving a side drive.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 1, 11-5-86)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 17-197. - Required; obligation to build.
   All sidewalks and aprons for side drives in the city, except crosswalks,
shall be built, maintained and repaired by the owner of lands improved thereby
in the manner and within the time prescribed by this division. In case of the
failure of such owner to comply with the provisions of this division, the city
may build, maintain or repair, or cause to be built, maintained or repaired,
such aprons for side drives and sidewalks and assess the cost against such
owner and against the land improved thereto. To the amount of such assessment
may be added an amount to cover overhead, such amount not to exceed 15 percent
of the actual cost, which cost and overhead shall be a charge and lien against
the land improved thereby until payment has been made.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 1, 11-5-86)
Sec. 17-198. - Enforcement.
   The director of public works shall have general supervision and control of
all sidewalks and aprons for side drives and the building, maintenance, repair
and construction thereof, including inspection, and it shall be his duty to
enforce the provisions of this division. He may act by himself or by any duly
authorized subordinate in any of the matters herein provided to be done by him,
and shall, whenever authorized by the council, employ such assistants as may be
necessary to enforce the provisions thereof. He may designate any competent
assistant as sidewalk inspector for the purposes of this division or for the
enforcement of its provisions.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 2, 11-5-86)
Sec. 17-199. - Furnish lines and grades.
   All sidewalks and aprons for side drives laid in the city shall conform to
the lines and grades officially established by the city engineer, and such
sidewalks and aprons for side drives must be laid according to the
specifications authorized and approved by the city council in accordance with
the provisions of this division. Application shall be made to the director of
public works for the grades and lines to be followed before the work is
commenced.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 3, 11-5-86)
Sec. 17-200. - Determination of necessity, notice.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, it is necessary to build,
rebuild, replace or repair any sidewalk or apron for side drive in the city,
the council shall declare such opinion by resolution, whereupon the director of
public works shall cause to be served upon the owner of any lot in front of or
adjacent to which such sidewalk or apron for side drive is required to be
built, rebuilt, replaced or repaired, that such sidewalk or apron for side
drive must be built, rebuilt, replaced or repaired within ten days after the
service of such notice, or that the work will be done by the city under the
direction of the director of public works and assess the cost against such
owner and against the land improved thereto. To the amount of such assessment
may be added an amount to cover overhead, such amount not to exceed ten percent
of the actual cost, which cost and overhead shall be a charge and lien against
the land improved thereby until payment has been made. Such notice may be
served by securely posting it upon the premises, if the owner cannot be found.
If the owner shall fail or neglect to comply with the terms of the notice
aforesaid, the director of public works shall cause such sidewalk or apron for
side drive to be built, rebuilt, replaced or repaired, as the case may be.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 4, 11-5-86)
Sec. 17-201. - Contents of notice.
   Notices provided for under this division shall contain the name of the owner
of the lot in front of or adjacent to which the sidewalk or apron for side
drive is required to be built, rebuilt, replaced or repaired, if known, a
description of the property to be improved thereby, and shall designate the
work required to be done. Such notices shall also recite that the work is
required to be done by resolution of the council, giving the date of such
resolution, and such other information as shall enable the owner notified to
comply fully with the terms thereof.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 5, 11-5-86)
Sec. 17-202. - Charge for construction; special assessment.
   Upon the completion of the building, re-building, replacing or repairing of
any sidewalk or apron for side drive by the city, in accordance with the
provisions of this division, the city shall assess the cost thereof against
such owner and against the land improved. To the amount of such assessment may
be added an amount to cover overhead, such amount not to exceed 15 percent of
the actual cost. Notice of such assessment shall be mailed by the director of
public works to the owner of the property improved, if his address be known or
can with reasonable diligence be ascertained, demanding payment of the amount
due. If such amount is not paid to the city within 30 days from the date of
such bill, the amount due shall be assessed against such property as a special
assessment, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 15 of the City
Charter.
      (1)   If the amount of the assessment shall be $250.00 or more, the
property owner shall have the option of paying such assessment in installments
over a period not to exceed five years, each installment to bear interest at a
rate not to exceed eight percent as determined by the city council, provided
further, that any annual installment not paid within 30 days shall be assessed
against the property as a special assessment in accordance with the provisions
of chapter 15 of the Charter of the City of Dearborn. The provisions of this
subsection shall apply to residential, commercial and industrial property
owners.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 6, 11-5-86; Ord. No. 05-1044, 6-20-05)
Sec. 17-203. - Duty to construct; damages.
   It shall be the duty of every owner of property improved by sidewalk or
aprons for side drives to make such improvements, repairs or maintenance as are
necessary to keep such sidewalks and aprons in a condition reasonably safe for
public travel. Any damages or judgments sustained by the city as a result of
the neglect or refusal of the property owner to keep such sidewalk or aprons in
a reasonable state of repair shall result in such owner being liable to the
city for the full amount of such damages sustained by the city.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 7, 11-5-86; Ord. No. 05-1044, 6-20-05)
Sec. 17-204. - Permit to construct.
   Every person proposing to lay, construct, reconstruct, replace or repair any
sidewalk or apron for side drive in the city shall apply to the department of
public works for a permit so to do. Such application shall be in writing upon
blanks to be furnished by the city and shall contain such information as may be
necessary to secure the enforcement of all the provisions of this division. The
applicant shall, before a permit is issued, pay a permit fee computed at the
rate of $0.30 per lineal foot of sidewalk or apron for a side drive to be
constructed, replaced or repaired, such charge to cover the cost of inspection
and the expense of establishing the lines, widths and grades of sidewalks or
aprons for side drives; provided, however, that in no case shall such permit
fee be less than $10.00; provided, further that in cases where the work of
construction, replacement or repairing of sidewalks or aprons for side drives
is to be done by the city, as covered by this division, the payment of the
permit fee herein prescribed shall be postponed until such time as the owner of
the lot being charged for such work is billed therefor, and such permit fee
shall be deemed to be included in and a part of the 15 percent charge for
overhead and added to the cost of such work, as above set forth.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 8, 11-5-86)
Sec. 17-205. - Minimum specifications.
   All sidewalks and aprons for side drives being constructed, replaced or
repaired in accordance with the provisions of this division shall have the
following minimum specifications:
      (1)   Width of five feet or more as specified by the city engineer. In
cases where there are practical difficulties or a hardship, the city engineer
may, in his discretion, allow a sidewalk to be four feet wide.
      (2)   Thickness of four inches or more as specified by the city engineer.
      (3)   Designed strength of concrete 3,000 pounds compression per square
inch at 28 days or more.
(Ord. No. 86-373, § 9, 11-5-86; Ord. No. 00-813, 3-21-00)
Secs. 17-206—17-220. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS AREAS
Sec. 17-221. - Accumulation of dirt, trash, weeds.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or occupant or any person having
charge of any lot or parcel of land being used for commercial or business
purposes of any nature within the city, to permit or allow an unsightly amount
of dirt, rubbish, trash, weeds, or debris of any nature to accumulate on the
sidewalk adjoining such establishment. The presence of the aforementioned items
upon any sidewalk adjoining any business or commercial establishment within the
city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 74-1805, § 1, 12-17-74)
Sec. 17-222. - Duty to provide receptacles.
   It is the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant, or any person having charge
of any lot or parcel of land being used for commercial or business purposes of
any nature within the city to provide adequate receptacles for the deposit of
trash or litter of any kind in a convenient place located near such
establishments. Failure to provide adequate receptacles for the deposit of
trash or litter may result in certificate of occupancy review.
   It is the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant, or any person having charge
of any lot or parcel of land being used for commercial or business purposes of
any nature within the city to provide for the disposal of trash or litter
accumulated in all receptacles placed on the property. No receptacle shall be
permitted to accumulate litter or trash to the point of overflowing. Failure to
provide for adequate litter or trash disposal shall result in the following
penalty:
 
First offense:            $100.00 and/or 5 days community service
Second offense:           $300.00 and/or 10 days community service
Third/subsequent offense: $500.00 and/or 93 days jail
 
   Repeat offenses may result in certificate of occupancy review.
(Ord. No. 74-1805, § 2, 12-17-74; Ord. No. 02-893, 4-16-02)
Secs. 17-223—17-240. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - PLANTING AND CARING FOR TREES AND SHRUBS ALONG STREETS AND PUBLIC
PLACES
Sec. 17-241. - Violations.
   The doing of any act forbidden by this article, neglecting or refusing to
perform any act required to be done by this article or neglecting or refusing
to obey any order of the proper authorities of the city authorized hereby to be
made, shall constitute and be a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-242. - Public benefit declared; obligation of property owner.
   Planting and caring for trees and shrubs, or either of them, along and
within the boundary lines of streets and public places in the city and in front
of or adjacent to lots or parcels of land abutting upon streets and public
places for the purpose of beautifying such streets and public places are hereby
declared to be public improvements which benefit the lots and parcels of land
abutting upon or adjacent to such streets and public places along which such
trees and shrubs, or either of them, are planted.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 24-1826, 10-8-24)
Sec. 17-243. - Assessment of costs, collection.
   (a)   Upon the completion of the planting and caring for trees and shrubs
provided for by this article, a bill for the cost thereof, together with the
additional ten percent, as above specified, shall be mailed by the director of
public works to the owner of the property improved, if his address is known or
can with reasonable diligence be ascertained, requesting payment of the amount
due. If such amount is not paid to the city within 30 days from the date of
such bill, the amount due shall be assessed against such property as a special
assessment, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 15 of the charter.
   (b)   If the planting occurs in a geographical area or district represented
by an area association, membership in which is open to all property owners and
tenants in the defined area, and the planting occurs as the result of a request
of the association or the planting is requested and approved by the property
owners and tenants representing 75 percent of the property in the affected area
and the costs and overhead hereinabove identified exceed $300.00, the property
owner or person charged with the responsibility of paying the bill shall have
the option of paying the bill in five equal annual installments, each
installment to bear interest at a rate not to exceed 7½ percent; provided
further, that any annual installment not paid within 30 days from its due date
shall be assessed against the property as a special assessment in accordance
with the provisions of the city charter.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-244. - Administration, enforcement.
   The director of public works shall have charge of the planting, care,
trimming, spraying and protection of all trees, shrubs and flowers within the
parks and public places of the city. It shall be his duty to cause all the
provisions of this article to be enforced both as to the planting, care and
protection of trees, shrubs and flowers upon streets, parks and public places,
and upon private premises in the city, as prescribed in this article.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-245. - Determination of necessity; notice.
   Whenever in the opinion of the city council it is necessary to plant any
trees along any street or sidewalk in the city, the council shall declare such
opinion by resolution, whereupon the director of public works shall cause to be
served upon the owners of any lot in front of or adjacent to which such tree or
trees are required to be planted, that such tree or trees must be planted
within ten days of the service of such notice, or that the work will be done by
the city under the direction of the director of public works, and the cost
thereof, with ten percent additional for overhead, will be charged to the owner
of the property improved, and if not sooner paid by such owner, will be
assessed against the property as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be
served by securely posting it upon the premises if the owner cannot be found.
If the owner can be found on or about the premises, such notice may be served
either personally or by ordinary mail on such owner of such lot. If such owner
shall fail or neglect to comply with the terms of the notice, the director of
public works shall cause any such tree to be planted as the case may be and the
costs assessed, as hereinabove provided.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 2a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-246. - Replacement of trees, flowers, etc.
   If a tree, shrubbery or flowers planted in accord with the provisions hereof
shall become damaged or diseased beyond repair, a notice similar in content,
form and surface shall be provided the owner of affected or abutting property
to replace the tree, shrubbery or flower and the costs assessed in the same
manner and form as an original planting under this article. The director of
public works shall be charged with responsibility for determining the extent of
damage or disease prior to issuance of a mandatory notice of replacement under
this article.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 2a, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-247. - Contents of notice.
   Notices provided for in this article shall contain the name of the owner of
the lot in front of or adjacent to which such tree or trees are required to be
planted, if known, a description of the property to be improved thereby, and
shall designate the work required to be done. Such notices shall also recite
that such tree or trees are required to be planted by resolution of the
council, giving the date of such resolution and such other information as shall
enable the owner notified to comply fully with the terms thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 2b, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-248. - Apportionment of costs.
   Whenever the spacing of trees ordered by the council to be planted along the
lines of streets or public places shall result in a greater number of trees
being planted in front of or adjacent to any one lot or parcel of land than is
required for other lots or parcels of land similarly located with respect to
the planting, the cost of the improvement shall be apportioned as benefits to
each lot or parcel of land according to the number of front feet of each lot or
parcel of land improved by the planting as a whole.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-249. - Location of trees.
   (a)   All trees planted along streets and/or public places must be selected
from a list of species recommended by the city forester or the director of
public works and shall be planted not less than 35 feet apart and three feet
from the general sidewalk line, except where the lawn space between the
sidewalk line and the curb is less than six feet wide, in which case the trees
shall be planted in the middle of the lawn space. All trees so planted shall be
of healthy stock, not less than 1½-inch caliper and tall enough so that the
first limb shall be not less than seven feet above the curb level. No hedges,
plants or shrubbery planted between the sidewalks and curbs of streets in the
city shall be permitted to grow more than four feet in height.
   (b)   In the case of original plantings or replacement, in accord with the
requirements of this article, the species selection shall be based upon
limitations of space, proximity of utilities, size and shape of mature trees,
avoidance of monoculture and commercial availability. Where possible and
practical, in the opinion of the director of public works, a choice of species
to a homeowner will be permitted based upon a list prepared by the director of
public works.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-250. - Permit required—General care.
   (a)   No person shall plant, grow, remove, transplant, treat, spray, do
surgery work on or otherwise care for any trees, shrubbery or other bushes and
plants, except grass, within the streets or public places of the city, without
first having obtained a permit therefor from the department of public works and
engineering of the city.
   (b)   Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the department
of public works. Such application shall contain the name and address of the
applicant, the description and dimensions of the property in front of which
such proposed planting is to be done, the kind and number of trees or shrubs
and their respective locations proposed to be planted.
   (c)   The director of public works shall inspect or cause to be inspected
the premises upon which the proposed planting is to be made and, if the same
shall conform in all respects to the general scheme of planting upon the street
and with all the provisions of this article, such permit shall be granted,
subject to everything being done in strict conformity with the provisions of
this article and in conformity to the general scheme of planting upon the
street.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-251. - Same—Trimming, removal.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, trim, remove, injure, destroy,
break, deface, disturb or care for any tree, shrub, plant or flower, except by
watering the same, within the limits of any street or public place of the city,
without first obtaining written permission from the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-252. - Attachment of rope, wire, etc.—On public property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any guy rope or other rope,
wire, cable or other contrivance whatsoever, to any tree within any street or
public place, or to use the same for any banner, sign or business purpose
whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-253. - Same—On private property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner or one having the
owner's consent, to break, injure, destroy or deface any tree, shrub or plant
or to attach any guy rope or other rope, wire, cable or other contrivance
whatsoever to any tree upon any private premises within the city.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-254. - Diseased, infected trees.
   No person shall plant, keep, maintain or cultivate any trees, shrubs or
other vegetation infected or attacked by any parasite, insect or disease nor
permit the same to exist upon any premises owned or occupied by him or them.
The director of public works and engineering shall have authority to provide
for the proper treatment and care of all trees, shrubs and other plants within
the streets and public places of the city, and shall have the power to enter
upon private premises to inspect any trees, shrubs or other plants growing
thereon and to take such action as may be necessary to protect and preserve
such infected trees or plants, and to prevent the spread of any such parasites,
insects or disease to other trees, shrubs and plants in the city. If necessary
to do so, the powers granted to the director of public works and engineering
shall extend to the destruction and removal of such infected trees, shrubs and
plants. Any attempt on the part of the owner or occupant of such premises to
prevent the entry thereof by the director of public works for the purpose set
forth in this section, shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-255. - Inspection; conformance to division.
   (a)   All planting, trimming or otherwise caring for trees, shrubs and other
plants, performed by the authority of permits granted by the director of public
works, in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall be subject to
his inspection.
   (b)   If such work is not done in accordance with the provisions of this
article and the conditions of such permits, he may order any necessary changes,
replanting, replacement or removal of such trees, shrubs or other plants. If
such orders are not complied with within a reasonable time, he may proceed to
do any and all work thus ordered at the cost and expense of the owner of the
property being improved by such planting or other work, such cost to be
collected or taxed to the property.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-256. - Assessment of costs for work.
   Upon the completion of the planting and otherwise caring for or doing and
performing any work or service upon such trees, shrubs and plants, or either or
any of them, upon the order either of the city council or of the director of
public works, in accordance with the provisions of this article, an invoice for
the cost thereof, together with 10 percent additional for overhead, shall be
mailed by the director of public works to the owner of the property thus
improved if his address be known or can, with reasonable diligence, be
ascertained, demanding payment of the amount due. If the amount is not paid to
the city treasurer within 30 days from the date of such bill, the amount
thereof shall be assessed against the property improved as a special assessment
within the provisions of chapter 15 of the charter.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-257. - Indemnification of city.
   It shall be the duty of every owner of property who shall be permitted to
plant any tree, shrub or other plant within the streets or public places of the
city to do any work to be done under such permit in such manner as to protect
the city from any damages or claims of damages to any person whatever, and if
such damages or claims of damages shall result from any improper work or
omission of necessary precautions to prevent such damages or to save the city
harmless from any such damages or claims of damages, such owner shall be liable
to the city for the full amount of such damages.
(Ord. No. 81-140, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17-258. - Unlawful removal of trees.
   A person who unlawfully removes, destroys, alters, or otherwise damages any
tree, shrubbery, bushes, or other plant material, shall be liable for a civil
fine and replacement costs, in addition to any other penalty under city
ordinance. The civil fine shall be paid to the city in an amount equal to the
total value of the trees, shrubbery, bushes, or other plant material that were
unlawfully removed as computed from the International Society of Arboriculture
shade tree value formula, or other generally recognized and established
organization. The city may require a combination of civil fine and tree
replacement but not to exceed the total value of any such illegally removed
tree(s). Tree replacement shall be on public property or on another's property
and be of a like kind and size as the ones that were illegally removed that are
commercially available.
(Ord. No. 05-1052, 7-18-05)
ARTICLE VII. SMALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT
Sec. 17-259.   Title and purpose.
   (a)   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “small wireless
communications facilities deployment ordinance.”
   (b)   The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of small
cell wireless infrastructure by the City of Dearborn, including but not limited
to, the activities of wireless infrastructure providers and wireless services
providers regarding the siting of certain wireless and “small cell” facilities.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-260.   Definitions.
   As used in this article:
   Act shall mean the Small Wireless Communications Facilities Deployment Act,
PA 365 of 2018, MCL 460.1301, et seq., as the same may be amended from time to
time.
   Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   Applicant means a wireless provider or wireless infrastructure provider that
submits an application described in this article.
   Authority unless the context implies otherwise, means the City of Dearborn,
the county, or the state to the extent authorized by law to make legislative,
quasi-judicial, or administrative decisions concerning an application described
in this article. Authority does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A municipally owned electric utility.
      (2)   An investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the Michigan
Public Service Commission (MPSC) created in section 1 of PA 3 of 1939, MCL
460.1.
      (3)   A state court having jurisdiction over an authority.
   City pole means a utility pole owned or operated by the city and located in
the public right-of-way (ROW).
   Co-locate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace
wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility
pole. “Collocation” has a corresponding meaning. “Co-locate” does not include
make-ready work or the installation of a new utility pole or new wireless
support structure.
   FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor agency.
   Fee means a one-time per small cell site charge for application processing
assessed by the city.
   Historic district means an historic district that is officially designated
pursuant to a local historic preservation ordinance adopted by the city
pursuant to the Local Historic District Acts, PA 169 of 1970, MCL 399.201, et
seq.
   Make-ready work means work necessary to enable a city pole or utility pole
to support collocation, and may include modification or replacement of utility
poles or modification of lines.
   Micro wireless facility means a small cell wireless facility that is not
more than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and
that does not have an exterior antenna more than 11 inches in length.
   MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission or any successor agency.
   Public right-of-way or ROW means the area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or utility easement
dedicated for compatible uses. Public right-of-way does not include any of the
following:
      (1)   A private right-of-way.
      (2)   A limited access highway.
      (3)   Land owned or controlled by a railroad as defined in section 109 of
the railroad code of 1993, PA 354 of 1993, MCL 462.109.
      (4)   Railroad infrastructure.
   Rate means an annual chare per site assessed by the city.
   Small cell wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of
the following requirements:
      (1)   Each antenna is not more than 6 cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility,
disregarding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, and vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, is cumulatively not
more than 25 cubic feet in volume.
   Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is or may be used in
whole or in part for cable or wireline communications service, electric
distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, ora similar function, or a
pole or similar structure that meets the height requirements in Sec.
17-262(e) and is designed to support small cell wireless facilities. Utility
pole does not include a sign pole less than 15 feet in height above ground.
   Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables the
provision of wireless services between user equipment and a communications
network, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial
or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility
includes a small cell wireless facility. Wireless facility does not include any
of the following:
      (1)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is located.
      (2)   A wireline backhaul facility.
      (3)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between utility poles or wireless
support structures or that otherwise is not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with a particular antenna.
   Wireless infrastructure provider means any person or entity, including a
person or entity authorized to provide telecommunications services in this
state but not including a wireless services provider, that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless
support structures and who, when filing an application with the city under this
ordinance, provides written authorization to perform the work on behalf of a
wireless services provider.
   Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider. Wireless provider does not include an investor-owned utility
whose rates are regulated by the MPSC.
   Wireless services means any services, provided using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile.
   Wireless services provider means a person or entity that provides wireless
services.
   Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure designed to
support or capable of supporting small cell wireless facilities. Wireless
support structure does not include a utility pole.
   Wireline backhaul facility means a facility used to transport services by
wire or fiber-optic cable from a wireless facility to a network.
   All other terms and phrases used herein shall be defined consistent with the
Act.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-261.   Scope of authority.
   (a)   Except as provided in this article or the Act, the city shall not
prohibit, regulate, or charge for the collocation of small cell wireless
facilities.
   (b)   The approval of a small cell wireless facility under this article
authorizes only the collocation of a small cell wireless facility and does not
authorize either of the following:
      (1)   The provision of any services.
      (2)   The installation, placement, modification, maintenance, or
operation of a wireline in the ROW.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-262.   Small cell ROW access; permitted use; height; underground,
downtown, residential, and historic districts; aesthetic and placement
requirements.
   (a)   This section applies only to activities of a wireless provider within
the ROW for the deployment of small cell wireless facilities and associated new
or modified utility poles.
   (b)   The city shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person
for use of the ROW for the construction, operation, or maintenance of utility
poles or the collocation of small cell wireless facilities.
   (c)   The city shall not charge a wireless provider an annual rate more
than:
      (1)   $20.00 annually, unless subdivision (2) applies.
      (2)   $125.00 annually, if a new utility pole or wireless support
structure was erected at a new site by or on behalf of the wireless provider on
or after the March 12, 2019. This subdivision does not apply to the replacement
of an existing utility pole.
   (d)   All rates and fees currently applicable shall be modified within 90
days of application receipt, so as not to exceed the fees provided in this
section, except (1) for new small cell dedicated utility poles installed and
operational in the ROW before the effective date of this article or (2) related
agreements, which shall remain in effect for the duration of this article or
agreement.
   (e)   Except as set forth in Sec.
17-263 of this article, and as limited in this section, small cell siting is a
permitted use and not subject to zoning review or approval if it complies with
all other sections of this article and if:
      (1)   A utility pole in the ROW installed or modified on or after the
effective date of this article shall not exceed 40 feet above ground level,
unless a taller height is agreed to by the city.
      (2)   A small cell wireless facility in the ROW installed or modified
after the effective date of this article shall not extend more than 5 feet
above a utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small cell
wireless facility is co-located.
   (f)   A proposed utility pole or other support structure that exceeds the
height limits under subsection (e), is subject to review as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (g)   Undergrounding. A wireless provider shall comply with reasonable and
nondiscriminatory requirements, including concealment measures, that prohibit
communications service providers from installing structures on or above ground
in the ROW in an area designed solely for underground or buried cable and
utility facilities, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The city has required all cable and utility facilities, other than
city poles, along with any attachments, or poles used for street lights,
traffic signals, or other attachments necessary for public safety, to be placed
underground by a date that is not less than 90-days before the submission of
the application.
      (2)   The city does not prohibit replacement of city poles by a wireless
provider in the designated area.
      (3)   A wireless provider may apply for a waiver of the undergrounding
requirements.
   (h)   Historic, Downtown, and Residential Districts. A wireless provider
shall comply with written, objective requirements for reasonable, technically
feasible, nondiscriminatory, and technologically neutral designs or concealment
measures in a historic district, downtown district, or residential zoning
district. Such requirement shall not have the effect of prohibiting any
wireless provider’s technology. Any such design or concealment measures are not
included in the size restrictions in the definition of a small wireless
facility in Sec.
17-260.
   (i)   General aesthetic and placement requirements. Wireless providers shall
install, modify, co-locate, or otherwise provide all wireless facilities,
equipment, poles, support structures and all other related wireless objects in
a manner, size, and appearance that is consistent and in conformity with the
existing requirements and existing practices in fact, pertaining to such
districts as defined by the applicable ordinances, rules, and codes of the City
of Dearborn and the applicable rules and laws of this State, in such fashion as
to create the least negative impact on the district as possible. Such
accommodations may include use of similar height, materials, color, design,
number and appearance of other similar structures utilized by other occupiers
of the rights-of-way and public spaces.
      (1)   To the extent consistent with applicable law, review of permit
applications under this article shall consider the following preferences:
         a.   Co-location including replacement of existing poles or support
structures is strongly encouraged over the installation of additional new poles
or support structures in the right-of-way, due to travel safety concerns.
         b.   Placement of all equipment inside the pole or support structure
is favored over placement outside the pole, including ground mountings.
         c.   Smallest feasible equipment, antennas and poles and support are
preferred.
         d.   Camouflaging, stealth, or concealment elements are preferred.
         e.   Installations generally are favored in the following districts in
the following order of preference:
               1st Preference: Industrial
               2nd Preference: Commercial
               3rd Preference: Residential
               4th Preference: Underground commercial and then underground
residential
               5th Preference: Historic
               6th Preference: Environmentally sensitive areas including nature
and wetland preservation sites.
      (2)   Separation distance requirement. New utility poles, wireless
support structures, and ground-mounted equipment shall be installed at least
300 feet from any existing or proposed utility pole, wireless support
structures, or ground-mounted equipment. Any wireless provider desiring to
install utility poles less than 300 feet apart shall demonstrate to the city’s
satisfaction that the wireless provider could not serve a location without the
desired placement.
      (3)   Location requirements. New utility poles, wireless support
structures, ground-mounted equipment, and wireless facilities shall be located
under the following guidelines, in addition to any other guidelines or
requirements found in this article, applicable codes, state, local, or federal
law:
         a.   In a manner that does not impede, obstruct, or hinder operation
of any emergency service, nor the usual pedestrian or vehicular access or
travel including to or from private properties and of legal parked vehicles or
permitted items in the public right-of-way.
         b.   In alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
streetlights.
         c.   Equal distance between trees when possible, with a minimum of 25
feet of separation to the tree trunk such that no proposed disturbance shall
occur within 5 feet of the critical root zone (drip-line) of any tree.
         d.   With appropriate clearance from existing utilities.
         e.   So as to not impact any existing bridges or retaining walls.
      (4)   Disagreements as between the provider and community on specific
aesthetics issues shall be addressed by the Council upon timely written request
of the provider. Staff and Council may consider incentives favoring
installations in preferred districts.
   (j)   All wireless providers shall repair all damage to the ROW caused by
the activities of the wireless provider while occupying, constructing,
installing, mounting, modifying, operating, or replacing small cell wireless
facilities, utility poles, or wireless support structures in the ROW and, to
return the ROW to its original condition. Following 60 days’ written notice,
the city may make those repairs and charge the wireless provider the cost of
the repairs.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-263.   Permit required; application information; permit process;
provider and city responsibilities; time periods; tolling; deemed approved;
basis for denial; resubmittal; application fees; micro wireless facility
exemption; alternate siting; decommissioning sites.
   (a)   This section applies to activities of a wireless provider within the
public right-of-way.
   (b)   In-kind contributions to the city are not permitted in lieu of rates
and fees described in this article.
   (c)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act and this
article, a wireless provider may not co-locate a small cell wireless facility
or install, modify, or replace a utility pole, city pole, or wireless support
structure on which a small cell wireless facility will be co-located within the
ROW without first applying for and receiving a permit from the city in a form
and subject to such terms and conditions as are acceptable to the city.
   (d)   Application. A wireless provider shall apply for a permit by filing a
written application with the Department of Economic Development on a form
furnished by the department. The applicant shall provide all the information
and documentation required by the city to enable it to make an informed
decision with regard to its criteria for authorizing ROW accessing.
Applications shall be complete and include all required information. An
application is not considered complete until all required materials have been
submitted and accepted by the city. At a minimum, the applications shall
include the following:
      (1)   Applicant contact information, including address, phone contact,
24-hour emergency contact information, email address, and any applicable
license numbers;
      (2)   Applicant’s contractor and subcontractor information, including the
names, addresses, phone contact, email addresses, emergency contact numbers,
and name of the supervisor(s) assigned to any facility project of all
contractors and subcontractors that will work within the city’s ROW under a
permit;
      (3)   Number of wireless facilities that will be deployed;
      (4)   The scope of the deployment, including whether the deployment is
modification of a current facility, utility pole, or city pole; co-location on
an existing utility pole, city pole, or wireless support structure; or
installation of a new or replacement wireless support structure or utility
pole;
      (5)   GIS maps and coordinates detailing locations for each proposed
small cell wireless facility and related facilities associated with each
facility;
      (6)   Site plan at a scale not smaller than one-inch equals 20 feet with
dimensions showing the following:
         a.   Proposed location, including nearest cross street intersection;
         b.   Height of the proposed facility;
         c.   The distance of the proposed facilities and the nearest property
line, roadways, rights-of-way, driveways, curb cuts, crosswalks, and utilities
within the rights-of-way; and
         d.   Any other proposed improvements that are part of the deployment.
      (7)   An application fee as established pursuant to this article;
      (8)   Executed permit and consent agreement for access to and use of the
ROW located in the city, if applicable;
      (9)   Specification sheets for all attachments and equipment that will be
located within the city, including the dimensional size of the small cell
wireless facility and all other wireless equipment;
      (10)   Attachment drawings and demonstrations of each type of
installation, including photograph simulations showing co-locations, new or
replacement utility poles, wireless support structures, and concealment and
design characteristics satisfying this article;
      (11)   Pole loading analysis if being co-located on a utility pole or
city pole located in a ROW in the city or wireless support structure;
      (12)   A certificate of compliance with FCC rules related to radio
frequency emissions from a small cell wireless facility;
      (13)   Proof of notification to every other affected authority and all
necessary permits, permit applications, or easements to ensure all necessary
permissions for the proposed activity are obtained;
      (14)   An attestation that the small cell wireless facilities will be
operational for use by a wireless services provider within one year after the
permit issuance date. Failure to abide by this term shall result in termination
of any permit issued in reliance on such attestation.
      (15)   Work plan describing the location of the proposed work, the work
to be performed, the limits of disturbance to the ROW and the method and
materials to be used;
      (16)   Landscape plans for ground-mounted facilities, if applicable;
      (17)   Site/structure remediation plans for restoring any public property
after removal of the wireless facilities, if applicable;
      (18)   To the extent available, identify other known permits related to
the deployment, including any applicable METRO Act (PA 48 of 2002, MCL
484.3101, et seq.) application and permit, related to the small cell wireless
facility, and any permits required by the state, county, Michigan Department of
Transportation, or other right-of-way, private property, or wireless support
structure owner;
      (19)   For deployments in residential or non-residential districts,
documentation of compliance with design and location requirements where
applicable;
      (20)   For deployments in the ROW, documentation showing adequate
insurance as required by this article;
      (21)   Proof of a performance bond meeting the requirements of this
article;
      (22)   Any additional information requested by the city.
      (23)   Upon receipt of an application, the Department of Economic
Development shall forward the application and all accompanying materials,
documents, and information to the Department of Public Works and Facilities for
review pursuant to subsection (h) below.
   (e)   Confidential information. If a wireless provider claims that any
portion of the information submitted by it as part of its application contains
trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from
the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231, et seq.), the wireless provider
shall prominently so indicate on the application and on the confidential
documents.
   (f)   Consolidated application. An applicant may file a consolidated
application and receive a single permit for the co-location of up to 20 small
cell wireless facilities. The small cell wireless facilities within a
consolidated application must consist of substantially similar equipment and be
placed on similar types of utility poles or wireless support structures. The
city may approve a permit for one or more small cell wireless facilities
included in a consolidated application and deny a permit for the remaining
small cell facilities.
   (g)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application fee for a permit under this subsection shall be:
      (1)   $200.00 for each small cell wireless facility alone.
      (2)   $300.00 for each small cell wireless facility and a new utility
pole to which it will be attached.
      (3)   Every 5 years after the effective date of the Act (March 12, 2019)
the application fee authorized in this subsection shall be increased by 10% and
rounded to the nearest dollar.
   (h)   Permit approval process and timeline. Permit applications shall comply
with the following process:
      (1)   Initial review for completeness. Within 25 days after receiving an
initial application, the city shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
application is complete. If incomplete, the notice will delineate all missing
documents or information. The notice tolls the running of the time for
approving or denying an application from the time notice is provided to the
time the city receives a supplemental submission.
      (2)   Supplemental submissions. If the applicant makes a supplemental
submission in response to the notice of incompleteness, the city will so notify
the applicant in writing within 10 days, delineating the previously requested
and missing documents or information. The time period for approval or denial is
tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices under the procedures
identified in preceding subsection (h)(1).
      (3)   Notice of approval or denial. The city shall approve or deny the
application and notify the applicant in writing within the following period of
time after the complete application is received:
         a.   Co-location time period. For an application for the colocation of
small cell wireless facilities on a utility pole, 60 days, subject to the
following adjustments:
            1.   Add 15 days if an application from another wireless provider
was received within one week of the application in question.
            2.   Add 15 days if a timely extension was requested.
         b.   New or replacement forty-foot (40') pole and limited equipment.
For an application for a new or replacement utility pole that meets the height
requirements of Sec.
17-262 and associated small cell facility, 90 days subject to the following
adjustments:
            1.   Add 15 days if an application from another wireless provider
was received within one week of the application in question.
            2.   Add 15 days if a timely extension is requested.
      (4)   Deemed approved. If the city fails to comply with this subsection,
an application that is otherwise complete is considered to be approved subject
to the condition that the applicant provide the city with not less than 7 days’
advance written notice that the applicant will be proceeding with the work
pursuant to this automatic approval and the applicant shall be responsible to
comply with all provisions of this section and the Act. Such advance notice
must be provided in writing.
      (5)   Basis for denial. The city may deny a completed application for a
proposed collocation of a small cell wireless facility or installation,
modification, or replacement of a utility pole that meets the height
requirements in Sec.
17-262 if the proposed activity would do the following:
         a.   Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control
equipment.
         b.   Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation or pedestrians.
         c.   Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, Public Law 101-336, or similar federal, state, or
local standards regarding pedestrian access or movement.
         d.   Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed use of
public utility infrastructure under the jurisdiction of an authority.
         e.   With respect to drainage infrastructure under the jurisdiction of
the city, either of the following:
            1.   Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed use
of the drainage infrastructure as it was originally designed; or
            2.   Not be located a reasonable distance from the drainage
infrastructure to ensure maintenance under the drain code of 1956, PA 40 of
1956, MCL 280.1 to 280.630, and access to the drainage infrastructure.
         f.   Fail to comply with reasonable, nondiscriminatory, written
spacing requirements of general applicability adopted by ordinance or otherwise
that apply to the location of groundmounted equipment and new utility poles and
that do not prevent a wireless provider from serving any location.
         g.   Fail to comply with applicable codes and zoning regulations.
         h.   Fail to comply with any provision of this article.
         i.   Fail to meet reasonable, objective, written stealth or
concealment criteria for small cell wireless facilities applicable in a
historic district or other designated area, as specified In an ordinance or
otherwise and applied in a nondiscriminatory manner applicable to all other
occupants of the ROW, including electrical utilities, incumbent or competitive
local exchange carriers, fiber providers, cable television operators, and the
city.
      (6)   Reasons for denial; resubmission and 30-day time period. If the
completed application is denied under this section, notice of the denial shall
be provided to the applicant and shall explain the reasons for the denial and,
if applicable, cite the specific provisions of applicable codes on which the
denial is based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city
and resubmit the application within 30 days after the denial without paying an
additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days, and shall limit its review of the revised
application to the deficiencies cited in the denial.
      (7)   Approval of an application authorizes the wireless provider to
undertake the installation, collocation, and maintenance of such facilities.
      (8)   The city shall not institute a moratorium on filing, receiving, or
processing applications or issuing permits for the collocation of small cell
wireless facilities or the installation, modification, or replacement of
utility poles on which small cell wireless facilities will be co-located.
      (9)   Extension of time. The city and an applicant may extend a time
period under this subsection by mutual agreement.
   (i)   Operational timeline; void for lack of progress. Within one year after
a permit is granted, a wireless provider shall complete co-location of a small
cell wireless facility that is to be operational for use by a wireless services
provider, unless the city and the applicant agree to extend this period or the
delay is caused by the lack of commercial power or communications facilities at
the site. If the wireless provider fails to complete the colocation within the
applicable time, the permit is void, and the wireless provider may reapply for
a pennit
   (j)   Revocation of permit. The city may revoke a permit, upon 30 days’
notice and an opportunity to cure, if the permitted small cell wireless
facilities and any associated utility pole fall to meet the requirements of
this article.
   (k)   Permit exception. The city shall not require a permit or any other
approval or require fees or rates for the following:
      (1)   Replacement of a small cell wireless facility with a small cell
wireless facility that is not larger or heavier, as long as such replacement is
in compliance with this article and all applicable code requirements.
      (2)   Routine maintenance of a small cell wireless facility, utility
pole, or wireless support structure.
      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement
of a micro wireless facility that is suspended on cables strung between utility
poles or wireless support structures in compliance with this article and all
applicable code requirements.
   (l)   Alternate siting. Upon receipt of an application to place a new
utility pole, the city may propose and the applicant shall use an alternate
location within the ROW or on properly or structures owned or controlled by the
city within 75 feet of the applicant’s proposed location if reasonably
achievable.
   (m)   Decommissioning sites. A wireless provider shall notify the city in
writing before discontinuing use of a small cell wireless facility, utility
pole, or wireless support structure. The notice shall specify when and how the
wireless provider intends to remove the small cell wireless facility, utility
pole, or wireless support structure. The wireless provider shall return the
property to its pre-installation condition. If the wireless provider does not
complete removal within 45-days after the discontinuance of use, the city may
complete the removal and assess the costs of removal against the wireless
provider. A permit under this section for a small cell wireless facility
expires upon removal of the small cell wireless facility.
   (n)   A provider shall obtain a permit for any work that will affect traffic
patterns or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the ROW.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-264.   City-owned poles; rates; terms.
   (a)   The city shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person
for the right to attach to city poles. A person who purchases, controls, or
otherwise acquires a city pole is subject to the requirements of this section.
   (b)   Rate. The rate for the collocation of small cell wireless facilities
on city poles shall be nondiscriminatory regardless of the services provided by
the collocating person. The rate shall not exceed $30.00 per year per city pole
plus any rate charged for the use of the ROW under this article or the Act.
   (c)   All greater rates and fees in current agreements shall be modified
within 90 days of application receipt, so as not to exceed the fees provided
here, except with respect to wireless facilities on city poles installed and
operational before the effective date of this article or any related agreement,
which shall remain in effect for the duration of the ordinance or agreement.
   (d)   Within 90 days after receiving the first request to co-locate a small
cell wireless facility on a city pole, the city shall make available, through
ordinance or otherwise, the rates, fees, and terms for the collocation of small
cell wireless facilities on the city poles. The rates, fees, and terms shall
comply with all the following:
      (1)   The rates, fees, and terms shall be nondiscriminatory,
competitively neutral, and commercially reasonable and shall comply with this
article and the Act.
      (2)   The city shall provide a good-faith estimate for any make-ready
work within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Makeready work
shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good faith
estimate by the applicant.
      (3)   The person owning or controlling the city pole shall not require
more make-ready work than required to comply with law or industry standards.
      (4)   Fees for make-ready work shall not do any of the following:
         a.   Include costs related to preexisting or prior damage or
noncompliance unless the damage or noncompliance was caused by the applicant.
         b.   Include any unreasonable consultant fees or expenses.
         c.   Exceed actual costs imposed on a nondiscriminatory basis.
   (e)   This section does not require the city to install or maintain any
specific city pole or to continue to install or maintain city poles in any
location if the city makes a nondiscriminatory decision to eliminate
aboveground poles of a particular type generally, such as electric utility
poles, in a designated area of its geographic jurisdiction. For city poles with
colocated small cell wireless facilities in place when the city makes a
decision to eliminate aboveground poles of a particular type, the city shall do
one of the following:
      (1)   Continue to maintain the city pole.
      (2)   Install and maintain a reasonable alternative pole or wireless
support structure for the collocation of the small cell wireless facility.
      (3)   Offer to sell the pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable
cost.
      (4)   Allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it
can maintain service from that location.
      (5)   Proceed as provided by an agreement between the city and the
wireless provider.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-265.   Higher education campus exempt.
   The city does not have jurisdiction or authority over the design,
engineering, construction, installation, or operation of a small cell wireless
facility located in an interior structure or upon a campus of an institution of
higher education, including any stadiums or athletic facilities associated with
the institution of higher education, a professional stadium, or a professional
athletic facility, other than to enforce applicable codes.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-266.   No provider requirement of service.
   This article does not require wireless facility deployment or regulate
wireless services.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-267.   Appeals.
   The Wayne County Circuit Court has jurisdiction to determine all disputes
arising under this article and the Act. In addition to its right to appeal to
the circuit court, an applicant may elect, at its sole discretion, to appeal a
determination under this article and the Act to the City of Dearborn Council.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-268.   Defense, indemnity, and insurance.
   All applicant wireless providers shall:
   (a)   Defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents,
and employees against any claims, demands, damages, lawsuits, judgments, costs,
liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees resulting from the installation,
construction, repair, replacement, operation, or maintenance of any wireless
facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles to the extent caused
by the applicant and all entities acting on its behalf including but not
limited to its contractors, its subcontractors, and the officers, employees, or
agents of any of these, except as to liabilities or losses due to or caused by
the sole negligence of the city or its officers, agents, or employees.
   (b)   Obtain insurance naming the city and those acting on its behalf,
including but not limited to, its officers, agents, and employees as additional
insureds against any claims, demands, damages, lawsuits, judgments, costs,
liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees. A wireless provider may meet all or
a portion of the city’s insurance coverage and limit requirements by self-
insurance, conditioned upon providing to the city, evidence demonstrating, to
the city’s satisfaction, the wireless provider’s financial ability to meet the
city’s insurance coverage and limit requirements throughout the life of the
provider’s use of the ROW. To the extent it self-insures, a wireless provider
is not required to name additional insureds under this section.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-269.   Reduced fees.
   The city may establish a fee or rate less than the maximum amounts specified
in this article and the Act, subject to other requirements of this article and
the Act.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-270.   Bonding.
   (a)   As a condition of a permit described in this article, the wireless
provider shall provide a $1,000.00 bond per site, for the purpose of providing
for the removal of abandoned or improperly maintained small cell wireless
facilities, including those that the city or an authority determines should be
removed to protect public health, safety, or welfare, to repair the ROW as
provided under Sec.
17-262 and, to recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a wireless
provider in more than 12 months, if the wireless provider has received 60-day
advance notice from the city of the noncompliance.
   (b)   The city shall not require a cash bond, unless the wireless provider
has failed to obtain or maintain a bond required under this section or the
surety has defaulted or failed to perform on a bond given to the city on behalf
of a wireless provider.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-271.   Labelling.
   A small cell wireless facility for which a permit is issued shall be labeled
with the name of the wireless provider, emergency contact telephone number, and
information that identifies the small cell wireless facility and its location.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-272.   Electric costs.
   A wireless provider is responsible for arranging and paying for the
electricity used to operate a small cell wireless facility.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-273.   Investor-owned utilities.
   (a)   This article, except to the extent the city seeks to hold all
utilities occupying the ROW to the same requirements and obligations as imposed
upon wireless providers consistent with PA 365 of 2018, does not add to,
replace, or supersede any law regarding poles or conduits, similar structures,
or equipment of any type owned or controlled by an investor-owned utility whose
rates are regulated by the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC), an
affiliated transmission company, or an independent transmission company.
   (b)   This article, except to the extent the city seeks to hold all
utilities occupying the ROW to the same requirements and obligations as imposed
upon wireless providers consistent with PA 365 of 2018, does not impose or
otherwise affect any rights, controls, or contractual obligations of an
investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the MPSC, an affiliated
transmission company, or an independent transmission company with respect to
its poles or conduits, similar structures, or equipment of any type.
   (c)   Except for purposes of a wireless provider obtaining a permit to
occupy a right-of-way, and to the extent the city seeks to hold all utilities
occupying the ROW to the same requirements and obligations as imposed upon
wireless providers consistent with PA 365 of 2018, this article does not affect
an investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the MPSC.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or the Act, pursuant to and
consistent with section 6g of PA 470 of 1980, MCL 460.6g, the MPSC has sole
jurisdiction over attachment of wireless facilities on the poles, conduits, and
similar structures or equipment of any type or kind owned or controlled by an
investor-owned utility whose rates are regulated by the MPSC.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-274.   City reservation of rights.
   This article is enacted in compliance with Michigan PA 365 of 2018, MCL
460.1301, et seq.; and PA 366 of 2018, MCL 125.3205(1Xc) as amended; and MCL
125.3514(10). However, the city takes specific note of inconsistencies between
these State Acts and certain potentially preemptive FCC Rulings concerning
“small cells” known as the “Moratoria Order”; FCC 3rd Report and Order and
Declaratory Ruling of 8/13/2018 FCC 18-111 https://docs.fcc.gov/public/
attachments/FCC-18-111A1.pdf and “Small Cell Order”; FCC Declaratory Ruling and
3rd Report and Order of 9/27/2018 FCC 18-133 https://docs.foc.gov/public/
attachments/FCC-18-133A1.pdf.
   The city also notes inconsistencies with the Michigan Constitution of 1963
including but not limited to Article VIII Sections 22, 26, 29, 30,31, and 34.
Enacting this article does not preclude the city from engaging in or otherwise
supporting a judicial or other challenge to either the State Acts or FCC rules
referenced above. In the event of any interpretations, including judicial,
legislative, or administrative, contrary to the Michigan Public Acts and/or FCC
rules referenced above, the city specifically reserves the right to amend and
or terminate this article and all related agreements, policies, and procedures
undertaken in furtherance hereof.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Sec. 17-275.   Effective date.
   This article shall take effect when published and recorded according to law.
(Ord. No. 22-1749, 6-7-22)
Chapter 17.5 - SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 17.5-1. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision of
land within the corporate limits of the city in order to promote the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and to provide for
the orderly growth and harmonious development of the city consistent with the
objectives of the master plan, the zoning ordinance and the city building code,
to secure adequate traffic circulation so as to lessen congestion on the
streets and highways; to ensure adequate provisions for public and private
utilities; to achieve the maximum utility and livability of individual lots and
to carry out the provision of Act 288 of Public Acts of 1967 of the State of
Michigan.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-2. - Definitions.
   Act 288 means the Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967 of the State of
Michigan, which is known as the Subdivision Control Act of 1967. For the
purpose of this chapter, those definitions provided in section 102 of Act 288
will govern where those terms are used.
   Final plat means the map or chart of a subdivision of land which is
submitted to the municipality in conformance with section 131 through 173 of
Act 288.
   Master plan means of the Official Master Plan of the City of Dearborn as
amended.
   Preliminary plat means the map showing salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to a municipality in conformance with section 111 through
120 of Act 288.
   Zoning ordinance means the Official Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Dearborn, as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-3. - Preliminary plat.
   (a)   The proprietor shall submit a preliminary plat to the city council, to
be referred over to the city plan commission, for review of lot size, lot
orientation, street layout, street width and overall compliance with the zoning
ordinance and the master plan of the city.
   (b)   The preliminary plats shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 100
feet to one inch (section 111(2) of Act 288).
   (c)   The proprietor shall submit ten copies of the preliminary plat to the
city clerk (section 112(1) of Act 288).
   (d)   There shall be an examination fee of $5.00 per lot or $100.00,
whichever is greater, submitted with all preliminary plats, payable to the
treasurer of the city. No additional examination fee will be required on
submittal of final plat (section 246(1) of Act 288).
   (e)   Within 60 days subsequent to the submitting a preliminary plat, the
proprietor shall submit to the city plan commission the written comments of all
private utility companies, indicating whether the private utility companies can
serve the area utilizing the easements as proposed on the preliminary plat.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-4. - Final plat.
   (a)   The proprietor shall submit one copy of the final plat on polyester
film in conformance with section R560.104 of the Plat Rules of the State
Department of Treasury to the city clerk, accompanied by:
      (1)   Ten copies of plat on paper.
      (2)   Petition to the common council asking approval of the plat.
      (3)   A check payable to the county treasurer for $20.00, being the
filing and recording fee (section 241 of Act 288).
      (4)   Copies of any deed covenants of other documents covering use and
maintenance of private areas on plat which are set aside for common use of
owners within the subdivision (section 258 of Act 288).
      (5)   An abstract of title to date or title insurance policy, or a title
insurance commitment dated not more than 30 days prior to submission.
      (6)   Certification by city treasurer that there are no due or unpaid
real property taxes or special assessments.
   (b)   All easements shall be dedicated to the public and shall be indicated
as "public easements," on the final plat.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-5. - Monuments and markers.
   (a)   The city engineer may, with the approval of the common council, waive
the placing of required monuments and lot markers for one year from date of
plat when it is determined that proposed construction within the subdivision
will endanger the monuments and markers. If placement is waived, a minimum
deposit of $25.00 per monument and $10.00 per lot marker shall be deposited
with the city treasurer.
   (b)   If horizontal control for construction and other uses is required
during the waiver period, the city engineer may require that surveyor's stakes
or markers be set by the proprietor at all locations requiring a monument and
that these stakes or markers be set prior to waiving the placement of monuments
and lot markers.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a survey's certificate that monuments and markers have
been placed, the city engineer will check for accuracy of placement and approve
the refund of any deposited monies.
   (d)   In the event the proprietor defaults, the city engineer will promptly
place the required monuments and markers. Necessary costs for such placement
shall be deducted from the deposit previously required.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-6. - Minimum lots sizes.
   The following requirements shall apply in the determination of minimum lot
sizes (section 186 of Act 288):
      (1)   When public sewer and public water are available in single-family
residential zones, the width, depth and area of lots shall generally conform to
or exceed the width, depth and area of other residential parcels in the
surrounding neighborhood, provided that not lot shall be platted at a width or
area that is less than the minimum lot size required for the zoning district,
as established by the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended at the time the
preliminary plat is submitted. If a proposed lot is located in more than one
zoning district, the width, depth and area shall comply with the requirements
of the more restrictive zone.
      (2)   When public sewer and public water area available in two-family and
multiple-family residential zones, the width, depth and area of lots shall
generally either conform to or exceed the width, depth and area of other
residential parcels in the surrounding neighborhood but must be of a size
sufficient for the types of structures which may be erected, to meet the
requirements of the zoning ordinance and building code, as amended at the time
the preliminary plat is submitted. No lot shall be platted at a width or area
that is less than the minimum lot size required for the zone in which said lot
is located, as established by the zoning ordinance. If a proposed lot is
located in more than one zoning district, the width, depth and area shall
comply with the more restrictive zone.
      (3)   Lot size requirements may be waived by the city plan commission if
the property is presently developed and if the proposed plat would create
parcels conforming to existing individual building units.
      (4)   In areas which are zoned for nonresidential purposes, the minimum
lot width shall be as set forth in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-7. - Street local and width (section 186 of Act 288).
   (a)   The proposed subdivision shall provide adequate street widths, as
determined by the objectives of the master plan of the city as amended at the
date of submitting of the preliminary plats.
   (b)   The plats shall not be isolated from or isolate other land from
existing public streets unless other suitable access is provided (section 182
(4) of Act 288).
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-8. - Utility easements.
   Adequate easements shall be provided for full service of public utilities to
every lot within the subdivision. When determined necessary by the city plan
commission to comply with the development objectives in the area, certain
easements may be limited to underground utilities only.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-9. - Public improvement.
   This section sets forth and defines the public improvements which may be
required to be constructed by or at the expense of the proprietor as conditions
for final plat approval (sections 182 and 188 of Act 288). All constructions
shall conform to the codes and ordinances of the city and to the current
standards of the various involved departments and workmanship shall be
inspected and approved by the city departments having jurisdiction over the
installation. Standards shall be those in effect at the time the preliminary
plat is submitted.
      (1)   Sanitary sewers and storm drainage. When a proposed subdivision is
located adjacent to, or reasonably near, a public sanitary or combined sewer,
the sanitary sewers and other required appurtenances thereto shall be installed
in such a manner and be connected to the existing system so that all lots,
regardless of their size, will be adequately served. An adequate storm drainage
system, including necessary storm or combined sewers, drain inlets, manholes,
culverts, bridges and other appurtenances, will be required to remove
stormwater from the area being subdivided.
      (2)   Water supply. An adequate water supply system, including necessary
mains, water gates, manholes, fire hydrants, meters, and other required
appurtenances shall be installed in such a manner as to adequately serve all
lots shown on the plat for domestic, commercial or industrial use, as well as
fire protection.
      (3)   Streets and alleys. All streets and alleys, whether public or
private, shall be paved in accordance with the standards of the city in effect
at the time the preliminary plat is submitted. This shall include sidewalks and
drainage structures, if required.
      (4)   Public utilities. Power lines and telephone lines shall be
constructed underground, including service lines to individual buildings,
unless above ground construction is expressly authorized by the city plan
commission. If such an exception is made by the city plan commission, the costs
to the proprietor shall be those costs required by the respective public
utilities at the time of installation.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-10. - Areas of common use.
   Where the proposed plat includes provisions for setting aside areas for the
private but common use of owners of property within the subdivision, deed
covenants or other documents covering the use and maintenance of same shall be
filed and recorded with the final plat and shall be subject to review and
approval by the corporation council and the appropriate city departments
(section 258 of Act 288).
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 17.5-11. - Division of existing platted lots.
   (a)   Any person, or persons owning platted lots who wish to further divide
such lots into not more than four parcels shall:
      (1)   Make written request signed by all parties in interest showing the
legal descriptions of the resultant parcels of the requested real property
division to the department of assessment.
      (2)   Submit two plot plans showing dimensions of said resultant parcels
to said department.
      (3)   For commercial or industrial property, pay a fee of $100.00 for the
department plan review and $75.00 for each new parcel created.
      (4)   For residential property, pay a fee of $100.00 for the department
plan review and $50.00 for each new parcel created.
      (5)   Submit a tax memo from the city treasurer to said board of all lots
involved.
   (b)   The board of assessors may permit division of lots into two, three, or
four parts when resulting parcels equal or exceed the area and width of
original platted size.
   (c)   The board of assessors may permit the division of lots into two,
three, or four parts when the city plan commission has certified that the
resulting parcels satisfy the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter
and, in the case of a residential parcel, the commission has further certified
that the width, depth and area of the resulting parcels either conforms to or
exceeds the width, depth, and area of other residential parcels in the
surrounding neighborhood.
   (d)   Where there are unusual or unique circumstances, the common council,
after report and recommendation from the city plan commission, may approve
division of lots into two, three or four parts when resulting parcels are less
than original size of lots and when resulting parcels do not satisfy minimum
lot requirements of this chapter. The report of the city plan commission must
indicate that the proposed division of a platted lot would allow the
development of the land in such a manner as to be compatible with surrounding
land use and development and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this
chapter and the zoning ordinance, or that the property is presently developed
and the proposed division creates parcels conforming the existing individual
building units.
   (e)   In no event shall a division of real property descriptions be made
upon the rolls where there are any due and unpaid city taxes or special
assessments.
   (f)   In no event shall a division of real property be considered until a
finding by the corporation counsel that parties signing the request have the
necessary interest in the property to request the division thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 11, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 02-900, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 15-1511,
12-8-15)
Sec. 17.5-12. - Urban renewal plats.
   Urban renewal plats shall conform to all of the requirements of this chapter
except as follows:
      (1)   On submission of preliminary plat, the examination fee will not be
required:
      (2)   Prior to submitting final plat, approval of common council will be
required authorizing the mayor and the city clerk to certify the plat:
      (3)   The following items shall be included when a final plat is
submitted to the city clerk by the housing commission or its authorized
representatives:
         a.   One copy of the plat on polyester film.
         b.   Ten copies of the plan on paper.
         c.   Petition to common council asking approval of the plat.
         d.   A check payable to the county treasurer for $20.00, being the
recording fee.
(Ord. No. 81-138, § 12, 11-4-81)
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Automobile parking lots, §
9-261 et seq.; gasoline stations, §
12-446 et seq.; motor buses, §
12-851 et seq.; taxicabs, §
12-886 et seq.; moving vans, §
12-951 et seq.
State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et
seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610, MSA
9.2305, 9.2306, 9.2310.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 18-1. - Attempt to commit violation.
   (a)   The court shall impose a criminal penalty for a conviction of an
attempted violation of this chapter in the same manner as if the offense had
been completed.
   (b)   This section shall take effect October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 99-792, 9-21-99)
Secs. 18-2—18-25. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC COMMISSION
Sec. 18-26. - Established.
   There is hereby created and established in and for the city a commission to
be known as the traffic commission which shall consist of seven members to be
appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the Charter;
preference shall be given to members of the Dearborn Parent Teacher
Organization, members of the Federation of Neighborhood Associations, and
senior citizens. The members of the commission shall qualify by taking an oath
of office to be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-83, § 1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 00-810, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 16-1559, 11-
15-16)
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, §
2-351 et seq.
Sec. 18-27. - Organization.
   The traffic commission shall organize by annually electing a chairman, vice-
chairman and secretary from its membership and shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out its powers and duties. The chief
of police shall furnish such secretarial help as may be needed to keep the
minutes of the commission and preserve such records and information in
pertaining to the functions of the commission as may be necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-83, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-28. - Duties.
   (a)   The traffic commission shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   It shall study, survey, investigate and make recommendations to the
mayor, council and police chief on all phases of the vehicular traffic problems
in the city and particularly those relating to parking both onstreet and
offstreet, eliminating traffic hazards, establishing or changing appropriate
speed limits in various parts of the city, establishing or abolishing one-way
streets, establishing or abolishing stop streets, establishing or eliminating
red and green traffic lights, constructing grade separations, establishing or
relocating truck routes in and through the city, and speeding up or slowing
down traffic flow on any city streets.
      (2)   It shall study and investigate the establishing of expressways
through and across and locating one or more bypasses around the business
sections of the city.
      (3)   It shall determine the necessity for and make recommendations with
reference to conducting an overall traffic survey in and through the city in
connection with Eno Foundation and Northwestern University and any other
organization qualified to make such surveys.
      (4)   It shall study, investigate and make recommendations concerning the
locating of the main traffic arteries across the undeveloped areas of the city.
   (b)   All of the duties and responsibilities hereinabove specified shall be
carried on in such manner that the work of this commission shall not invade or
supplant the duties or functions of any department, commission or board
heretofore established by the city charter.
(Ord. No. 81-83, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-29. - Council to provide personnel, equipment and supplies.
   The city council shall provide such quarters, equipment and personnel for
the proper functioning of the traffic commission as it shall deem necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-83, § 4, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-30—18-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 18-51. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Sec. 18-52. - Accessory.
   Accessory means any accessory, equipment, additional part or replacement
part for a vehicle for which a certificate of title is required to be issued
under the Michigan Vehicle Code Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.2(a), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.1a.
Sec. 18-53. - Alley.
   Alley shall mean a public way within a block primarily intended for service
and access to abutting property from the rear thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-54. - Authorized emergency vehicle.
   Authorized emergency vehicle means the following:
      (1)   Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, ambulances, or
privately owned motor vehicles of volunteer or paid fire fighters if authorized
by the chief of an organized fire department, or privately owned motor vehicles
of volunteer or paid members of a life support agency licensed by the
department of consumer and industry services if authorized by the life support
agency.
      (2)   For purposes of section
18-155.5, a road service vehicle giving a visual signal by means of a flashing,
rotating, or oscillating red or amber light. As used in this subdivision, "road
service vehicle" means a vehicle that is clearly marked and readily
recognizable as a vehicle used to assist disabled vehicles.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 04-1002, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-04)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.2.
Sec. 18-55. - Axle.
   Axle shall mean the common axis of rotation of one or more wheels, whether
power driven or freely rotating, whether in one or more segments and regardless
of the number of wheels carried thereon.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.5, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.3.
Sec. 18-56. - Bicycle.
   Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is over 20 inches in
diameter.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.4.
Sec. 18-57. - Bus.
   Bus shall mean a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten
passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and a motor vehicle,
other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation. It does not include a school bus or a bus equipped and used for
living or camping purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.4b.
Sec. 18-58. - Bus stop.
   Bus stop shall mean the space in a street or highway and along the curb or
edge thereof set aside for the exclusive use by a bus for the loading or
unloading of passengers, which bus stop shall be plainly marked by appropriate
signs.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-59. - Business district.
   Business district shall mean the territory contiguous to a highway or street
where 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.9, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.5.
Sec. 18-60. - Civil infraction.
   Civil infraction shall mean an act or omission prohibited by law which is
not a crime, as defined in section 5 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1931 (MCL 750.5, MSA 28.195), as amended, and for which a civil
sanction may be ordered.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.11(a), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.6a.
Sec. 18-61. - Civil infraction determination.
   Civil infraction determination shall mean a determination that a person is
responsible for a civil infraction by one of the following:
      (1)   An admission of responsibility for the civil infraction.
      (2)   An admission of responsibility for the civil infraction, "with
explanation."
      (3)   A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing on the
question.
      (4)   A default judgment, for failing to appear at a scheduled informal
hearing or at a scheduled formal hearing.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.11(b), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.6b, MSA 9.1806(2).
Sec. 18-62. - Commercial sound advertising.
   Commercial sound advertising shall mean the use and operation of sound
amplifying equipment in promoting the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise
or the patronage of any business establishment.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-63. - Commercial vehicle.
   (a)   Commercial vehicle shall mean and include all motor vehicles used for
the transportation of passengers for hire; constructed or used for
transportation of goods, wares or merchandise; and/or all motor vehicles
designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry
any load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle
or load so drawn. Commercial vehicle does not include a limousine operated by a
limousine driver, a taxicab operated by a taxicab driver, or a personal vehicle
operated by a transportation network company driver.
   (b)   The terms limousine, limousine driver, taxicab, taxicab driver, and
transportation network company driver shall have the meanings given to them in
Article XX of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances titled “Taxicabs and Other Motor
Vehicles for Hire,” §
12-886.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.11, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 19-1659, 9-10-19)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.7, MSA 9.1807.
Sec. 18-63.1. - Commercial motor vehicle.
   Commercial motor vehicle shall mean a bus; school bus; a school
transportation vehicle; a motor vehicle, except a motor home, having a gross
vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more
pounds; a motor vehicle towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of
more than 10,000 pounds; or a motor vehicle carrying hazardous material and on
which is required to be posted a placard as defined and required under 49
C.F.R. parts 100 to 199. A commercial motor vehicle does not include a vehicle
used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for
nonbusiness purposes.
(Ord. No. 93-577, 12-21-93)
Sec. 18-64. - Crosswalk.
   Crosswalk shall mean:
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable highway.
      (2)   Any portion of a street or highway at an intersection, or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.13, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.10, MSA 9.1810.
Sec. 18-65. - Driver.
   Driver shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.14, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.13, MSA 9.1813.
Sec. 18-66. - Explosives.
   Explosives shall mean any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such
proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.15, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.15, MSA 9.1815.
Sec. 18-67. - Farm tractor.
   Farm tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a
farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.16, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.16, MSA 9.1816.
Sec. 18-68. - Fire route, fire lane.
   Fire route or fire lane shall mean the street or streets in the city legally
designated and properly posted with adequate signs thereon for the passing of
fire equipment while making an emergency run.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-69. - Flammable liquid.
   Flammable liquid shall mean any liquid which has a flashpoint of 70 degrees
Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test
device.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.18, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.17, MSA 9.1817.
Sec. 18-70. - Freeway.
   Freeway shall mean a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
control of access and with all crossroads separated in grade from pavements for
through traffic.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.18(a), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.18a, MSA 9.1818(1).
Sec. 18-71. - Gross weight.
   Gross weight shall mean the weight of a vehicle without load, plus the
weight of any load thereon.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.20, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.19, MSA 9.1819.
Sec. 18-72. - Highway, street.
   Highway or street is used interchangeably and shall mean the same thing,
being the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.21, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.20, MSA 9.1820.
Sec. 18-73. - Holiday.
   Holiday shall mean New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Armistice Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-74. - Intersection.
   Intersection shall mean:
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of the two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting
highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing
of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.23, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.22, MSA 9.1822.
Sec. 18-75. - Laned roadway.
   Laned roadway shall mean a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.24, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.24, MSA 9.1824.
Sec. 18-76. - License.
   License shall mean any driving privileges, license, temporary instruction
permit or temporary license issued under the laws of this state pertaining to
the licensing of persons to operate motor vehicles.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.25, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.25, MSA 9.1825.
Sec. 18-77. - Limited access highway.
   Limited access highway shall mean every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only, and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.26, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.26, MSA 9.1826.
Sec. 18-78. - Loading zone.
   Loading zone shall mean the space in a street or highway and along the curb
or edge thereof set aside for use by a truck or other vehicle for the loading
or unloading of goods, wares or merchandise, which loading zone shall be
plainly marked by appropriate signs, and shall be permitted only during the
hours specified on such signs.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.27, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-79. - Maximum axle load.
   Maximum axle load shall mean the gross weight over the axle which includes
vehicles and load.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.28, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.29, MSA 9.1829.
Sec. 18-80. - Metal tire.
   Metal tire shall mean every tire the surface of which in contact with the
highway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.29, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.30, MSA 9.1830.
Sec. 18-81. - Motor vehicle.
   Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.30, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.33, MSA 9.1833.
Sec. 18-82. - Motorcycle.
   Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the
use of a rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.31, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.31, MSA 9.1831.
Sec. 18-83. - Motor driven cycle.
   Motor driven cycle shall mean every motorcycle, including every motor
scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five maximum brake
horsepower, and every bicycle with motor attached.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.32, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.32, MSA 9.1832.
Sec. 18-84. - Normal atmospheric condition.
   Normal atmospheric condition shall mean weather without fog, rain or snow.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.33, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.81, MSA 9.1881.
Sec. 18-85. - One-way streets, alleys.
   One-way streets or alleys are those public ways in the city which have been
legally established for vehicular traffic in only one direction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.35, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-86. - Operator.
   Operator shall mean every person, other than a chauffeur, who is in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.36, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.36, MSA 9.1836.
Sec. 18-87. - Owner.
   Owner shall mean:
      (1)   Any person renting a motor vehicle or having the exclusive use
thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period of greater than 30 days.
      (2)   A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, if a vehicle is
the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof, with the
right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement,
and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or
lessee; or if a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such
conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.37, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.37, MSA 9.1837.
Sec. 18-88. - Parking, to park.
   Parking or to park shall mean allowing a vehicle, whether occupied by a
person or not, to stand upon private property, or upon a public place or
street, except when obeying traffic signals, directions or regulations, and
except when making necessary emergency repairs.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.38, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.38, MSA 9.1838.
Sec. 18-89. - Pedestrian.
   Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.39, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.39, MSA 9.1839.
Sec. 18-90. - Pole trailer.
   Pole trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power designed to be
drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach
or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles,
pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as
beams between the supporting connections.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.41, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.41, MSA 9.1841.
Sec. 18-91. - Police officer.
   Police officer shall mean any person who is a member of the police
department, and such person or persons as shall be appointed as school traffic
attendants in assisting school children to cross the streets.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.43, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-92. - Private road, driveway.
   Private road or driveway shall mean every road or driveway not open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.44, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.44, MSA 9.1844.
Sec. 18-93. - Railroad.
   Railroad shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
street cars, operated upon stationary rails.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.45, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.46, MSA 9.1846.
Sec. 18-94. - Railroad sign, signal.
   Railroad sign or signal shall mean any sign, signal or device erected by the
authority of a statute, public body, official or by a railroad and intended to
give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or structures or the approach of
a railroad train.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.46, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.47, MSA 9.1847.
Sec. 18-95. - Railroad track.
   Railroad track shall mean every pair or group of pairs of rails, as the case
may be, of any railroad or traction company, except municipal streetcar
companies.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.47, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.48, MSA 9.1848.
Sec. 18-96. - Railroad train.
   Railroad train shall mean a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.48, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.49, MSA 9.1849.
Sec. 18-97. - Residence district.
   Residence district shall mean the territory contiguous to a highway, not
comprising a business district, when the frontage on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings
and buildings in use for business.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.49, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.51, MSA 9.1851.
Sec. 18-98. - Right-of-way.
   Right-of-way shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.50, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.53, MSA 9.1853.
Sec. 18-99. - Road tractor.
   Road tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.51, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.54, MSA 9.1854.
Sec. 18-100. - Roadway.
   Roadway shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed, and
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two or more
separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway
separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.52, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.55, MSA 9.1855.
Sec. 18-101. - Safety zone.
   Safety zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected and so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a safety zone.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.53, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.56, MSA 9.1856.
Sec. 18-102. - School bus.
   School bus shall mean every motor vehicle, except station wagons, with a
manufacturer's rated seating capacity of eight or more children owned by a
public, private or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of
children to or from school, or privately owned and operated for compensation
for the transportation of children to or from school; provided, that the term
"school bus" shall not include buses operated by a municipally owned
transportation system or by a common passenger carrier certificated by the
public service commission.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.54, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.57, MSA 9.1857.
Sec. 18-103. - Security interest, etc.
   Security interest, security agreement, secured party, debtor, financing
statement and termination statement shall have the same meanings as are defined
therefor in Act No. 174 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1962 (MCL 440.1101 et
seq., MSA 19.1101 et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.54(a), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.58b, MSA 9.1858(2).
Sec. 18-104. - Semitrailer.
   Semitrailer shall mean every vehicle with or without motive power, other
than a pole-trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and
that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.55, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.59, MSA 9.1859.
Sec. 18-105. - Sidewalk.
   Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use
of pedestrians.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.56, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.60, MSA 9.1860.
Sec. 18-106. - Sound amplifying equipment.
   Sound amplifying equipment shall mean any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. It shall not be
construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by
occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized
emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used
only for traffic safety purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.57, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-107. - Sound truck.
   Sound truck shall mean any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle, having
mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.58, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-108. - Spacing between axles.
   Spacing between axles shall mean the distance from axle center to axle
center.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.59, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.61, MSA 9.1861.
Sec. 18-109. - Special mobile equipment.
   Special mobile equipment shall mean every vehicle not designed or used
primarily for the transportation of persons or property and incidentally
operated or moved over the highways, including farm tractors, road construction
or maintenance machinery, mobile office trailers, mobile tool shed trailers,
mobile trailer units used for housing stationary construction equipment, ditch-
digging apparatus, well-boring and well-servicing apparatus. The foregoing
enumeration shall be deemed partial and shall not operate to exclude other such
vehicles which are within the general terms of this definition.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.60, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.62, MSA 9.1862.
Sec. 18-110. - Standing.
   Standing shall mean any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except for the making of emergency repairs, to avoid conflict with other
traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic
control signal.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.61, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-111. - Stop.
   Stop shall mean a complete cessation of movement.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.62, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-112. - Stop intersection.
   Stop intersection shall mean an intersection at one or more entrances to
which vehicles are required by law to stop before entering or crossing.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.63, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-113. - Street, highway.
   Street or highway is used interchangeably and shall mean the same thing,
meaning the entire width between the boundary lines of every or any way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of travel thereon.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.65, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.64, MSA 9.1864.
Sec. 18-114. - Tandem axle.
   Tandem axle means two axles spaced more than three feet, six inches, and
less than nine feet apart.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.66, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.67, MSA 9.1867.
Sec. 18-115. - Taxicab stand.
   Taxicab stand, when referring to onstreet use by taxicabs, shall mean the
space in a street or highway and along the curb or edge thereof set aside for
use by one or more taxicabs for the purpose of parking while waiting for
patronage or for loading or unloading of pedestrians.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.67, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-116. - Through street, highway.
   Through street or highway shall mean every street or highway, or portion
thereof, at the entrance to which vehicles from intersecting streets are
required by law to stop before entering or crossing.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.70, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.68, MSA 9.1868.
Sec. 18-117. - Traffic.
   Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles,
streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any
street, highway, public way or public place for purposes of travel.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.71, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.69, MSA 9.1869.
Sec. 18-118. - Traffic control devices.
   Traffic control devices shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices
officially placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, protecting or guiding
traffic.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.72, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.70, MSA 9.1870.
Sec. 18-119. - Traffic control signal.
   Traffic control signal shall mean any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.73, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.72, MSA 9.1872.
Sec. 18-120. - Trailer.
   Trailer shall mean every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a
pole-trailer, designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.74, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.73, MSA 9.1873.
Sec. 18-121. - Truck.
   Truck shall mean every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily
for the transportation of property.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.76, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.75, MSA 9.1875.
Sec. 18-122. - Truck tractor.
   Truck tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.77, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.77, MSA 9.1877.
Sec. 18-123. - U-turn.
   U-turn shall mean a turn in the opposite direction by any motor vehicle in
any street or highway in the city.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.78, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-124. - Vehicle.
   Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.79, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 257.79, MSA 9.1879.
Sec. 18-125. - Vendor.
   Vendor shall mean any person traveling by wagon, bicycle, motor vehicle or
any other type of conveyance, from street to street or from place to place,
exposing for sale and selling goods of any nature, but shall not include those
persons traveling about the city on regularly established routes filling orders
for established customers such as, but not limited to, milk and baked goods
vendors.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 1.80, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-126. - Low-speed vehicles.
   (a)   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (b)   "Low-speed vehicle" means a self-propelled motor vehicle to which all
of the following apply pursuant to Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.25b:
      (1)   That is 4-wheeled;
      (2)   Whose speed attainable in 1 mile is more than 20 miles per hour and
not more than 25 miles per hour on a paved surface;
      (3)   Whose gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR is less than 3,000
pounds. GVWR means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight
of a single vehicle.
   (c)   Each person riding a low-speed vehicle upon a roadway has all of the
rights and is subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle under all state statutory regulations and this chapter, except for the
provisions of this chapter that by their nature do not apply.
   (d)   A person operating a low-speed vehicle shall ride as near to the right
side of the roadway as practicable and shall exercise due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (e)   A person operating a low-speed vehicle shall not pass between lines of
traffic, but may pass on the left of traffic moving in his or her direction in
the case of a 2-way street or on the left or right of traffic in the case of a
1-way street, in an unoccupied lane.
   (f)   A low-speed vehicle shall not be operated on a sidewalk constructed
for the use of pedestrians.
   (g)   A low-speed vehicle shall be operated at a speed of not more than 25
miles per hour, and shall not be operated on a highway or street with a speed
limit of more than 35 miles per hour except for the purpose of crossing that
highway or street. The state transportation department may prohibit the
operation of a low-speed vehicle on any highway or street under its
jurisdiction if it determines that the prohibition is necessary in the interest
of public safety.
(Ord. No. 19-1657, 9-10-19)
State law reference - MCL 257.25b, MCL 257.657, MCL 257.660.
Secs. 18-127—18-145. Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 18-146. - Duty to obey chapter; police orders and directions.
   This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety, convenience and
welfare. Every person shall comply with, observe and obey, when applicable to
him, all the provisions, requirements and regulations contained in this chapter
and the regulations and orders adopted or issued in pursuance hereof. No person
shall refuse to obey or comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a
police officer, it being hereby determined that all temporary orders and
directions, or either of them, by an authorized police officer for the
guidance, control or regulation of traffic shall supersede the provisions of
this chapter or of any and all traffic control signals and devices.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.602, MSA 9.2302.
Sec. 18-147. - Enforcement personnel.
   The police department shall enforce and administer the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations herein authorized, except as herein
otherwise provided.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-148. - Failure to obey.
   If any person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required
by this chapter or by an authorized police officer while directing traffic, or
by the rules and regulations established under this chapter, such person shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or responsible for a civil infraction, as
provided for under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1800 et seq.), as
amended.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-149. - When council approval required.
   (a)   The city council shall approve all traffic rules and regulations
authorized by this chapter that will be in effect for more than 365 days. The
council shall also approve and locate by resolution all bus and taxicab stands.
   (b)   Failure to obtain city council approval shall not be a defense to the
underlying traffic offense.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.4, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 18- 1616, 7-17-18)
Sec. 18-150. - Function of chief of police.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the chief of police to formulate the general
policy for the direction, flow and control of traffic or parking of vehicles on
any highway, alley or public place in the city, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The chief of police shall have the power and he is hereby authorized
to promulgate, amend or rescind traffic rules and regulations pertaining to the
following matters:
      (1)   Designate the streets or parts of streets upon which there shall be
no stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at any time; upon which there
shall be stopping, standing or parking for a limited time, or during certain
hours or on certain days and; prescribe generally the manner and duration of
parking, standing or stopping of vehicles throughout the city, including
regulation and location of parking meters.
      (2)   Allow or prohibit angle parking in designated places.
      (3)   Cause limit lines and lanes to be marked upon pavements and
sidewalks or adequate signs to be erected for the direction of pedestrians and
operators of vehicles.
      (4)   Regulate turns by designated vehicles at designated locations and
during designated hours.
      (5)   Prohibit U-turns by vehicles in designated street areas.
      (6)   Designate fire routes and prohibit standing or parking thereon
where such street or highway is especially required for use in attending fires.
      (7)   Temporarily close any highway or portion of same or restrict the
use thereof when required for public safety and convenience, or by reason of
construction or repair work thereon, or for the purpose of designating
temporary play streets. Traffic may be restricted or prohibited on such streets
or portions thereof during the hours of such use for any of the purposes
specified in this section.
      (8)   Establish quiet and safety zones along the streets.
      (9)   Establish certain alleys or parts thereof which are restricted to
one-way traffic.
      (10)   Issue permits for parades or processions in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (11)   Safety zones, building entrance zones, taxicab stands and bus
stops and bus stands, with appropriate signs providing therefor, may be erected
and established, when approved by the council, to allow standing of any vehicle
for loading and unloading of passengers, provided the standing of vehicles for
the purposes designated shall be permitted for a reasonable time only.
      (12)   Loading zones, with appropriate signs providing therefor, may be
erected and established, when approved by the council, to allow standing of
vehicles for the loading and unloading of merchandise; provided, however, the
standing of vehicles for such purposes shall be permitted only during the hours
specified on such sign, and the regulations establishing such loading zone
shall be effective only during those hours when such building or properties are
open for business; provided, further, that the establishing of a loading zone,
as herein described, shall be permitted only in those cases which will avoid
hardship to the owner or occupant of the adjacent premises and without undue
hardship to the driving public.
      (13)   Designate the streets, boulevards or parts thereof which shall be
prohibited from use by any commercial vehicle which, together with the load it
carries, exceeds two tons in weight; provided that the chief of police is
hereby authorized to designate an emergency truck route or routes for the
purpose of avoiding excessive damage to lightly paved streets which ordinarily
might be used in obtaining ingress to or egress from any particular location.
      (14)   Designate through streets.
      (15)   Determine and designate those intersections where a particular
hazard exists and determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more
entrances to any such stop intersection and shall erect a stop sign at every
place where a stop is required.
      (16)   Determine and designate intersections where conditions warrant
requiring traffic to yield the right-of-way to cross traffic and to determine
whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way at one or more entrances to any
such intersection. A yield right-of-way sign shall be erected at every place
where approaching traffic is required to yield the right-of-way.
      (17)   Determine and designate one-way streets and direct the appropriate
signs indicating the direction of travel on such streets.
      (18)   Establish, increase or decrease speed regulations for the streets,
alleys, public parks, cemeteries and any and all other roadways commonly open
to the public.
      (19)   Prescribe and locate all necessary official traffic control
signals, devices, markers and signs.
      (20)   Designate no passing zones on streets or parts of streets and
place and maintain official signs or markings on the roadway to indicate such
zones.
      (21)   Designate and issue permits to persons authorized to operate
emergency vehicles.
      (22)   Promulgate rules and regulations governing the operation, parking
without fees and the speed of motor vehicles upon the property owned by or
under the control of boards of education or school districts or other
educational institutions; provided, however, that no such rules and regulations
shall be promulgated without first receiving a resolution requesting the
adoption of such rules and regulations from the board of education, school
district or educational institution over whose property such rules and
regulations shall apply.
State Law reference— Operation of motor vehicles on school district property,
MCL 257.961, MSA 9.2660.
      (22A)   Promulgate rules and regulations governing the operation, parking
and the speed of motor vehicles upon privately-owned property in residential
subdivisions; provided, however, that no such rules and regulations shall be
promulgated without first receiving a request for the adoption of such rules
and regulations from the owner of the privately-owned property in the
residential subdivision.
      (23)   To make such other reasonable rules and regulations as shall be
consistent with state law and not violative of the powers of the city council.
   (c)   All rules and regulations adopted in accordance with this section
shall be documented in a record maintained by the chief of police with a copy
filed with the city clerk. Rules and regulations may be issued by the chief of
police on his own authority, but when so issued shall be known as temporary
rules and regulations. Rules and regulations will be considered permanent after
the passage of 365 days with the approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.5, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 06-1090, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 18-1629,
9-11-18)
Sec. 18-151. - Parades or processions.
   No parade or procession, excepting the forces of the United States Army or
Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the police and fire
departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along and upon any street or
highway, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the chief of police.
Such permit shall contain a specification of the route of the proposed parade
or procession, and the chief of police, in his sole discretion, may specify any
and all routes to be traversed within the city for such parades or processions.
Whenever such parade or procession is likely to promote riot or disorder in the
city, permission to conduct the same may be denied by the chief of police;
provided, however, a procession of funeral cars through and along the streets
or highways of the city shall not be required to obtain a permit therefor;
provided, further, each vehicle composing such funeral procession, shall be
identified as such by the display, on the outside of each vehicle, of a pennant
of the type permitted by law, and each driver of such funeral vehicle shall
drive as near to the righthand edge of the street as practicable, and follow
the vehicle ahead as closely as is safe.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-152. - Application to pushcarts, animals.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding or leading any animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving an animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter, which by their nature can have no
application, shall not apply.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.604, MSA 9.2304.
Sec. 18-153. - Application to emergency vehicles.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles
upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated
by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district, or any
other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions
as are set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency
vehicles.
   (b)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, but not while returning therefrom, may exercise the privileges
set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
   (c)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (d)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle. Only authorized emergency vehicles operated as police vehicles shall
be equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating blue light which, when
activated shall be visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, except where it is deemed advisable
not to equip such authorized emergency vehicle operating as a police vehicle
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating light. At other times, drivers of
authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
This provision shall not operate to relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the
highway.
   (e)   No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privileges under this chapter except when such vehicle is operated in response
to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.8(a)—(d), (f), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.603.
Sec. 18-154. - Application to workmen, equipment.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
a highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or
from such work. The provisions of this chapter governing the size and width of
vehicles shall not apply to vehicles owned by public highway authorities, when
such vehicles are proceeding to or from work on public highways.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.8(e), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-155. - Duty upon approach of emergency vehicle.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one lighted flashing, rotating or oscillating lamp
exhibiting a red or blue light, visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and when the driver
is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell: the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to and as close as possible to, the righthand edge or curb of
the roadway clear of any intersection and, shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (b)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.9, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 19- 1651, 5-21-19)
State Law reference—Similar provision, MCL 257.653.
Sec. 18-155.5. - Duty upon approaching and passing a stationary authorized
emergency vehicle.
   (a)   Upon approaching and passing a stationary authorized emergency vehicle
that is giving a visual signal by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating
red, blue, or white lights, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall exhibit
due care and caution, as required under the following:
      (1)   On any public roadway with at least two adjacent lanes proceeding
in the same direction of the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, the
driver of the approaching vehicle shall proceed with caution, reduce his or her
speed by at least ten miles per hour below the posted speed limit, and yield
the right-of-way by moving into a lane at least one moving lane or two vehicle
widths apart from the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, unless directed
otherwise by a police officer. If movement to an adjacent lane or two vehicle
widths apart is not possible due to weather, road conditions, or the immediate
presence of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in parallel moving lanes, the
driver of the approaching vehicle shall proceed as required in subsection (2).
      (2)   On any public roadway that does not have at least two adjacent
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the stationary authorized emergency
vehicle, or if the movement by the driver of the vehicle into an adjacent lane
or two vehicle widths apart is not possible as described in subsection (1), the
approaching vehicle shall proceed with due care and caution and reduce his or
her speed by at least ten miles per hour below the posted speed limit, or as
directed by a police officer.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of $400.00.
(Ord. No. 01-849, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 01-849, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 19-1651, 5-21-19)
   State Law Reference—Similar provision, MCL 257.653a
Sec. 18-156. - Unlawful to display emergency vehicle lights.
   No vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, shall display a red or
blue light to the front or a green light to the rear.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-157. - Following or parking near fire apparatus.
   The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within 500 feet where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.11, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.679.
Sec. 18-158. - Driving over fire hose.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when laid down on any street, private driveway or street car track, to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.12, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.680.
Sec. 18-159. - Traffic control signal legend.
   (a)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, exhibiting
different colored lights successively, one at a time, or with arrows, the
following terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles, as
follows:
      (1)   Green indication. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or
left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Steady yellow indication. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection or at a limit
line, when marked, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be
driven cautiously through the intersection.
      (3)   Steady red indication. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal
alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or at a limit line, when marked, or if not, then before entering
the intersection and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown,
except as provided in subsection a.
         a.   Vehicle traffic facing a steady red signal, after stopping before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or at a limit line
when marked or, if there is not crosswalk or limit line, before entering the
intersection, may make a right turn from a one-way or two-way street into a
two-way street or into a one-way street carrying traffic in the direction of
the right turn; or a left turn from a one-way or two-way street into a one-way
roadway carrying traffic in the direction of the left turn unless prohibited by
sign, signal, marking, light or other traffic control device. The vehicular
traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (4)   Arrow indications: 
         a.   Green arrow (steady). Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow
signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously
enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or
such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same
time. Vehicle traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully
within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
         b.   Red arrow (flashing). When a red arrow is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none
then before entering the intersection and shall then be privileged to make the
movement indicated if no interference is offered pedestrians or vehicles
lawfully on the highway.
   (b)   If a traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other
than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable,
except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating
where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any sign or marking the
stop shall be made at the signal.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.13, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 93-580, 12-21-93)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.612, MSA 9.2312.
Sec. 18-160. - Flashing red or yellow signals.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line, when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.14, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.614, MSA 9.2314.
Sec. 18-161. - Imitation, obstruction of signs, devices prohibited, nuisance;
advertising.
   (a)   Except with authority of a statute or of a duly authorized public body
or official, no person shall place, maintain, or display along any highway or
upon any structure in or over any highway any sign, signal, marking, device,
blinking, oscillating or rotating light or lights, decoration or banner which
is or purports to be, is in imitation of or resembles, which can be mistaken
for a traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (b)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (c)   No person shall place, maintain or display along any highway any
blinking, oscillating or rotating light or lights sufficiently similar in color
and design that they may be mistaken for the distinguishing lights authorized
by law for emergency vehicles or that creates a hazard for the safety of
drivers using the highways.
   (d)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking device, decoration or
banner is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having
jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause
the same to be removed without notice.
   (e)   Decorations or banners which may be placed over the traveled portion
of any street or highway shall be placed not closer than ten feet on either
side of traffic lights or signals and shall be so placed as to not obstruct a
clear view of such traffic lights or signals.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.15, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.615, MSA 9.2315.
Sec. 18-162. - Interference with traffic control devices or railroad signs or
signals.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, break, knock down or remove any traffic control device, any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.16, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.616, MSA 9.2316.
Sec. 18-163. - Driving on streets partially or completely closed.
   Whenever any street is partially or completely closed to the use of traffic,
and is so indicated by authorized signs or barriers, no vehicle shall proceed
into such street or any portion thereof closed to traffic, except as directed
by such signs.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-164. - Excessive noise and smoke.
   No person while operating or in charge or control of any vehicle shall make
with such vehicle, or any device connected therewith, any noise so excessive as
to annoy the public; unnecessarily race the motor while running or idling;
permit to be opened the muffler on any vehicle; or permit such vehicle, or any
device thereon, to emit an unreasonable quantity of smoke or noxious gases or
vapor. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at any time on the
streets of the city with the so-called "cut-out" open, or to operate a motor
vehicle with a muffler from which one or more baffles have been removed.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.18, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Mufflers generally and noise levels, MCL 257.707 et seq.,
MSA 9.2407 et seq.
Sec. 18-165. - Zone of quiet.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected, indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device on such vehicle, except in an emergency.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.19, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-166. - Littering; public and private property.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or
cause or permit such dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of
litter, including all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper,
glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, nails, tacks, wire or other foreign
substance of every kind and description on any public or private property or
waters, other than property designated and set aside for such purposes, without
the consent of the owner or public authority having supervision thereof.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly cause any litter or object to fall or to be
dropped into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling the highway, street or
alley, and such person shall immediately remove it or cause it to be removed
therefrom.
   (c)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway or
street shall remove any glass, metal or other injurious substance dropped upon
the highway from such vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.20, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Littering act, MCL 752.901 et seq., MSA 28.603(1) et seq.
Sec. 18-167. - Commercial advertising by sound truck prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, any
sound truck on or along the streets in the city for commercial sound
advertising purposes with sound amplifying equipment in operation.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.21, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-168. - Where driving prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle, including
motorcycles and motor driven cycles:
      (1)   On or over any sidewalk, curb, safety zone, barricade or authorized
structure in any highway, street, alley or public place.
      (2)   Across any parkway, island or unimproved portion of the highway,
either in the center thereof or at the side of the roadway, except at regularly
established crossings.
      (3)   Across private property or driveways to evade established public
ways and regulations.
      (4)   Through or upon any drive-in restaurant or parking lot driveway,
for purposes other than those for which they were constructed.
      (5)   Across, through or upon any public or private property not normally
in use and designed and intended for use by vehicular traffic, except by the
permission of the owner or lessee thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.22, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-169. - Enforcement of traffic regulations, emergencies.
   (a)   Officers of the police department, or such police officers as are
assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct the traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, this chapter, and the
rules and regulations pertaining thereto; provided, however, that in the event
of a fire or other emergency, where it is necessary to expedite the flow of
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may
direct traffic as such conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions
of the traffic code.
   (b)   Officers or employees of the fire department in the city, when at the
scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat,
or in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.23, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-170. - Police officer's authority to enforce Code on boundary streets
and highways.
   A police officer of the city may exercise authority and powers outside the
city when he is enforcing this chapter of the Code on a street or highway which
is on the boundary of the city as if he were in the city.
(Ord. No. 94-589, 3-16-94)
Sec. 18-171. - Committing a traffic offense while using a hand-held mobile
phone prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a traffic offense while
operating a motor vehicle on any public roadway, or area open to the general
public, while using a hand-held mobile phone.
   (b)   Violation of this section is a civil infraction.
   (c)   The enforcement of this section shall be accomplished only as a
secondary action when the driver of a motor vehicle has been detained for a
suspected violation of another section of this chapter of the Code.
(Ord. No. 07-1122, 2-20-07)
Sec. 18-172. - Reading, typing, or sending text message on wireless two-way
communication device prohibited; exceptions; violation as civil infraction;
fine.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not read,
manually type, or send a text message on a wireless two-way communication
device that is located in the person's hand or in the person's lap, including a
wireless telephone used in cellular telephone service or personal communication
service, while operating a motor vehicle that is moving on a highway or street
in this city. As used in this subsection, a wireless two-way communication
devices does not include a global positioning or navigation system that is
affixed to the motor vehicle.
   (b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to an individual who is using a device
described in subsection (a) to do any of the following:
      (1)   Report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious road
hazard.
      (2)   Report a situation in which the person believes his or her personal
safety is in jeopardy.
      (3)   Report or avert the perpetration or potential perpetration of a
criminal act against the individual or another person.
      (4)   Carry out official duties as a police officer, law enforcement
official, member of a paid or volunteer fire department, or operator of an
emergency vehicle.
   (c)   An individual who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be ordered to pay a civil fine as follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, $100.00.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation, $200.00.
(Ord. No. 10-1287, 8-16-10)
Sec. 18-173. - Prohibited use of a cellular telephone by a person issued a
level 1 or level 2 graduated driver license; exceptions.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, an individual issued a level 1 or
level 2 graduated license under MCL 257.310e shall not use a cellular telephone
while operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or street. For purposes of this
section, "use" means to initiate a call, answer a call, or listen to or engage
in verbal communications through the cellular telephone.
   (b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to an individual who is using a device
described in subsection (a) to do any of the following:
      (1)   Report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious road
hazard.
      (2)   Report a situation in which the person believes his or her personal
safety is in jeopardy.
      (3)   Report or avert the perpetration or potential perpetration of a
criminal act against the individual or another person.
   (c)   Subsection (a) does not apply to an individual using a voice-operated
system that is integrated into the motor vehicle.
   (d)   An individual who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (e)   This section shall become effective on March 28, 2013.
(Ord. No. 13-1387, 3-19-13)
Secs. 18-174—18-185. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - REGISTRATION AND LICENSES
Sec. 18-186. - Operation of vehicle without registration plates.
   (a)   No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be
operated, upon any highway, street, public way or other place open to the
general public in the city, any vehicle, including low-speed vehicles, required
to be registered under the provisions of the state vehicle code unless there
shall be attached thereto and displayed thereon, when and as required by the
state vehicle code, a valid registration certificate and registration plate
issued therefore for the current registration year. No registration plate or
plates shall be required upon any wrecked or disabled motor vehicle being
transported upon the highway by a wrecker or a registered motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section a person who violates
subsection (a) of this section is responsible for a civil infraction. However,
if the vehicle is a commercial vehicle which is required to be registered
according to the schedule of elected gross vehicle weights under MCL 257.801(1)
(k), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 99-758, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 03-988,
10-21-03; Ord. No. 19-1657, 9-10-19)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.255.
Sec. 18-187. - Unlawful use of certificate of title, registration certificate,
plates or permit.
   (a)   No person shall lend to another any certificate of title, registration
certificate, registration plate, special plate or permit issued to him if the
person desiring to borrow the same would not be entitled to the use thereof;
nor shall any person knowingly permit the use of any of the same by one not
entitled thereto; nor shall any person carry or display upon a vehicle any
registration certificate or registration plate not issued for such vehicle or
not otherwise lawfully used thereon under the state vehicle code.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $100.00, or both.
   (c)   A person who displays upon a commercial vehicle, which is required to
be registered according to the schedule of elected gross vehicle weights under
MCL 257.801(1)(k), any registration plate not issued for the vehicle or not
otherwise lawfully used under this act is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than
$500.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.256.
Sec. 18-188. - Alteration or forging of documents.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   To alter with fraudulent intent any certificate of title,
registration certification of registration (license) plate, issued by the
secretary of state;
      (2)   To forge or counterfeit any such document or plate purporting to
have been issued by the secretary of state;
      (3)   To alter or falsify with fraudulent intent or forge any assignment
upon a certificate of title;
      (4)   To hold or use any such document or plate knowing the same to have
been so altered, forged or falsified.
(Ord. No. 89-449, § 3.2(a), 5-2-89)
Sec. 18-189. - Operators, chauffeurs must be licensed.
   (a)   No person, except those expressly exempted by law, shall drive or
operate any motor vehicle, including a low-speed vehicle upon any street,
highway or public way, including public parking lots in the city, unless such
person has been, and is at the time of such driving or operating, licensed in
full force and effect as an operator or chauffeur under the provisions of the
state vehicle code or by some other constituted authority.
   (b)   No person shall be permitted to have more than one valid operator's
license at any time.
   (c)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle, including a low-speed vehicle,
in the city as a chauffeur unless he holds a valid chauffeur's license, but any
person holding a valid chauffeur's license need not procure a valid operator's
license.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.3, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 19-1657, 9-10-19)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.301.
Sec. 18-190. - License endorsement for motorcycles.
   Every person, before operating any motorcycle or motor driven cycle upon any
highway, street or public way in the city, shall procure a motorcycle
indorsement on the operator's or chauffeur's license. Such license shall be
issued, suspended, revoked, canceled or renewed in accordance with and governed
by the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act (MCL 257.1 et seq.), as amended.
Licenses issued prior to June 1, 1970, shall be valid for the duration of the
license period.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.3(a), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.312(a).
Sec. 18-191. - Investigation of license application.
   Before the application, either new or renewal, for an operator's license or
chauffeur's license will be accepted and processed by the city police
department and sent to the secretary of state's office, the records in the city
must show that there are no traffic violation tickets or notices of traffic
violations which have been issued by the police department or by any other
authorized agency in the city which are not settled or disposed of according to
law as of the date of such application. If the police department discovers any
such traffic violation tickets or notices of traffic violations against such
applicant, or if any such violation tickets or notices of traffic violations
exist, the application of any such person for a driver's license and
chauffeur's license, or either of them, will not be processed or forwarded to
the secretary of state until all such traffic violations have been settled or
disposed of according to law.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-192. - Falsification of license application.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   To use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious
address or birthdate in any application for an operator's or chauffeur's
license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof.
      (2)   Knowingly make any false statement, or knowingly conceal any
material fact or otherwise commit a fraud on any such application.
   (b)   Any person applying for either an original, renewal or duplicate
operator's or chauffeur's license and any person requesting a change of address
for either an operator's or chauffeur's license shall sign an affidavit
swearing and affirming that the statements and answers given by him in such
application for an operator's or chauffeur's license or for change of address,
as contained therein, are true.
   (c)   Any license for any operator or chauffeur issued upon an application
which is untrue or which contains false statements as to any material matters
shall be absolutely void from the date of issuance, and the operator or
chauffeur shall be deemed unlicensed and the license so issued shall be at once
taken upon request or order of the police department.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.324.
Sec. 18-193. - Motor vehicle insurance; evidence of insurance.
   (a)   The owner or registrant of a motor vehicle, including a low-speed
vehicle, who operates or permits the operation of the motor vehicle or low-
speed vehicle on any highway, street, public way, or other place open to the
general public in the city, shall produce under subsection (b), on the request
of a police officer, evidence that the motor vehicle or low-speed vehicle is
insured under Chapter 31 of the Insurance Code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL
500.3101 to 500.3179.
      (1)   Subject to MCL 257.907(14), an owner or operator of a motor vehicle
or low-speed vehicle who fails to provide evidence of insurance on request
under this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
      (2)   An owner or operator of a motor vehicle, low-speed vehicle, or
motorcycle who fails to have motor vehicle or motorcycle insurance as required
by MCL 500.3102 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not
more than 93 days, or a fine of not more than $500, or both.
   (b)   If an individual displays an electronic copy of his or her certificate
of insurance using an electronic device, the police officer shall only view the
electronic copy of the certificate of insurance and shall not manipulate the
electronic device to view any other information on the electronic device. An
individual who displays an electronic copy of his or her certificate of
insurance using an electronic device as provided in this section is not
presumed to have consented to a search of the electronic device. A police
officer may require the individual to electronically forward the electronic
copy of the certificate of insurance to a specified location provided by the
police officer. The police officer may then view the electronic copy of the
certificate of insurance in a setting in which it is safe for the officer to
verify that the information contained in the electronic copy of the certificate
of insurance is valid and accurate. The City of Dearborn, the Dearborn Police,
or an employee of the City or Dearborn Police is not liable for damage to or
loss of an electronic device that occurs as a result of a police officer's
viewing an electronic copy of a certificate of insurance in the manner provided
in this section or state law, regardless of whether the police officer or the
owner or operator of the vehicle was in possession of the electronic device at
the time the damage or loss occurred.
   (c)   The failure of a person to produce evidence that a motor vehicle,
including a low- speed vehicle, or motorcycle has in full force and effect
security complying with state statutory requirements on the date of the
issuance of the citation, creates a rebuttable presumption in a prosecution
under this section that the motor vehicle or motorcycle did not have in full
force and effect security complying with this section on the date of the
issuance of the citation.
   (d)   A certificate of insurance, paper or electronic form and issued by an
insurance company, that certifies that the security that meets the requirements
of sections 3101 and 3102 of the Insurance Code of 1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL
500.3101 and 500.3102, is in force is prima facie evidence that insurance is in
force for the motor vehicle or low-speed vehicle described in thecertificate of
insurance until the expiration date shown on the certificate. The certificate,
in addition to describing the motor vehicles or low-speed vehicles for which
insurance is in effect, must, if applicable, state the name of each individual
named on the policy, policy declaration, or a declaration certificate whose
operation of the vehicle would cause the liability coverage of that insurance
to become void.
   (e)   An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who knowingly produces false
evidence under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or a fine of not more than $500 or
both.
   (f)   A nonresident owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle not
registered in this state shall not operate or permit the vehicle to be operated
in the city for an aggregate of more than 30 days in any calendar year unless
he or she continuously maintains security for the payment of benefits pursuant
to the Insurance Code of 1956, 1956 PA 218.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.12, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 94-614, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 99-759,
2-16-99; Ord. No. 17-1594, 9-12-17; Ord. No. 19-1657, 9-10-19; Ord. No. 21-
1716, 8-17-21; Ord. No. 23-1791, 6-13-23)
State Law reference—Similar provision, MCL 257.328, 500.3101, 500.3102
Sec. 18-194. - Violation of restricted license.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any manner
in violation of the restrictions imposed in a restricted operator's or
chauffeur's license issued to him under the provisions of the state vehicle
code, or by some other constituted authority.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.11, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.312, MSA 9.2012.
Sec. 18-195. - Possession of license; display.
   The licensee shall have his operator's license in his immediate possession
at all times when driving a motor vehicle, and shall display the same upon
demand of any uniformed police officer or field deputy or inspector, or other
duly authorized law enforcement official, who shall identify himself as such.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.311, MSA 9.2011.
Sec. 18-196. - Unlawful acts in use of licenses.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or to have in possession
any operator's or chauffeur's license, knowing the same to be fictitious or to
have been canceled, revoked, suspended, altered or mutilated.
      (2)   Lend to any other person or knowingly permit the use of, by one not
entitled thereto, any operator's or chauffeur's license issued to the person so
lending or permitting the use thereof.
      (3)   Display or to represent as one's own, any operator's or chauffeur's
license not issued to the person so displaying the same.
      (4)   Fail or refuse to surrender to a law enforcing official, upon
demand, any operator's or chauffeur's license which has been suspended,
canceled or revoked, as provided by law.
      (5)   Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious
address in any application for an operator's or chauffeur's license or any
renewal or duplicate thereof, or knowingly to make a false statement, knowingly
to conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in any such application.
      (6)   Alter or otherwise cause to be altered any operator's or
chauffeur's license so as to knowingly make a false statement or knowingly
conceal a material fact in order to misrepresent as one's own the operator's or
chauffeur's license.
      (7)   Use or have in possession in committing a crime an operator's or
chauffeur's license that has been altered or that is used to knowingly conceal
a material fact in order to misrepresent as one's own the operator's or
chauffeur's license.
      (8)   Furnish to a peace officer false, forged, fictitious, or misleading
verbal or written information identifying the person as another person, if the
person is detained for a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Any license for an operator or chauffeur, issued under the provisions
of this division upon an application which is untrue, or which contains false
statements as to any material matters, shall be absolutely void from the date
of issuance. The operator or chauffeur who was issued the license shall be
deemed unlicensed, and the license issued shall be at once taken upon request
or order of the department.
   (c)   The secretary of state shall suspend the license of an operator or
chauffeur upon conviction of one of the prohibited practices described in this
section, or of this chapter, for 90 days. A second violation within a period of
seven years shall result in a suspension for one year.
(Ord. No. 81-103, §§ 3.5, 3.5a, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.324, MSA 9.2024.
Sec. 18-197. - Driving by unlicensed minor.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or knowingly permit any minor
under the age of 18 years to drive a motor vehicle upon a highway as an
operator, unless such minor shall have first obtained a license to so drive a
motor vehicle under the provisions of the state vehicle code.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.325, MSA 9.2025.
Sec. 18-198. - Permitting violations.
   No person shall knowingly authorize or permit a motor vehicle owned by him
or under his control to be driven by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.326, MSA 9.2026.
Sec. 18-199. - Operating vehicle if license, registration certificate, or
designation suspended, revoked or denied; penalty; extending period of
suspension or revocation; informing court of record and status; applicability.
   (a)   A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or registration
certificate has been suspended or revoked, whose application for license has
been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
motor vehicles, within this city.
   (b)   A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within this city by a person whose license or registration
certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license has been
denied, or who has never applied for a license, except as permitted by state
law.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who violates
subsection (a) or (b) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, by jail for not more than 93 days or a fine
of not more than $500.00 or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with
the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed driver to
operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled
by the secretary of state upon notification by a peace officer.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation, by jail for not more than 1
year or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both. Unless the vehicle was
stolen, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled by the
secretary of state upon notification by a peace officer.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely
for the purpose of protecting human life or property if the life or property is
endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential.
   (e)   A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked and
who has been notified as provided in MCL 257.212 of that suspension or
revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has been
denied as provided by state law, or who has never applied for a vehicle group
designation and who operates a commercial motor vehicle within this state,
except as permitted under this ordinance, while any of those conditions exist
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, except as otherwise provided in this
section, by jail for not less than three days or more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $100.00, or both.
   (f)   If a person has a second or subsequent suspension or revocation under
this section within seven years as indicated on the person's Michigan driving
record, the court shall proceed as provided in section
18-199d.
   (g)   This section does not apply to a person who has one currently
effective suspension or denial on his or her Michigan driving record under MCL
257.321a and has never been convicted of or received a civil infraction
determination for a violation that occurred during that suspension or denial.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a person who never applied for a license
includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never applied
again.
   (i)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.8, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-659, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 97-695, 2-
4-97; Ord. No. 99-794, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 19-1655, 7-16-19)
   State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.904, MSA 9.2604.
Sec. 18-199A. - Order of impoundment.
   (a)   When a person in convicted of a first offense punishable under
18-199, or MCL 257.904, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.904, for operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the court may order the motor
vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part or leased by that person, impounded
for not more that 120 days from the date of judgment.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of a second offense punishable under
section
18-199, or MCL 257.904, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.904, for operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the court shall order the motor
vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part or leased by that person, impounded
for not less than a period the court orders but not more than 120 days from the
date of judgment.
   (c)   An order for the impounding of a motor vehicle issued pursuant to this
section is valid throughout the state. Any peace officer may execute the
impoundment order. The order shall include the implied consent of the owner of
the vehicle to the storage for insurance coverage purposes.
   (d)   The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is
liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle whether
or not the vehicle is returned to him or her. The vehicle shall be returned to
the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage. If
redemption in not made or the vehicle is not returned as provided in this
section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment order for return
of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and
disposed of as provided by law.
   (e)   This section does not affect the rights of a conditional vendor,
chattel mortgagee, or lessor of a motor vehicle registered in the name of
another person as owner who becomes subject to section.
   (f)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 99-794, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-199B. - Vehicle immobilization—Required; duties of peace officer
validity of temporary vehicle registration; duration.
   (a)   When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor vehicle for a
violation of a law of this state or local ordinance for which vehicle
immobilization is required, the peace officer shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Immediately confiscate the vehicles's registration plate and
destroy it.
      (2)   Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for the vehicle in the
same form prescribed by the secretary of state for temporary registration
plates issued under MCL 257.266a.
      (3)   Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on the vehicle in
the manner required by the secretary of state.
      (4)   Notify the secretary of state through the law enforcement
information network in a form prescribed by the secretary of state that the
registration plate was confiscated and destroyed, and a temporary plate was
issued.
   (b)   A temporary vehicle registration plate issued under this section is
valid for 100 days unless extended by the court.
   (c)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 99-794, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-199C. - Same—Order.
   (a)   For a violation of section
18-271, the following apply:
      (1)   For a violation of subsectiosn 18-271(a), (c) or (e); the court may
order vehicle immobilization for not more than 180 days.
      (2)   For a second violation of subsections 18-271(a), (c), or (e); or
MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (7), or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (7), in any combination arising out of
separate incidents, the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less
than 24 days or more than 180 days.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation of subsections 18-271(a), (c),
or (e); or MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (7), or a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to MCL 257.625(1), (3), or (7), in any combination
arising out of separate incidents, the court shall order vehicle immobilization
for not less than six months or more than three years.
   (b)   For a suspension, revocation, or denial under section
18-199, the following apply:
      (1)   For one prior suspension, revocation, or denial under section
18-199, or MCL 257.904, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.904, within the past seven years, the court may order vehicle
immobilization for not more than 180 days.
      (2)   For any combination of two or three prior suspensions, revocations,
or denials under section
18-199, or MCL 257.904, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.904, within the past seven years, the court shall order vehicle
immobilization for not less than 90 days or more than 180 days.
      (3)   For any combination of four or more prior suspensions, revocations,
or denials under section
18-199, or MCL 257.904, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.904, within the past seven years, the court shall order vehicle
immobilization for not less than one year or more than three years.
   (c)   The defendant shall provide the court the vehicle identification
number and registration plate number of the vehicle involved in the violation.
   (d)   The court shall not order vehicle immobilization under this section if
the defendant is not the owner or lessee of the vehicle operated during the
violation unless the owner or lessee knowingly permitted the vehicle to be
operated in violation of subsection
18-271(b) or subsection
18-199(b) regardless of whether a conviction resulted.
   (e)   An order required to be issued under this section shall not be
suspended.
   (f)   If a defendant is ordered jailed for the violation for which
immobilization is ordered, the period of immobilization shall begin at the end
of the period of jail.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A suspension, revocation, or denial based on a violation of the
support and parenting time enforcement act, 1982 PA 295, MCL 552.601 to
552.650.
      (2)   For a suspension, revocation, or denial under section
18-199, or MCL 257.904, an individual who has no currently effective suspension
or denial under MCL 257.321a or who has one currently effective suspension or
denial under MCL 257.321a but has never violated a condition of that suspension
or denial, and who has no other suspensions or revocations or denials.
      (3)   A vehicle that is registered in another state or that is a rental
vehicle.
      (4)   Any of the following:
         i.   A violation of chapter II of the State of Michigan Vehicle Code.
         ii.   A violation of chapter V of the State of Michigan Vehicle Code.
         iii.   A violation for failure to change address.
         iv.   A parking violation.
         v.   A bad check violation.
         vi.   An equipment violation.
         vii.   A pedestrian, passenger, or bicycle violation, other than a
violation of section 703(1) or (2) of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998,
1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1703, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
section 703(1) or (2) of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, 1998 PA 58,
MCL 436.1703, or section MCL 257.624a or 257.624b or a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to section 257.624a or 257.624b.
         viii.   A violation of a local ordinance substantially corresponding
to a violation described in subsections i. to vii. above.
   (h)   As used in this section, "vehicle immobilization" means requiring the
motor vehicle involved in the violation immobilized in a manner provided in
section
18-199D.
   (i)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 99-794, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-199D. - Same—Manner; storage; removal.
   (a)   A court shall order a vehicle immobilized under section
18-199C by the use of any available technology that locks the ignition, wheels,
or steering of the vehicle or otherwise prevents any person from operating the
vehicle or that prevents the defendant from operating the vehicle. If a vehicle
is immobilized under this section, the court may order the vehicle stored at a
location and in a manner considered appropriate by the court. The court may
order the person convicted of violating section
18-271 or a suspension, revocation, or denial under section
18-199 to pay the cost of immobilizing and storing the vehicle.
   (b)   A vehicle subject to immobilization under this section may be sold
during the period of immobilization, but shall not be sold to a person who is
exempt from paying a use tax under section 3(3)(a) of the Use Tax Act, 1937 PA
94, MCL 205.93, without a court order.
   (c)   A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle by
vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease, or otherwise obtain a motor
vehicle during the immobilization period.
   (d)   A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or attempt to
remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he or she knows or has reason to
know has been installed on a vehicle by court order for vehicle immobilization
or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he or she knows or has reason
to know has been ordered immobilized.
   (e)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by jail for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$100.00, or both.
   (f)   To the extent that an existing ordinance regarding the storage or
removal of vehicles conflicts with an order of immobilization issued by the
court, the existing ordinance is preempted.
   (g)   The amendments to this section shall take effect October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 99-794, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-200. - Unlicensed operators.
   Any person, not exempt from license under the provisions of the state
vehicle code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), who shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
streets, highways or public ways of this city and who is unable to show that he
has been issued a license to operate a motor vehicle by a state or foreign
country valid within the three years preceding, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or
both. Any person convicted of a second offense under this section shall be
punished by imprisonment for not less than two nor more than 90 days or by a
fine of $100.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 3.8(a), 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.904a.
Sec. 18-201. - Registration certificate.
   (a)   Every owner of a motor vehicle, upon receipt of the registration
certificate for such vehicle, shall write his signature thereon with pen and
ink in the space provided. Every such registration certificate shall at all
times be carried in the vehicle to which it refers or shall be carried by the
person driving or in control of such vehicle who shall display the same upon
demand of a law enforcing officer.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.16, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.223.
Sec. 18-202. - Registration plates; obstructed plates.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection and subsection (f), a
registration plate issued for a vehicle shall be attached to the rear of the
vehicle. A registration plate issued for a truck tractor or road tractor shall
be attached to the front of the vehicle.
   (b)   A registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a
horizontal position to the vehicle for which the plate is issued so as to
prevent the plate from swinging. The plate shall be attached at a height of not
less than 12 inches from the ground, measured from the bottom of the plate, in
a place and position that is clearly visible. The plate shall be maintained
free from foreign materials that obscure or partially obscure the registration
information and in a clearly legible condition. The attachment to the rear of a
vehicle of a tow ball, bicycle rack, removable hitch, or any other device
designed to carry an object on the rear of a vehicle, including the object
being carried, does not violate this subsection.
   (c)   A registration plate or an expiration tab on the registration plate
shall be of a different color designated by the secretary of state with a
marked contrast between the color of the registration plate and the numerals or
letters on the plate. The secretary of state may provide a distinctive
registration plate as a replacement for a standard plate. To honor a special or
historical event, the secretary of state may provide a commemorative plate as a
replacement for a standard plate.
   (d)   A person shall not attach a name plate, insignia, or advertising
device to a registration plate in a manner that obscures or partially obscures
the registration information.
   (e)   A person shall not operate a motor vehicle that has a name plate,
insignia, or advertising device attached to a registration plate in a manner
that obscures or partially obscures the registration information.
   (f)   A registration plate issued for a historic military vehicle that is
authorized to be operated on the roads of this state is not required to be
attached to the rear or the front of the historic military vehicle unless the
historic military vehicle was originally manufactured with lighting and
mounting provisions for a registration plate. However, if the registration
plate is not attached to the exterior of the historic military vehicle, it
shall be present in the historic military vehicle to which it refers and shall
be made available upon demand of a police officer. As used in this subsection,
"historic military vehicle" means a vehicle, including a trailer, regardless of
the vehicle's size, weight, or year of manufacture, that was manufactured for
use in any country's military forces and is maintained to represent its
military design and markings accurately.
   (g)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (h)   This section takes effect on August 14, 2018.
(Ord. No. 18-1623, 8-21-18)
Secs. 18-203—18-215. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - ACCIDENTS
Sec. 18-216. - Investigation of accidents.
   It shall be the duty of the traffic division of the police department,
assisted by other police officers of the city, to investigate traffic accidents
and to assist in arresting and in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of this chapter who cause, or contribute to the causing, of such
accidents.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.24, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-217. - Accident studies.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
traffic division, together with the records bureau in the police department,
shall collect data and conduct studies of such accidents with a view to making
recommendations and determining remedial measures to correct such conditions.
The records bureau shall maintain a suitable system of filing such reports
alphabetically by location, among other possible methods of filing, and such
reports shall be available for use in making such studies.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.25, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-218. - Duty of driver to stop.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to fail, neglect or
refuse to bring his motor vehicle to a complete stop upon a signal given by a
school traffic attendant who is directing and aiding school or other children
across any streets or highways in the city, and any such school traffic
attendant is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this
chapter by directing motor vehicles to stop to permit children to cross any
such street or highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 2.26, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-219. - Involving death or personal injury.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that
he has been involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any
person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and
shall remain thereat until he has fulfilled the requirements of the Michigan
Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.) and of this chapter. Every such stop shall be
made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (b)   Any person failing to stop or to comply with such requirements under
such circumstances shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment
for not more than one year, or both.
   (c)   Any person thus convicted shall be subject to having his operator's
and chauffeur's license, or either of them, revoked, and the judge of the
district court shall immediately request the secretary of state to revoke the
operator's and chauffeur's license, or either of them, of the person so
convicted.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.617a.
Sec. 18-220. - Resulting in damage to vehicle.
   The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he has
been involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is
driven or attended by any person or resulting in damage to other property shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and shall remain
thereat until he has fulfilled the requirements of the state vehicle code and
of this chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more
than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with such requirements
under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.618.
Sec. 18-220A. - Vehicle accident; removal from main traveled portion of
roadway.
   (a)   Unless the operator of a motor vehicle involved in an accident knows
or reasonably should know that serious impairment of bodily function or death
has resulted from the accident, the operator or any other occupant of the motor
vehicle who possess a valid drivers license shall remove the motor vehicle from
the main traveled portion of the roadway into a safe refuge on the shoulder,
emergency lane, median, or to a place otherwise removed from the roadway if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   Moving the motor vehicle may be done safely.
      (2)   The motor vehicle is capable of being normally and safely operated
and can be operated under its own power in its customary manner without further
damage or hazard to the traffic elements or to the roadway.
   (b)   The operator or any other person who removes a motor vehicle from the
main traveled portion of the roadway as provided in this section before the
arrival of a police officer is not prima facie at fault regarding the cause of
the traffic accident solely by reason of moving the motor vehicle as provided
in this section.
   (c)   The decision of the operator or any other person to remove or not or
to remove a motor vehicle from the main traveled portion of the roadway as
provided in this section is not admissible in a civil action as evidence that a
serious impairment of bodily function has or has not resulted from the
accident.
   (d)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 10-1269, 5-3-10)
Sec. 18-221. - Driver to give information.
   The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he has
been involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or
damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his
name, address, and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving, also
the name and address of the owner; exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's
license to the person struck or the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided
with; and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable
assistance in securing medical aid or transportation of any injured person.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.619.
Sec. 18-222. - Notice to operator, owner of attended or unattended vehicle.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides, upon either public or private
property in the city, with any vehicle which is attended or unattended shall
immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator
or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the operator or owner of
the vehicle striking the vehicle or, if such owner cannot be located, shall
forthwith report it to the nearest or most convenient police officer in the
city.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.620.
Sec. 18-223. - Notice to owner of fixtures on highway.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable
steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of
such accident, of his name and address and of the registration number of the
vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request, exhibit his operator's or
chauffeur's license and, if such owner cannot be found, shall forthwith report
such accident to the nearest or most convenient police officer.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the officer receiving such report to forward
the same to the commissioner of state police on forms prescribed by him.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.5, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.621.
Sec. 18-224. - Same—Local police.
   The driver of every motor vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent
extent of $200.00 or more shall forthwith report such accident to the nearest
or most convenient police station or police officer in the city. The officer
receiving such report shall forthwith forward the same to the commissioner of
state police on forms to be prescribed by him, which shall be completed in full
by the investigating officer.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.622.
Sec. 18-225. - Report required of occupants.
   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the
time of the accident, capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or
cause to be made the report required by this division.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-226. - Use of reports.
   (a)   All accident reports made under this division shall be made without
prejudice and shall be for the information of the police department of the
city, except that the police department may issue statistical reports based
thereon and except as hereinafter stated in this section. The fact that any
person has made a written report of an accident shall be admissible in evidence
solely to prove compliance with this division.
   (b)   The reports required to be filed pursuant to this section may be
examined by any person making such report or his attorney but shall not be open
to general public inspection, and copying of lists of such reports shall not be
permitted. The reports required by this section shall not be available for use
in any court action, and the information contained therein shall not be
referred to in any way, as evidence of the negligence or due care of any party
involved in an accident, at the trial of any action at law to recover damages.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 4.9, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-227—18-245. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 18-246. - General restrictions.
   (a)   Any person driving a vehicle on any highway, public way or alley shall
drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the then existing traffic, surface
and width of the highway, public way or alley and of any other conditions then
existing, and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway, public way or
alley at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.
   (b)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and except
in those instances where a different speed is specified in this division,
except when such speed would be unsafe, it shall be prima facie lawful for the
driver of a vehicle to drive the same at a speed not exceeding the following:
      (1)   On all highways in a business or residence district, unless
otherwise posted, 25 miles per hour.
      (2)   In public parks and cemeteries, unless a different speed is fixed
and duly posted, 25 miles per hour.
      (3)   Through or along any alley, or in turning any corner, whether
street or alley, ten miles per hour.
   On any street, public place or public way in the city where a lower rate of
speed than that above specified is imposed by any constituted authority, and
such lower speed limit is posted, it shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle
in excess of such lower speed. It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the foregoing speed limitations, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
   (c)   No passenger vehicle drawing another vehicle or trailer shall exceed a
speed of 50 miles per hour.
   (d)   No truck, tractor with trailer or semitrailer, nor any combination of
such vehicles with a gross weight, loaded or unloaded, in excess of 5,000
pounds, shall exceed a speed of 50 miles per hour on highways of streets or 60
miles per hour on freeways, which shall be reduced to 35 miles per hour during
the period when reduced loadings are being enforced in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.,
MSA 9.1801 et seq.).
   (e)   No school bus shall exceed the speed of 50 miles per hour.
   (f)   On all freeways the minimum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
law, or in compliance with special permit issued by appropriate authority.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 5.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.627, 257.628, MSA 9.2327,
9.2328.
Sec. 18-247. - Bridges.
   (a)   A person shall not drive a vehicle upon a public bridge, causeway, or
viaduct at a speed or with a load which is greater than the maximum speed or
load which can be maintained with safety to the structure, when the structure
is signposted, as provided in this section. A person who violates this
subsection is responsible for a civil infraction.
   (b)   A person who drives or moves a vehicle or combination of vehicles, or
the owner or lessee of a vehicle who causes or allows such a vehicle or
combination of vehicles to be loaded and driven or moved, upon a public bridge,
causeway, or viaduct when the gross weight of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles exceeds the limitations established and signposted pursuant to this
section, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil
fine as set forth in this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to either
of the following:
      (1)   Implements of husbandry operated upon a public bridge, causeway, or
viaduct.
      (2)   The use of a public bridge, causeway, or viaduct by a vehicle or
combination of vehicles for a function essential to a farm operation, otherwise
reasonably inaccessible to vehicles performing the essential agricultural
function.
   (c)   The civil fine assessed under subsection (b) of this section shall be
determined as follows:
      (1)   In the amount equal to four cents per pound for each pound of
excess load when the excess is more than 2,500 pounds but not more than 3,000
pounds.
      (2)   In the amount equal to six cents per pound for each pound of excess
load when the excess is more than 3,000 pounds but not more than 4,000 pounds.
      (3)   In the amount equal to eight cents per pound for each pound of
excess load when the excess is more than 4,000 pounds but not more than 5,000
pounds.
      (4)   In the amount equal to ten cents per pound for each pound of excess
load when the excess is more than 5,000 pounds.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles shall be determined as prescribed in MCL 257.722(7),
MSA 9.2422(7).
   (e)   The department of transportation, county road commission, or other
authority having jurisdiction of a public bridge, causeway, or viaduct may
conduct an investigation of that bridge, causeway, or viaduct. If it is found
after investigation that the structure cannot with safety to itself withstand
vehicles traveling at the speed or carrying a load otherwise permissible under
this chapter, the department, commission, or other authority shall determine
and declare the maximum speed of vehicles or load which the structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating that maximum speed
and load limitations to be erected and maintained not more than 50 feet from
each end of the structure, and also at a suitable distance from each end of the
bridge to enable vehicles to take a different route.
   (f)   The findings and determination of the department of transportation,
county road commission, or other local authority shall be conclusive evidence
of the maximum speed and load which can with safety be maintained on a public
bridge, causeway, or viaduct.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 5.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.631, MSA 9.2331.
Sec. 18-248. - Authorized emergency vehicles.
   The speed limitations set forth in this division shall not apply to vehicles
when operated with due regard for safety under the direction of the police in
the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or the apprehension of
persons charged with or suspected of any such violation, and shall not apply to
fire department or fire patrol vehicles when traveling in response to a fire
alarm, nor to public or private ambulances when traveling in emergencies. This
exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the
consequences of his negligence or of a reckless disregard for the safety of
others.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 5.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.632, MSA 9.2332.
Sec. 18-249. - Drag racing.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any
highway, or any other place open to the general public, including any area
designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this city, in a speed or
acceleration contest or for the purpose of making a speed record, whether from
a standing start or otherwise over a measured or unmeasured distance, or in a
drag race.
   (b)   "Drag racing" means, for the purposes of this section, the operation
of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a
competitive attempt to outdistance each other over a common selected course, or
where timing is involved or where timing devices are used in competitive
accelerations of speeds by participating vehicles. Persons rendering assistance
in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as
participants. The operation of two or more vehicles either at speeds in excess
of prima facie lawfully established speeds or rapidly accelerating from a
common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawfully
established speed is prima facie evidence of drag racing and is unlawful.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 5.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.626a, MSA 9.2326(1).
Sec. 18-250. - Specification of speed in complaint, etc.; proof of negligence
in civil action.
   (a)   In every charge of violation of any speed regulation in this division,
the complaint, summons or notice to appear shall specify the speed at which the
defendant is alleged to have driven, as well as the speed applicable within the
district or at the location of the alleged violation.
   (b)   The provisions of this division declaring any speed limitations shall
not be construed to relieve the plaintiff in any civil action from the burden
of proving negligence on the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of
any accident.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 5.5, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.633, MSA 9.2333.
Secs. 18-251—18-269. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - DRUNK, IMPAIRED AND RECKLESS DRIVING; ARREST; PENALTIES
Sec. 18-270. - Forfeiture of vehicle or return to lessor.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and in addition to any
other penalty provided for in this division, the judgment of sentence for a
conviction for a violation of subsection
18-271(a) described in subsection18-271 (h)(2), or a violation of subsection
18-271(3) described in subsection
18-271(h)(2), or a violation of subsection
18-271(e) may require one of the following with regard to the vehicle used in
the offense if the defendant owns the vehicle in whole or in part or leases the
vehicle:
      (1)   Forfeiture of the vehicle if the defendant owns the vehicle in
whole or in part.
      (2)   Return of the vehicle to the lessor if the defendant leases the
vehicle.
   (b)   The vehicle may be seized pursuant to an order of seizure issued by
the court having jurisdiction upon a showing of probable cause that the vehicle
is subject to forfeiture or return to lessor.
   (c)   The forfeiture of a vehicle is subject to the interest of the holder
of a security interest who did not have prior work knowledge of or consent to
the violation.
   (d)   Within 14 days after the defendant's conviction for a violation
described in subsection (1), the city attorney may file a petition with the
court for the forfeiture of the vehicle or to have the court order return of a
leased vehicle to the lessor. The city attorney shall give notice by first-
class mail or other process to the defendant and his or her attorney, to all
owners of the vehicle, and to any person holding a security interest in the
vehicle that the court may require forfeiture or return of the vehicle.
   (e)   If a vehicle is seized before disposition of the criminal proceedings
a defendant who is an owner or lessee of the vehicle may move the court having
jurisdiction over the proceedings to require the seizing agency to file a lien
against the vehicle and to return the vehicle to the owner or lessee pending
disposition of the criminal proceedings. The court shall hear the motion within
seven days after the motion is filed. If the defendant established at the
hearing that he or she holds the legal title to the vehicle or that he or she
has a leasehold interest and that it is necessary for him or her or a member of
his or her family to use the vehicle pending the outcome of the forfeiture
action, the court may order the seizing agency to return the vehicle to the
owner or lessee. If the court orders the return of the vehicle to the owner or
lessee, the court shall order the defendant to post a bond in an amount equal
to the retail value of the vehicle, and shall also order the seizing agency to
file a lien against the vehicle.
   (f)   Within 14 days after notice by the prosecuting attorney is given under
subsection (4), the defendant, an owner, lessee, or holder of a security
interest may file a claim of interest in the vehicle with the court. Within 21
days after the expiration of the period for filing claims, but before or at
sentencing, the court shall hold a hearing to determine the legitimacy of any
claim, the extend of any co-owner's equity interest, the liability of the
defendant to any co-lessee, and whether to order the vehicle forfeited or
returned to the lessor. In considering whether to order forfeiture, the court
shall review the defendant's driving record to determine whether the defendant
has multiple convictions under section
18-271 (or MCL 257.625) or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.625, or multiple suspensions, restrictions, or denials under section
18-199 (or MCL 275.904), or both. If the defendant has multiple convictions
under section
18-271 (or MCL 257.625) or multiple suspensions, restrictions, or denials under
section
18-199 (or MCL 257.904), or both, that factor shall weigh heavily in favor of
forfeiture.
   (g)   If a vehicle is forfeited under this section, the unit of government
that seized the vehicle shall sell the vehicle and dispose of the proceeds in
the following order of priority:
      (1)   Pay any outstanding security interest of a secured party who did
not have prior knowledge of or consent to the commission of the violation.
      (2)   Pay the equity interest of a co-owner who did not have prior
knowledge of or consent to the commission of the violation.
      (3)   Satisfy any order of restitution entered in the prosecution for the
violation.
      (4)   Pay the claim of each person who shows that he or she is a victim
of the violation to the extent that the claim is not covered by any order of
restitution.
      (5)   Pay any outstanding lien against the property that has been imposed
by a governmental unit.
      (6)   Pay the proper expenses of the proceedings for forfeiture and sale,
including, but not limited to, expenses incurred during the seizure process and
expenses for maintaining custody of the property, advertising, and court costs.
      (7)   The balance remaining after the payment of items (1) through (6)
above, shall be distributed by the court having jurisdiction over the
forfeiture proceedings to the unit or units of government substantially
involved in effecting the forfeiture. Seventy-five percent of the money
received by a unit of government under this subdivision shall be used to
enhance enforcement of the criminal laws and 25 percent of the money shall be
used to implement the crime victim's rights act, 1985 PA 87, MCL 780.751 to
780.834. A unit of government receiving money under this subdivision shall
report annually to the department of management and budget the amount of money
received under this subdivision that was used to enhance enforcement of the
criminal laws and the amount that was used to implement the crime victim's
rights act, MCL 780.751 to 780.834.
   (h)   The court may order the defendant to pay a co-lessee any liability
determined under subsection (f) above. The order may be enforced in the same
manner as a civil judgment.
   (i)   The return of a vehicle to the lessor under this section does not
affect or impair the lessor's rights or the defendant's obligations under the
lease.
   (j)   A person who knowingly conceals, sells, gives away, or otherwise
transfers or disposes of a vehicle with the intent to avoid forfeiture or
return of vehicle to the lessor under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by jail for not more than one year or a fine of not more than
$1,000.00, or both.
   (k)   The failure of the court or prosecutor to comply with any time limit
specified in this section does not preclude the court from ordering forfeiture
of a vehicle or its return to a lessor, unless the court finds that the owner
or claimant suffered substantial prejudice as a result of that failure.
   (l)   The forfeiture provisions of this section do not preclude the
prosecuting attorney from pursuing a forfeiture proceeding under any other law
of this state or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section.
   (m)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-271. - Operating motor vehicle while under influence of intoxicating
liquor or controlled substance; operating motor vehicle when visibly impaired;
operation of motor vehicle by person less than 21 years of age; sanctions;
costs; enhanced sentence; guilty plea or nolo contendere; establishment of
prior conviction; special verdict; public record; burden of proving religious
service or ceremony.
   (a)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within this city if the person is operating while intoxicated. As used in this
section, "operating while intoxicated" means either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance.
      (2)   The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine or,
beginning 5 years after the state treasurer publishes a certification under MCL
257.625, the person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
   (b)   The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a
vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon
a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles,
within this city by a person if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled
substance, or combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.
      (2)   The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine
or, beginning 5 years after the state treasurer publishes a certification under
MCL 257.625, the person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (3)   The person's ability to operate the motor vehicle is visibly
impaired due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or
a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.
   (c)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within this city when, due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled
substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, the
person's ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If a person is
charged with violating subsection (a), a finding of guilty under this
subsection may be rendered.
   (d)   A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not,
shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated
for the parking of vehicles, within the city if the person has any bodily
alcohol content. As used in this subsection, "any bodily alcohol content" means
either of the following:
      (1)   An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.08
grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67
milliliters of urine, or, beginning 5 years after the state treasurer publishes
a certification under MCL 257.625, the person has an alcohol content of not
less than 0.02 grams or more but less than 0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as
part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
   (e)   A person, whether licensed or not, is subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   He or she shall not operate a vehicle in violation of subsection
(a), (c), or (f) while another person who is less than 16 years of age is
occupying the vehicle. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of crime
punishable as follows:
         i.   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii), a person who violates
this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00 and to one or more of the
following:
            A.   Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than one
year. Not less than 48 hours of this imprisonment shall be served
consecutively. This term of imprisonment shall not be suspended.
            B.   Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90
days.
         ii.   If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction
or within ten years of two or more prior convictions, a person who violates
this subsection is guilty of a felony.
      (2)   He or she shall not operate a vehicle in violation of subsection
(d) while another person who is less than 16 years of age is occupying the
vehicle. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as follows:
         i.   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii), a person who violates
this subdivision may be sentenced to one or more of the following:
            A.   Community service for not more than 60 days.
            B.   A fine of not more than $500.00.
            C.   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
         ii.   If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction
or within ten years of two or more prior convictions, a person who violates
this subsection shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or
more than $1,000.00 and to one or more of the following:
            A.   Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than one
year. Not less than 48 hours of this imprisonment shall be served
consecutively. This term of imprisonment shall not be suspended.
            B.   Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90
days.
      (3)   In the judgment of sentence under subsection (1)(i) or (2)(i), the
court may, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section
18-270, order vehicle immobilization as provided in section
18-199C. In the judgment of sentence under subsection (1)(ii) or (2)(ii), the
court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section
18-270, order vehicle immobilization as provided in section
18-199C.
   (f)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within this state if the person has in his or her body any amount of a
controlled substance listed in schedule 1 under section 7212 of public health
code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7212, or a rule promulgated under that section, or
of a controlled substance described in section 7214(a)(iv) of the public health
code, 1978 PA 268, MCL 333.7214.
   (g)   If a person is convicted of violating subsection (a) or (f) above, all
of the following apply:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) or (3) below, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
         i.   Community service for not more than 360 hours.
         ii.   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
         iii.   A fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00.
      (2)   If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction,
the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more
than $1,000.00 and one or more of the following:
         i.   Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than one year.
Not less than 48 hours of the term of imprisonment imposed under this
subparagraph shall be served consecutively.
         ii.   Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90
days.
      (3)   If the violation occurs within ten years of two or more prior
convictions, the person is guilty of a felony.
      (4)   A term of imprisonment imposed under subsection (2) or (3) above
shall not be suspended.
      (5)   In the judgment of sentence under subsection (1) above, the court
may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section
18-199C. In the judgment of sentence under subsection (2) or (3) above, the
court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section
18-270, order vehicle immobilization as provided in section
18-199C.
      (6)   In the judgment of sentence under subsection (2) or (3) above, the
court may impose the sanction permitted under section
18-270.
   (h)   A person who is convicted of violating subsection (b) above, is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine
of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, or both.
   (i)   If a person is convicted of violating subsection (c) above, all of the
following apply:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) and (3), the person
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
         i.   Community service for not more than 360 hours.
         ii.   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
         iii.   A fine of not more than $300.00.
      (2)   If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior conviction,
the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more
than $1,000.00, and one or more of the following:
         i.   Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than one year.
Not less than 48 hours of the term of imprisonment imposed under this
subparagraph shall be served consecutively.
         ii.   Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90
days.
      (3)   If the violation occurs within ten years of two or more prior
convictions, the person is guilty of a felony.
      (4)   A term of imprisonment imposed under subsection (2) above, shall
not be suspended.
      (5)   In the judgment of sentence under subsection (1) above, the court
may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section
18-199C. In the judgment of sentence under subsection (2) above, the court
shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section
18-270, order vehicle immobilization as provided in section
18-199C.
      (6)   In the judgment of sentence under subsection (2) above, the court
may impose the sanction permitted under section
18-270.
   (j)   If a person is convicted of violating subsection (d) above, all of the
following apply:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2), the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or both of the following:
         i.   Community service for not more than 360 hours.
         ii.   A fine of not more than $250.00.
      (2)   If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior
convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the following:
         i.   Community service for not more than 60 days.
         ii.   A fine of not more than $500.00.
         iii.   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
   (k)   In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under this section,
the court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution.
   (l)   A person sentenced to perform community service under this section
shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or appropriate
local unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or
local unit of government as a result of the person's activities in that
service.
   (m)   If the prosecuting attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence under
this section or a sanction under section
18-270 based upon the defendant having one or more prior convictions, the
prosecuting attorney shall include on the complaint, or on an amended
complaint, filed in district court, or family division of circuit court, a
statement listing the defendant's prior convictions.
   (n)   If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (a), (c), or (f)
above, or section
18-289, the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to a charge of violating subsection (d) above, in exchange for
dismissal of the original charge. This subsection does not prohibit the court
from dismissing the charge upon the prosecuting attorney's motion.
   (o)   A prior conviction shall be established at sentencing by one or more
of the following:
      (1)   An abstract of conviction.
      (2)   A copy of the defendant's driving record.
      (3)   An admission by the defendant.
   (p)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (r) below, if a person is
charged with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance in
violation of subsection (a) above, the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the
person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court
shall make a finding as to whether the person was under the influence of a
controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance at the time of the violation.
   (q)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (r) below, if a person is
charged with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to operate the
vehicle was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance in
violation of subsection (c) above, the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the
person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court
shall make a finding as to whether, due to the consumption of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, the
person's ability to operate a motor vehicle was visibly impaired at the time of
the violation.
   (r)   A special verdict described in subsections (p) and (q) above, is not
required if a jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to either of the
following:
      (1)   Whether the defendant was under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance at
the time of the violation.
      (2)   Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to his or her
consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and
a controlled substance at the time of the violation.
   (s)   If a jury or court finds under subsections (p), (q), or (r) above,
that the defendant operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or while
impaired due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of a
controlled substance and an alcoholic liquor, the court shall do both of the
following:
      (1)   Report the finding to the secretary of state.
      (2)   On a form or forms prescribed by the state court administrator,
forward to the department of state police a record that specifies the penalties
imposed by the court, including any term of imprisonment, and any sanction
imposed under section
18-270 or
18-199C.
   (t)   In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (d) above, the
defendant bears the burden of proving that the consumption of alcoholic liquor
was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   (u)   The court may order as a condition of probation that a person
convicted of violating subsection (a) or (f) shall not operate a motor vehicle
unless that vehicle is equipped with an ignition interlock device approved,
certified, and installed as required under section
18-276, MCL 257.625k and MCL 257.625l.
   (v)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Intoxicating substance" means any substance, preparation, or a
combination of substances and preparations other than alcohol or a controlled
substance, that is either of the following:
         i.   Recognized as a drug in any of the following publications or
their supplements:
            A.   The official United States pharmacopoeia.
            B.   The official homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States.
            C.   The official national formulary.
         ii.   A substance, other than food, taken into a person's body,
including, but not limited to, vapors or fumes, that is used in a manner or for
a purpose for which it was not intended, and that may result in a condition of
intoxication.
   (w)   Subject to subsection (y) below, as used in this section, "prior
conviction" means a conviction for any of the following, whether under an
ordinance of this city, a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to a law of this state or a law of another state substantially
corresponding to a law of this state:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (x), a violation or attempted
violation of any of the following:
         i.   This section, except a violation of section (b), or a violation
of any prior enactment of this section in which the defendant operated a
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating or alcoholic liquor or a
controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating or alcoholic liquor and
a controlled substance, or while visibly impaired, or with an unlawful bodily
alcohol content.
         ii.   Section
18-289 
         iii.   Former MCL 257.625b.
      (2)   Negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the
operation of a vehicle or an attempt to commit any of those crimes.
   (x)   Except for purposes of the enhancement described in subsection (i)(2)
above, only one violation or attempted violation of subsection
18-271(d), MCL 257.625(6), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.625(6), or a law of another state substantially corresponding to MCL
257.625(6) may be used as a prior conviction.
   (y)   If two or more convictions described in subsection (w) above, are
convictions for violations arising out of the same transaction, only one
conviction shall be used to determine whether the person has a prior
conviction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793,
9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-984, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 13-1410, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 24-1818,
5-21-24)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.625.
Sec. 18-272. - Arrest without warrant; circumstances; preliminary chemical
breath analysis; operator ordered out-of-service; refusal of commercial motor
vehicle operator to submit to breath analysis as misdemeanor; provisions
applicable to chemical tests and analysis; evidence; availability of test
results; presumptions; admissibility of refusal to submit to chemical test.
   (a)   A peace officer may arrest a person without warrant under either of
the following circumstances:
      (1)   The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was,
at the time of an accident in this city, the operator of a vehicle involved in
the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of section
18-271, MCL 257.625, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.625.
      (2)   The person is found in the driver's seat of a vehicle parked or
stopped on a highway or street within this state if any part of the vehicle
intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable to cause to
believe the person was operating the vehicle in violation of section
18-271, MCL 257.625, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL
257.625.
   (b)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was
operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public or
generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within the city and that the person by the consumption of
alcoholic liquor may have affected his or her ability to operate a vehicle, or
reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a commercial motor
vehicle within the city while the person's blood, breath, or urine contained
any measurable amount of alcohol or while the person had any detectable
presence of alcoholic liquor, or reasonable cause to believe that a person who
is less than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or
other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles,
including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this city
while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in
subsection
18-271(d), may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. The following provisions apply with respect to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis administered under this subsection:
      (1)   A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon
the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
      (2)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in subsection
18-274(a) or in an administrative hearing for one or more of the following
purposes:
         i.   To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge
to the validity of an arrest. This subparagraph does not limit the introduction
of other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest.
         ii.   As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if
offered by the defendant to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination of a
defense witness that the defendant's breath alcohol content was higher at the
time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered under
subsection (f) below.
         iii.   As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if
offered by the prosecution to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination of
a prosecution witness that the defendant's breath alcohol content was lower at
the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered
under subsection (f) below.
      (3)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
remains subject to the requirements of sections
18-274 and
18-275, and MCL 257.625c, 625d, 625e, and 625f, for the purposes of chemical
tests described in those sections.
      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (e) below, a person who refuses to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a
peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction.
   (c)   A peace officer shall use the results of a preliminary chemical breath
analysis conducted pursuant to this section to determine whether to order a
person out-of-service under section
18-288. A peace officer shall order out-of-service as required under section
18-288 a person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis as provided in this section.
This section does not limit use of other competent evidence by the peace
officer to determine whether to order a person out-of-service under section
18-288.
   (d)   A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who is
requested to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis under this
section shall be advised that refusing a peace officer's request to take a test
described in this section is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00 or both, and will result
in the issuance of a 24-hour out-of-service order.
   (e)   A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses
to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a peace officer's
lawful request is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both.
   (f)   The following provisions apply with respect to chemical test and
analysis of a person's blood, urine, or breath, other than preliminary chemical
breath analysis:
      (1)   The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both
in a driver's blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in a person's breath at
the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of a person's blood, urine, or
breath is admissible into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding and is
presumed to be the same as at the time the person operated the vehicle.
      (2)   A person arrested for a crime described in subsection
18-274(a) shall be advised of all of the following:
         i.   If he or she takes a chemical test of his or her blood, urine, or
breath administered at the request of a peace officer, he or she has the right
to demand that a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the
chemical tests.
         ii.   The results of the test are admissible in a judicial proceeding
as provided under this chapter and will be considered with other admissible
evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt.
         iii.   He or she is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a
test sample obtained pursuant to his or her own request.
         iv.   If he or she refuses the request of a peace officer to take a
test described in subparagraph i above, a test shall not be given without a
court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain a court order.
         v.   Refusing a peace officer's request to take a test described in
subparagraph i above, will result in the suspension of his or her operator's or
chauffeur's license and vehicle group designation or operating privilege and in
the addition of six points to his or her driver record.
      (3)   A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and
collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or an individual
operating under the delegation of a licensed physician under section 16215 of
the public health code, MCL 333.16215, qualified to withdraw blood and acting
in a medical environment, may withdraw blood at a peace officer's request to
determine the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both
in the person's blood, as provided in this subsection. Liability for a crime or
civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing blood and
related procedures does not attach to a licensed physician or individual
operating under the delegation of a licensed physician who withdraws or
analyzes blood or assists in the withdrawal or analysis in accordance with this
chapter unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a negligent manner.
      (4)   A chemical test described in this subsection shall be administered
at the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person has committed a crime described in subsection
18-274(a). A person who takes a chemical test administered at a peace officer's
request as provided in this section shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
have a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the chemical tests
described in this subsection within a reasonable time after his or her
detention. The test results are admissible and shall be considered with other
admissible evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. If the
person charged is administered a chemical test by a person of his or her own
choosing, the person charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis
of the test sample.
      (5)   If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the
accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the driver's
blood is withdrawn at that time for medical treatment, the results of a
chemical analysis of that sample are admissible in any civil or criminal
proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance
or both in the person's blood at the time alleged, regardless of whether the
person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The medical facility or
person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the
analysis to a prosecuting attorney who requests the results for use in a
criminal prosecution as provided in this subsection. A medical facility or
person disclosing information in compliance with this subsection is not civilly
or criminally liable for making the disclosure.
      (6)   If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the
accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be withdrawn in a
manner directed by the medical examiner to determine the amount of alcohol or
the presence of a controlled substance, or both, in the decedent's blood. The
medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis of the sample
to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident and that agency shall
forward the results to the department of state police.
   (g)   The provisions of subsection (f) relating to chemical testing do not
limit the introduction of any other admissible evidence bearing upon any of the
following questions:
      (1)   Whether the person was impaired by, or under the influence of,
alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of both alcoholic
liquor and controlled substance.
      (2)   Whether the person had an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per
100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person had an alcohol content of 0.10
grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67
milliliters of urine.
      (3)   If the person is less than 21 years of age, whether the person had
any bodily alcohol content within his or her body. As used in this subsection,
"any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following:
         i.   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more but less than 0.08 grams
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters
of urine or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person had an alcohol content of
0.02 grams or more but less than 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
         ii.   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from
the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than the consumption of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
   (h)   If a chemical test described in subsection (f) above, is administered,
the test results shall be made available to the person charged or the person's
attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request
filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at least two
days before the day of the trial. The prosecution shall offer the test results
as evidence in that trial. Failure to fully comply with the request bars the
admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution.
   (i)   A person's refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in
subsection (f) above, is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime
described in subsection
18-274(a) only to show that a test was offered to the defendant, but not as
evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. The jury shall be
instructed accordingly.
   (j)   The amendments to this section shall take effect September 30, 2003.
(Ord. No. 91-529, § 6.1a, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793,
9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-984, 9-16-03)
Sec. 18-273. - Arraignment of person arrested for misdemeanor violation;
pretrial conference; advising accused of maximum penalty before acceptance of
plea; screening, assessment, and rehabilitative services; action by secretary
of state pending appeal.
   (a)   A person arrested for a violation of subsection
18-271(a), (c), (d), or (e) or section
18-289 shall be arraigned on the citation, complaint, or warrant not more than
14 days after the arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued
or reissued, not more than 14 days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant
is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any
other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit.
   (b)   The court shall schedule a pretrial conference between the prosecuting
attorney, the defendant, and the defendant's attorney in each case in which the
defendant is charged with a violation of subsection 18-625(a), (c), (d), or (e)
or section
18-289. The pretrial conference shall be held not more than 35 days after the
person's arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or
reissued, not more than 35 days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant is
served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any
other sanction for a failure to comply with the applicable time limit. The
court shall order the defendant to attend the pretrial conference and may
accept a plea by the defendant at the conclusion of the pretrial conference.
The court may adjourn the pretrial conference upon the motion of a party for
good cause shown. Not more than one adjournment shall be granted to a party,
and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed 14 days.
   (c)   Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the defendant,
a witness, or material evidence or due to an interlocutory appeal or
exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, the
court shall finally adjudicate, by a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, entry
of a verdict, or other final disposition, a case in which the defendant is
charged with a violation of subsection 18-625(a), (c), (d), or (e) or section
18-289, within 77 days after the person is arrested for the violation or, if an
arrest warrant is issued or reissued not more than 77 days after the date the
issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. The court
shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply
with this time limit.
   (d)   Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under section
18-271, the court shall advise the accused of the maximum possible term of
jail, and the maximum possible fine that may be imposed for the violation and
shall advise the defendant that the maximum possible license sanctions that may
be imposed will be based upon the master driving record maintained by the
secretary of state under MCL 257.204a.
   (e)   Before imposing sentence for a violation of subsection
18-271(a), (c), (d), or (e), the court shall order the person to undergo
screening and assessment by a person or agency designated by the office of
substance abuse services to determine whether the person is likely to benefit
from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol
or drug treatment programs. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
the court may order the person to participate in and successfully complete one
or more appropriate rehabilitative programs as part of the sentence. If the
person has one or more prior convictions, the court shall order the person to
participate in and successfully complete one or more appropriate rehabilitative
programs as part of the sentence. The person shall pay for the costs of the
screening, assessment, and rehabilitative services.
   (f)   If the judgment and sentence are appealed to circuit court, the court
may ex parte order the secretary of state to stay the suspension, revocation,
or restricted license issued by the secretary of state pending the outcome of
the appeal.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.1a, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 91-529, § 6.1b, 1-7-92; Ord. No.
97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793, 9-21-99)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.625b.
Sec. 18-274. - Consent to chemical tests; persons not considered to have given
consent to withdrawal of blood; administration of tests.
   (a)   A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or other place
open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including
an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this city is considered
to have given consent to chemical test of his or her blood, breath, or urine
for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a
controlled substance or both in his or her blood or urine or the amount of
alcohol in his or her breath in all of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If the person is arrested for a violation of subsection
18-271(a), (c), (d), (e) or (f), section
18-272(e), or section
18-289.
   (b)   A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or a condition
requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a physician is not
considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of blood.
   (c)   The tests shall be administered as provided in subsection
18-272(f).
(Ord. No. 91-529, § 6.1c, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793,
9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-984, 9-16-03)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-529, adopted Jan. 7, 1992, repealed former §§ 18-
274—18-276, which pertained to similar subject matter. Sections 6.1c—6.1e of
said Ord. No. 91-529 enacted new §§
18-274—
18-276, to read as herein set out.
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.625c.
Sec. 18-275. - Refusal to submit to chemical test; court order; report to
secretary of state; form.
   (a)   If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to a
chemical test offered pursuant to subsection
18-272(f), a test shall not be given without a court order, but the officer may
seek to obtain the court order.
   (b)   A written report shall immediately be forwarded to the secretary of
state by the peace officer. The report shall state that the officer had
reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described
in subsection
18-274(a) and MCL 257.625c(1), and that the person had refused to submit to the
test upon the request of the peace officer and had been advised of the
consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and
furnished by the secretary of state.
(Ord. No. 91-529, § 6.1d, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793,
9-21-99)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.625d.
Sec. 18-275A. - Chemical tests; results; duties of peace officer; confiscation
of license; temporary license.
   (a)   If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to subsection
18-272(f), or submits to the chemical test or a chemical test is performed
pursuant to a court order and the test reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the
peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all of
the following:
      (1)   On behalf of the secretary of state, immediately confiscate the
person's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and, if the person is
otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a temporary license or permit
to the person. The temporary license or permit shall be on a form provided by
the secretary of state.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (b), immediately do all of the
following:
         i.   Forward a copy of the written report of the person's refusal to
submit to a chemical test required under section
18-275 to the secretary of state.
         ii.   Notify the secretary of state by means of the law enforcement
network that a temporary license or permit was issued to the person.
         iii.   Destroy the person's driver's license or permit.
   (b)   If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant to section
18-272(f) that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a report of the
results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the peace officer
who requested the person to submit to the test shall comply with subsection (a)
(1) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals an unlawful
alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the
test shall immediately comply with subsection (a)(2). If the report does not
reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person
to submit to the test shall immediately notify the person of the test results
and immediately return the person's license or permit by first-class mail to
the address given at the time of the arrest.
   (c)   A temporary license or permit issued under this section is valid for 1
of the following time periods:
      (1)   If the case is not prosecuted, for 90 days after issuance or until
the person's license or permit is suspended pursuant to MCL 257.625f, whichever
occurs earlier. The prosecuting attorney shall notify the secretary of state if
a case referred to the prosecuting attorney is not prosecuted. The arresting
law enforcement agency shall notify the secretary of state if a case is not
referred to the prosecuting attorney for prosecution.
      (2)   If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal charges against the
person are dismissed, the person is acquitted of those charges, or the person's
license or permit is suspended, restricted, or revoked.
   (d)   As used in this section, "unlawful alcohol content" means any of the
following, as applicable:
      (1)   If the person tested is less than 21 years of age, 0.02 grams or
more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per
67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)   If the person tested was operating a commercial motor vehicle
within this city, 0.04 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine.
      (3)   If the person tested is not a person described in subsection (1) or
(2), 0.08 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters
of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October 1, 2013, 0.10
grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
   (e)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on September 30,
2003.
(Ord. No. 03-984, 9-16-03)
Sec. 18-276. - Ignition interlock device; warning label; prohibited conduct;
violation of misdemeanor; penalty; definition; liability; insurance; servicing.
   (a)   The manufacturer of an ignition interlock device shall design a
warning label, and the person who has an ignition interlock device shall
promptly affix that label to each ignition interlock device upon installation.
The label shall contain a warning that any person tampering, circumventing, or
otherwise misusing the device is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided
by law.
   (b)   A person who has an ignition interlock device installed and whose
driving privilege is restricted shall not request or solicit any other person
to blow into an ignition interlock device or to start a vehicle equipped with
the device for the purpose of providing the person whose driving privilege is
restricted with an operable vehicle.
   (c)   A person shall not blow into an ignition interlock device or start a
motor vehicle equipped with the device for the purpose of providing an operable
vehicle to a person who has an interlock device installed and whose driving
privilege is restricted.
   (d)   A person shall not tamper with or circumvent the operation of an
ignition interlock device.
   (e)   A person who violates subsection (b), (c), or (d) above, is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by jail for not more than six months or a fine of not
more than $5,000.00, or both.
   (f)   As used in this section, "ignition interlock device" or "device" means
an alcohol concentration measuring device that prevents a motor vehicle from
being started at any time without first determining through a deep lung sample
the operator's breath alcohol level. The system shall be calibrated so that the
motor vehicle may not be started if the breath alcohol level of the operator,
as measured by the test, reaches a level of 0.025 grams per 210 liters of
breath.
   (g)   The state, the department, or the city, its officers, employees, or
agents, or a court, its officers, employees, or agents are not liable in any
claim or action that may arise, directly or indirectly, out of any act or
omission by a manufacturer, installer, or servicing agent of an ignition
interlock device that results in damage to persons or property.
   (h)   A person shall not sell, lease, install, or monitor in a vehicle in
this city an ignition interlock device unless the ignition interlock device
manufacturer and provider carried liability insurance covering product
liability, including, but not limited to, insurance to indemnify the
department, the city and any person injured as a result of a design defect or
the calibration or removal of the ignition interlock device or a
misrepresentation about the ignition interlock device. The insurance required
by this subsection shall be in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per
incident.
   (i)   The provider of insurance described in this section may cancel the
insurance upon 30 days' written notice to the department and the city and is
not liable for a claim rising from an event that occurs after the effective
date of a cancellation made in compliance with this section.
   (j)   An ignition interlock device shall be serviced according to
manufacturer's standards. Service shall include, but not be limited to physical
inspection of the device and vehicle for tampering, calibration of the device,
and monitoring of the data contained within the device's memory. Only
authorized employees of the manufacturer, the city, or the department, or other
persons approved by the court, may observe the installation of a device.
Reasonable security measures must be taken to prevent the customer from
observing the installation of a device or obtaining access to installation
materials.
   (k)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on September 30,
2003.
(Ord. No. 91-529, § 6.1e, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 97-714, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 99-793,
9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-984, 9-16-03)
Sec. 18-276.1. - Operating a vehicle while intoxicated; minors.
   (a)   A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not,
shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated
for the parking of vehicles, within the city if the person has any bodily
alcohol content. As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means
either of the following:
      (1)   A blood alcohol content of not less than 0.02 percent or more than
0.07 percent by weight of alcohol.
      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
   (b)   A person convicted of violating this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by one or both of the following:
      (1)   Service to the community for a period of not more than 45 days.
      (2)   A fine of not more than $250.00.
   (c)   If the violation of this section occurs within seven years of one or
more convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or both of the following.
      (1)   Service to the community for a period of not more than 60 days.
      (2)   A fine of not more than $500.00.
   (d)   The court shall impose license sanctions as provided by state law.
   (e)   A person sentenced to perform service to the community under this
section shall not receive compensation, and shall reimburse the city for the
cost of supervision incurred by the city as a result of the person's activities
in that service.
   (f)   As used in this section, "prior conviction" means a conviction for a
violation of section
18-271,
18-273 or
18-276.1, violation of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to state
law, or violation of a law of another state substantially corresponding to
state law.
   (g)   If a person is charged with a violation of section
18-271 or section
18-273, the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to a charge of violating this section in exchange for dismissal
of the original charge.
   (h)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, the defendant shall
bear the burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating liquor was a
part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a preponderance
of the evidence.
   (i)   A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person who
is less than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or
other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles,
including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this city,
while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in this
section, may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. In so doing, the provisions contained with section
18-272(b) shall apply.
   (j)   Immediately upon acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere or upon entry of a verdict of guilty for a violation of this
section, the person shall surrender to the court his or her operator's or
chauffeur's license or permit. The court shall immediately destroy the license
or permit and forward an abstract of conviction with court-ordered license
sanctions to the secretary of state. Upon receipt of, and pursuant to, the
abstract of conviction with court-ordered license sanctions, the secretary of
state shall suspend or revoke the person's license and, if ordered by the court
and the person is otherwise eligible for a license, issue to the person a
restricted license stating the limited driving privileges indicated on the
abstract. If the judgment and sentence is appealed to the circuit court, that
court may, ex parte, order the secretary of state to stay the suspension,
revocation, or restricted license issued pursuant to this section pending the
outcome of the appeal.
   (k)   A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or other place
open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including
an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this city, and who is
arrested for a violation of this section, is considered to have given consent
to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of
determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both
in his or her blood. The tests shall be administered as provided in section
18-272(c). If a person refuses the request of a police officer to submit to a
chemical test offered pursuant to section
18-272(c), a test shall not be given without court order, but the officer may
seek to obtain the court order.
(Ord. No. 94-612, 10-18-94)
Sec. 18-277. - Fleeing or eluding an officer.
   A person who operates a motor vehicle, who is given by hand, voice,
emergency light or siren a visual or audible signal by a police or conservation
officer, acting in the lawful performance of his duty, directing the driver to
bring his motor vehicle to a stop, and who willfully fails to obey the
direction by increasing the speed of the motor vehicle, extinguishing the
lights of the motor vehicle or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the
officer, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a fine not to exceed $500.00, or both. The officer giving the
signal shall be in uniform, and the vehicle driven shall be adequately
identified as an official police or department of natural resources vehicle.
Points shall be assigned in accord with the provisions of MCL 257.320, MSA
9.2020(i)(g).
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.4b, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-278. - Reckless driving.
   (a)   Any person who drives any vehicle upon a highway or a frozen public
lake, stream or pond or other place open to the general public, including any
area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the city, in willful
or wanton disregard for the safety of person or property is guilty of reckless
driving.
   (b)   Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be punished by
imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more
than $500.00, or by both.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.5, 11-4-81; Ord. 22-1741, 4-12-22)
State Law reference- Similar provision, MCL 257.626
Sec. 18-279. - Careless driving.
   A person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or a frozen public lake,
stream or pond or other place open to the general public, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, in a careless or negligent manner
likely to endanger any person or property, but without wantonness or
recklessness, is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-280. - Arrest without warrant—When authorized.
   Whenever any person is arrested without a warrant for any violation of this
chapter, punishable as a misdemeanor, the arrested person shall, without
unreasonable delay, be taken before a magistrate, or judge, having jurisdiction
of such offense, in any of the following cases:
      (1)   When the person is arrested upon a charge of negligent homicide.
      (2)   When the person is arrested under section
18-271(a) or (c) or 18-272.
      (3)   When a person is arrested upon a charge of reckless driving;
provided, however, that when in the existing circumstances it does not appear
that releasing such person pending the issuance of a warrant will constitute a
public menace, the arresting officer may proceed in such cases, as provided by
section
18-282.
      (4)   When a person arrested does not have in his immediate possession a
valid operator's or chauffeur's license; provided, however, that if the
arresting officer otherwise satisfactorily determines the identity of such
person and the practicability of subsequent apprehension in the event of
failure to voluntarily appear before the district court or probate court, as
directed, the officer may release such person from custody with instructions to
appear in court, given in writing, as prescribed by section
18-281.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.727, MSA 9.2427.
Sec. 18-281. - Same—Procedures.
   (a)   When a person is arrested without a warrant for a violation of this
chapter, punishable as a misdemeanor, under conditions not referred to in
sections
18-219,
18-221, and
18-280(1), (2), (3), the arresting officer shall prepare, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and copies of a written citation to
appear in court containing the name and address of the person, the violation
charged, and the time and place when and where the person shall appear in
court. The officer shall inform the offender of the violation and shall give a
copy of the citation to the alleged offender. If the arrested person demands,
he shall be taken before a magistrate or judge, as provided in section
18-280, in lieu of being given the citation.
   (b)   The time specified in the citation to appear shall be within a
reasonable time after the arrest.
   (c)   The place specified in the citation to appear shall be before a
magistrate or probate court within the county in which the violation charged is
alleged to have been committed and who has jurisdiction of the violation.
   (d)   Appearance may be made in person, by representation, or by mail. When
appearance is made by representation or mail, the magistrate may accept the
plea of guilty or not guilty for purposes of arraignment, with the same effect
as though the person personally appeared before him. The magistrate, by giving
five days' notice of the date of appearance, may require appearance in person
at the time and place designated in the citation.
   (e)   When a person who is not a resident of this state is arrested without
warrant for a violation of this chapter, punishable as a misdemeanor, under
conditions not referred to in section
18-278, the arresting officer, upon demand of the arrested person, immediately
shall take the person before a magistrate of the vicinity to answer to the
complaint made against the person. If a magistrate is not available or an
immediate trial cannot be had, the person arrested may recognize to the officer
for his or her appearance by leaving with the officer a guaranteed appearance
certificate or a sum of money not to exceed $100.00, in which case the
following provisions apply:
      (1)   The officer making the arrest shall give a receipt to the person
arrested for the guaranteed appearance certificate or the monies deposited
together with a written citation as provided in subsection (a) of this section.
      (2)   If the offender fails to appear as required in the citation, the
guaranteed appearance certificate or deposit shall be forfeited as in other
cases of default in bail, in addition to any other penalty provided in this
chapter.
      (3)   The officer taking a certificate or deposit before completion of
his tour, excluding Sunday, legal holidays and Saturdays when court is closed,
shall deliver the certificate or deposit to the magistrate named in the
citation together with a report of the facts relating to the arrest. Failure to
make a report and deliver the deposit shall be embezzlement of public money.
      (4)   "Guaranteed appearance certificate" means a card or certificate
containing a printed statement that a surety company authorized to do business
in this state guarantees the appearance of the person whose signature appears
on the card or certificate, and that the company, if the person fails to appear
in court at the time of trial or sentencing or to pay any fines or costs
imposed pursuant to this chapter, will pay any fine, costs or bond forfeiture
imposed on the person in a total amount not to exceed $200.00.
   (f)   An officer making an arrest under this chapter for a misdemeanor
without a warrant, except under section
18-280(1), (2) and (3), shall not be entitled to any fees for making the arrest
or the issuance of a citation under this section.
   (g)   An officer or magistrate violating this section is guilty of
misconduct in office and subject to removal from office.
   (h)   A police officer may issue a citation to a person who is a driver of a
motor vehicle involved in an accident when, based upon personal investigation,
the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a
misdemeanor under the ordinance in connection with the accident. The officer
shall prepare an original and three copies of the citation, setting forth the
name and address of the person, the violation that may be charged against the
person, and the time and place of the appearance of the person in court. The
citation shall inform the person of the office, bureau, or department to which
requests for a change or adjournment of the court date may be made.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.9, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.728, MSA 9.2428.
Sec. 18-282. - Citations—Defined, form.
   As used in this chapter, "citation" shall mean a complaint or notice upon
which a police officer shall record an occurrence involving one or more vehicle
law violations by the person cited. Each citation shall be numbered
consecutively, be in a form as determined by the secretary of state, the
attorney general, the state court administrator and the director of the
department of state police. Use of this citation for other than moving
violations is optional.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.8, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.727c, MSA 9.2427(3).
Sec. 18-283. - Same—Accountability for records.
   (a)   At or before the completion of his tour of duty, a police officer to
whom a citation book has been issued and who has recorded the occurrence of a
vehicle law violation upon a citation shall deliver to his police chief or to
the person duly authorized by him all copies of such citation duly signed. The
police chief or person authorized by him shall deposit the original of the
citation, together with a copy designated for the department of state's motor
vehicle records, with the court having jurisdiction over the offense not later
than two days after the date of the citation, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted.
   (b)   If a police officer arrests any person without a warrant for any
vehicle law violation, such arrest shall be noted on the complaint or notice.
   (c)   If a citation is spoiled, mutilated or voided, it shall be endorsed
with a full explanation thereof by the police officer voiding such citation,
and shall be duly accounted for to his police chief or authorized designee.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall prevent a person other than a police
officer from applying for a criminal complaint for a vehicle law violation, and
such person need not show that the alleged offender has been issued a citation
in connection with such offense.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.9a, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.728a, MSA 9.2428(1).
Sec. 18-284. - Same—Falsifying or disposing of records.
   Whoever knowingly falsifies a citation or copies thereof or a record of the
issuance of same; disposes of such citation, copy or record, in a manner other
than as required in this division; or attempts so to falsify or dispose, or
attempts to incite or procure another so to falsify or dispose shall be fined
not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.9b, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.728d, MSA 9.2488(4).
Sec. 18-285. - Notice of failure to appear.
   Upon failure of any person to appear before a district judge, as provided in
this division, the district judge may notify the secretary of state upon forms
prescribed by him who shall not issue a new license to such person during his
default to appear and answer such charge.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-286. - Provisions of division not exclusive.
   The provisions of this division shall govern all police officers in making
arrests without a warrant for violations of this chapter, and nothing contained
in this division shall be construed as preventing the execution of a warrant
for the arrest of such person as in other cases of misdemeanors when the same
may be necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 6.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-287. - Transportation or possession of alcohol liquor in container open
or uncapped or upon which seal broken; violation as misdemeanor; exception.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) below, a person who is an
operator or occupant shall not transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a
container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the
passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway, or within the passenger
compartment of a moving vehicle in any place open to the general public or
generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, in this city.
   (b)   A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that
is open or uncapped upon which the seal is broken within the passenger
compartment of a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated
for the parking of vehicles in this city, if the vehicle does not have a trunk
or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, the container is
enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily accessible to the
occupants of the vehicle.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. As part
of the sentence, the person may be ordered to perform community service and
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as
described in Section 703(1) of the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, 1998
PA 58, MCL 436.1703. A court shall not accept a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere for a violation of this section from a person charged solely with a
violation of subsection
18-271(f).
   (d)   The section does not apply to a passenger in a chartered vehicle
authorized to operate by the state transportation department.
   (e)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 93-579, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 99-793, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-287A. - Transportation or possession of alcoholic liquor by person less
than 21 years of age.
   (a)   A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or
possess alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle as an operator or occupant unless
the person is employed by a licensee under the Michigan liquor control code of
1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1101 to 436.2303, a common carrier designated by the
liquor control commission under the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, 1998
PA 58, MCL 436.1101 to 436.2303, the liquor control commission, or an agent of
the liquor control commission and is transporting or having the alcoholic
liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working
hours and in the course of the person's employment. This section does not
prevent a person less than 21 years of age from knowingly transporting alcohol
liquor in a motor vehicle if a person at least 21 years of age is present
inside the motor vehicle. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a
misdemeanor. As part of the sentence, the person may be ordered to perform
community service and undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his
or her own expense as described in Section 703(1) of the Michigan liquor
control code of 1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1703.
   (b)   Within 30 days after the conviction for a violation of subsection (a)
above, by the operator of a motor vehicle, which conviction has become final,
the arresting law enforcement officer or the officer's superior may make a
complaint before the court from which the warrant was issued. The complaint
shall be under oath and shall describe the motor vehicle in which alcoholic
liquor was possessed or transported by the operator, who is less than 21 years
of age, in committing the violation and requesting that the motor vehicle be
impounded as provided in this section. Upon the filing of the complaint, the
court shall issue to the owner of the motor vehicle an order to show cause why
the motor vehicle should not be impounded. The order to show cause shall fix a
date and time for the hearing, which shall not be less than ten days after the
issuance of the order. The order shall be served by delivering a true copy to
the owner not less than three full days before the date of hearing or, if the
owner cannot be located, by sending a true copy by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner. If the owner is a nonresident of the state, service
may be made upon the secretary of state as provided in MCL 257.403.
   (c)   If the court determines upon the hearing of the order to show cause,
from competent and relevant evidence, that at the time of the commission of the
violation the motor vehicle was being driven by the person less than 21 years
of age with the express or implied consent or knowledge of the owner in
violation of subsection (a) above, and that the use of the motor vehicle is not
needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of the owner's employment or the
actual operation of the owner's business, the court may authorize the
impounding of the vehicle for a period of not less than 15 days or more than 30
days. The court's order authorizing the impounding of the vehicle shall
authorize a law enforcement officer to take possession without other process of
the motor vehicle wherever located and to store the vehicle in a public or
private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle. The owner
of the vehicle may appeal the order to the circuit court and the provisions
governing the taking of appeals from judgments for damages apply to the appeal.
This section does not prevent a bona fide lienholder from exercising rights
under a lien.
   (d)   A person who knowingly transfers title to a motor vehicle for the
purpose of avoiding this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (e)   A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18
years of age allegedly violated this section, shall notify the parent or
parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation
if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by
the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be
made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that
the person who allegedly violated this section is less than 18 years of age and
may be made in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail.
   (f)   As used in this section, "alcoholic liquor" means that term as defined
in section 105 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL
436.1105.
(Ord. No. 99-793, 9-21-99)
Sec. 18-288. - Operation of commercial motor vehicle by person whose blood
contains 0.015% alcohol or more.
   (a)   A person, whether licensed or not, whose blood contains 0.015% or more
by weight of alcohol shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within the
city.
   (b)   A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was
operating a commercial motor vehicle within the city while the person's blood
contained 0.015% or more by weight of alcohol, as measured by a preliminary
chemical breath analysis or a chemical test provided under section
18-273, shall order the person out-of-service immediately for a period of 24
hours, which shall begin upon the issuance of the order.
   (c)   A police officer shall order out-of-service immediately for a period
of 24 hours, which shall begin upon issuance of the order, a person who refuses
to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis requested under section
18-276.
   (d)   A person ordered out-of-service under this section, or a law or local
ordinance of another state substantially corresponding to this section, shall
not operate a commercial motor vehicle within the city during the 24-hour out-
of-service period.
   (e)   A police officer who issues an out-of-service order under this section
shall provide for the safe and expeditious disposition of a product carried by
a commercial motor vehicle that is hazardous or would result in damage to the
vehicle, human health, or the environment.
   (f)   Failure to comply with subsection (a) is not a civil infraction or
criminal violation of this section.
   (g)   A person who violates subsection (d) is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more
than $100.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 93-577, 12-21-93)
Sec. 18-289. - Operation of commercial motor vehicle by person with certain
alcohol content; arrest without warrant; violation as misdemeanor; sentence;
"prior conviction" defined.
   (a)   A person, whether licensed or not, who has an alcohol content of 0.04
grams or more but less than 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October 1,
2013, an alcohol content of 0.04 grams or more but less than 0.10 grams per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine,
shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this city.
   (b)   A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant under either of
the following circumstances:
      (1)   The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person
was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a commercial motor vehicle
involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of this
section.
      (2)   The person is found in the driver's seat of a commercial motor
vehicle parked or stopped on a highway or street within this city if any part
of the vehicle intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable
cause to believe the person was operating the vehicle in violation of this
section.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) and (e) below, a person
who is convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$300.00, or both, together with costs of the prosecution.
   (d)   A person who violates this section within seven years of one prior
conviction may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than one year or a
fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both.
   (e)   A person who violates this section within 10 years of 2 or more prior
convictions is guilty of a felony.
   (f)   A term of jail imposed under subsection (d) above, shall not be
suspended.
   (g)   Subject to subsection (i) below, as used in this section, "prior
conviction" means a conviction for any of the following, whether under an
ordinance of this city, a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially
corresponding to a law of this state:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (h), a violation or attempted
violation of any of the following:
         i.   This section.
         ii.   Section
18-271, except a violation of section
18-271(b), or a violation of any prior enactment of section
18-271 in which the defendant operated a vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating or alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of
intoxicating or alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, or while visibly
impaired, or with an unlawful bodily alcohol content.
         iii.   Former MCL 257.625b.
      (2)   Negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the
operation of a vehicle or an attempt to commit any of those crimes.
   (h)   Only one violation or attempted violation of subsection 18.271(d), or
former section
18-276.1; MCL 257.625(6), or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
section MCL 257.625(6), or a law of another state substantially corresponding
to section MCL 257.625(6), may be used as a prior conviction.
   (i)   If two or more convictions described in subsection (g) above, are
convictions for violations arising out of the same transaction, only one
conviction shall be used to determine whether the person has a prior
conviction.
   (j)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on September 30,
2003.
(Ord. No. 93-577, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 99-793, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-984, 9-16-03)
Secs. 18-290—18-305. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - MEETING; OVERTAKING; PASSING; RIGHT-OF-WAY; MARKED LANES
Sec. 18-306. - Driving on right side of roadway.
   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the
right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon.
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.634.
Sec. 18-307. - Meeting of vehicles.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half of the main traveled
portion of the roadway, as nearly as possible.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.635.
Sec. 18-308. - Overtaking and passing vehicles.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and
special rules hereinafter stated:
      (1)   The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof and, when
safely clear of such overtaken vehicle, shall take up a position as near the
righthand edge of the main traveled portion of the highway as is practicable.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.636.
Sec. 18-309. - Passing vehicles in intersection.
   It shall be unlawful to overtake or pass a vehicle at any street
intersection; provided, however, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass
upon the right of another vehicle which is making or is about to make a left
turn.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-310. - Overtaking on bridges and viaducts.
   (a)   No vehicle shall overtake and pass another vehicle moving in the same
direction upon any bridge or viaduct within the city, unless the roadway
thereof is of sufficient width to accommodate two lanes of traffic moving in
each direction; and such passing shall occur only when such movement can be
made with safety.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, the roadway within 100 feet of a
bridge, including the approaches thereto, shall be considered a part of such
bridge or viaduct.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-311. - Passing on right of another vehicle.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles or sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction, and when such vehicles are moving in substantially continuous
lanes of traffic.
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles,
and when such vehicles are moving in substantially continuous lanes of traffic.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or maintraveled portion
of the roadway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.637.
Sec. 18-312. - Limitations on privilege of overtaking and passing.
   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of a two-lane
highway or in the center lane of a three-lane highway in overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side or
center lane is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken; provided, however, that when
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person, indicate that no passing shall be allowed, then every driver
of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.638.
Sec. 18-313. - Driving on left side of roadway restricted.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the drivver's view is obstructed within such distance as to
create a hazard if another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
   (b)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply to a one-way roadway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.8, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.639, MSA 9.2339.
Sec. 18-314. - Driving on roadway divided into two or more marked lanes.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within
a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety, and on highways with
four or more lanes such vehicle shall be driven within the extreme righthand
lane, except when overtaking and passing, but in no event shall cross the
centerline of such highway except where making a left turn.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven to the left of the center lane except when making a left turn
shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use
a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.9, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.642, MSA 9.2342.
Sec. 18-315. - Following too closely.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle with a gross weight,
loaded or unloaded, in excess of 5,000 pounds within the city, within 500 feet
of any like vehicle described herein, moving in the same direction, except when
overtaking and passing such vehicle.
   (c)   A distance of not less than 500 feet must be maintained between any
two or more driven vehicles being delivered from one place to another.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.643, MSA 9.2343.
Sec. 18-316. - Driving on highway divided into two roadways.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section, so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the righthand roadway, and no vehicle shall park or be driven
over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except
through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at
a crossover or intersection established by public authority; provided, that
such crossovers on limited access highways shall not be used except by such
vehicles, as provided in section
18-153, and except by road service vehicles while going to or returning from
servicing a disabled vehicle. "Road service vehicles" means vehicles clearly
marked and readily recognizable as a vehicle used to assist disabled vehicles.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.11, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.644, MSA 9.2334.
Sec. 18-317. - Driving on limited access road- way.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.12, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.645, MSA 9.2345.
Sec. 18-318. - Funeral processions.
   (a)   A motor vehicle forming part of a funeral procession when going to a
place of burial shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles except fire
apparatus, ambulances and police patrol vehicles at a street or highway
intersection within this state, if the vehicle in the funeral procession
displays a flag which shall be fluorescent orange in color, and upon which
shall be printed, stamped or stained a black cross or Star of David. The lead
vehicle and the last vehicle in the funeral procession may carry an additional
flag. The flags shall not contain a name embossed or printed on the flag,
except the word "funeral."
   (b)   A person passing through a funeral procession of motor vehicles,
designated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, with a vehicle of any
kind, is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.13, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.654, MSA 9.2354.
Sec. 18-319. - Freeway travel restricted.
   (a)   A person shall not operate a motorcycle with less than a 125 cubic
centimeter engine, moped, farm tractor or other self-propelled farm implement,
nor shall a pedestrian, bicycle, except as provided in this section, or other
nonmotorized traffic be permitted on a limited access highway in this state.
Bicycles shall be permitted on paths constructed separately from the roadway
and designated for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.13(a), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-320. - School buses; overtaking, meeting, or passing.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting a school bus which has
stopped and is displaying two alternately flashing red lights located at the
same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop not less than 20 feet from
the school bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the
visual signals are no longer actuated. At an intersection where traffic is
controlled by an officer or a traffic stop-and-go signal, a vehicle need not be
brought to a full stop before passing a stopped school bus, but may proceed
past the school bus at a speed not greater than is reasonable and proper but
not greater than ten miles an hour and with due caution for the safety of
passengers being received or discharged from the school bus. The driver of a
vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus, as required by this subsection, who
passes a school bus in violation of this subsection, or who fails to stop for a
school bus in violation of an ordinance that complies with this subsection, is
responsible for a civil infraction.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway which has been divided into two
roadways by leaving an intervening space, by a physical barrier, or clearly
indicated dividing sections, so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic,
need not stop upon meeting a school bus which has stopped across the dividing
space, barrier, or section.
   (c)   In a proceeding for a violation of subsection (a) of this section,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was in violation of
subsection (a), together with proof that the defendant named in the citation
was, at the time of the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
   (d)   In addition to a civil fine and costs, the judge, district court
referee, or district court magistrate may order a person who violates this
section to perform not to exceed 100 hours of community service at a school.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.14, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.682, MSA 9.2382.
Sec. 18-321. - Operation of trucks generally.
   (a)   All trucks, truck tractors and semitrailers, whether loaded or
unloaded, shall travel in the right lane on any and all streets and highways in
the city, except when passing other vehicles traveling in the same direction.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any truck, truck tractor or semitrailer to
travel in any lane other than in the right lane except when passing other
vehicles traveling in the same direction.
   (c)   The driver of any truck or truck tractor, when traveling upon a
highway outside of a business or residence district, shall, whenever conditions
permit, leave sufficient space between his vehicle and any other truck or truck
tractor so that any overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without
danger, except that this shall not prevent the driver of any truck or truck
tractor from overtaking and passing any other truck, truck tractor or other
vehicle in a lawful manner.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 7.15, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.643a, MSA 9.2343.
Sec. 18-322. - Minimum distance when overtaking or passing a bicycle; penalty.
   (a)   When overtaking or passing a person operating a bicycle proceeding in
the same direction, the driver of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care and
may only overtake or pass a bicyclist when there is a safe distance, which
shall minimally require allowing the bicyclist at least five feet separation
between the right side of the driver's vehicle, including all mirrors or other
projections, and the left side of the bicyclist at all times.
   (b)   A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 17-1596, 9-26-17)
Secs. 18-323—18-340. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - PARKING AND STANDING OF VEHICLES
Sec. 18-341. - Effectiveness of signs, regulations.
   When signs are lawfully ordered erected in any street, highway or public
place by and in accordance with the provisions of this division, or the rules,
and regulations promulgated thereunder within the city giving a specific notice
of a particular regulation, no person shall operate or park any vehicle, at any
time, upon any portion of any street or place so marked contrary to any such
regulatory provision.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-342. - Vehicles left unattended.
   (a)   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand on any highway unattended without first effectively setting
the brakes thereon, stopping the motor and removing the ignition key from such
vehicle, and when standing upon any grade, no person shall leave the vehicle
without turning the front wheels of such vehicle in to the curb.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, unattended shall not be construed to
mean a motor vehicle with an engine that has been activated by a remote starter
system, when the motor vehicle is locked and the ignition keys are not in the
motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.18, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 08-1166, 6-2-08)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.676, MSA 9.2376.
Sec. 18-343. - Proximity to curb.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a highway shall be so stopped or parked with the wheels of the
vehicle parallel to the roadway and within 12 inches of any existing righthand
curb.
   (b)   Parking of vehicles with the lefthand wheels adjacent to and within 12
inches of the left-hand curb shall be permitted on a one-way street if
appropriate signs permitting such parking are posted.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.2(d), (e), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-344. - Angle parking.
   Angle parking of vehicles shall be permitted if appropriate signs and
markings permitting angle parking are posted.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.2(f), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-345. - Parking prohibited in specified places.
   (a)   A person shall not park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk or that portion of a street marked for pedestrian
use, or on the unpaved portion of the street right-of-way lying between the
street and sidewalk.
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway.
      (3)   Within an intersection.
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (5)   On a crosswalk.
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if none, then within 15 feet of
the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways.
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of a highway.
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by official signs or markings.
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing.
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet
of such entrance when properly signposted.
      (11)   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction when the
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (12)   On the highway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      (13)   Upon a bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel.
      (14)   At a place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking.
      (15)   Within 500 feet of an accident at which police officers are in
attendance.
      (16)   In front of a theater.
      (17)   In a place or in a manner so as to block immediate egress from an
emergency exit, or exits conspicuously marked as such, of buildings.
      (18)   In a public alley, except for the loading or unloading of
commercial vehicles, unless posted signs indicate otherwise.
      (19)   Within a parking area, whether public or private, contrary to
posted signs or pavement markings or in any place that can only be reached by
driving over, across or through any sidewalk, curb, barricade or other
authorized structure.
      (20)   On lawns or other unpaved areas on public and private property,
with the exception of approved parking areas.
      (21)   When a sign provides notice that a parking space is a publicly
designated electric vehicle charging station, no person shall park or stand any
non-electric vehicle in a designated electric vehicle charging station space.
Further, no person shall park or stand an electric vehicle in a publicly
designated electric vehicle charging station space when not electrically
charging. For purposes of this subsection, "charging" means an electric vehicle
is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the
charging station equipment.
   (b)   A motor bus, for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers,
may be stopped at a place described in subsections (a)(2), (4) or (6) of this
section or on the highway side of a vehicle illegally parked in a legally
designated bus loading zone.
   (c)   A person shall not move a vehicle not owned by the person into a
prohibited area or, away from a curb, a distance as is unlawful.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.2, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 03-964, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 14-1421,
3-4-14)
Sec. 18-346. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
   No person shall stand or park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to stand or
park upon any roadway, highway, street or public place in the city for the
principal purpose of:
      (1)   Advertising for commercial purposes; provided, however, that the
chief of police may and is authorized to issue a temporary permit to any person
as owner of any vehicular equipment used in carrying on a commercial
advertising business, to use any space of the streets of the city designated by
such chief of police, when suitable space is not available on private property,
on the following conditions:
         a.   That the use of space occupied by such equipment on the streets
will not violate any of the traffic laws or ordinances of the city.
         b.   That such use will not interfere with traffic upon the roadway.
         c.   That such use shall be under the express supervision and
direction of the police department.
         d.   That the application for such permit shall be made to the police
department at least 24 hours before it is to become operative.
         e.   That such owner will pay a permit fee in the amount of $3.00 per
vehicle per day, or fraction thereof, to the city treasurer before any such
permit shall be issued.
         f.   That such permit be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
vehicle during the time the permit is in force.
      (2)   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
      (3)   Washing, cleaning, polishing, greasing or repairing such vehicle,
except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-347. - Prohibited during certain hours.
   When signs are erected on any street, prohibiting parking within certain
hours or beyond specified time limits and give notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours or beyond the limits indicated thereon, on any
day or upon any of the streets so marked.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-348. - Prohibited on designated streets or public places.
   When signs are erected on any street or public place prohibiting parking
thereon and give notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on such street
or upon any portion of the street so marked.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-349. - Stopping, standing or parking not to obstruct ways.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street except for
areas designated for parking or when necessary in obedience to traffic
regulations, traffic signs or signals, or a police officer.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.7, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-658, 2-20-96)
Sec. 18-350. - Limited standing in loading zone.
   No vehicle may remain in a loading zone for a period of time greater than is
necessary to unload or load either passengers or property, nor while the
operator thereof is engaged otherwise than in the actual loading or unloading
of the vehicle, except that a reasonable time shall be allowed to secure a
receipt for delivery of property.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-351. - Bus and taxi stands.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus, in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab, in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately marked; except, that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, discharging or loading passengers, when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-351.5. - Stopping, standing, or parking of buses and taxicabs
restricted; exception; violation as civil infraction.
      (1)   The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand, or park on
any street in any business district at any place other than a bus stop or
taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision does not prevent the
operator of the vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping, standing, or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of, and
while engaged in, the expeditious unloading or loading of passengers.
      (2)   A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 09-1218, 4-6-09)
Sec. 18-352. - Lights on parked vehicles.
   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked on a street, whether attended or
unattended, at any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before
sunrise, and there is sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles upon the street at a distance of 500 feet from such vehicle upon
such street, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle; provided,
however, during such time when there is insufficient light, as hereinbefore
stated, a parked vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps projecting a
white or amber light on the roadway side, visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and
projecting a red light visible under like conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the rear of such vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.694.
Sec. 18-353. - Evidence of unlawful parking.
   In any proceeding for violation of the parking provisions of this division,
or any parking rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof,
the registration plate displayed on such motor vehicle shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such motor vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the point where such
violation occurred.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-354. - Interference with vehicle attempting to park.
   It shall be unlawful for a driver of a motor vehicle to attempt to drive or
force his motor vehicle into a parking space when some other driver of a motor
vehicle has already stopped near such space for the purpose of backing his
motor vehicle into such parking space.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-355. - Stopping or parking on freeway.
   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any motor vehicle, attended or
unattended, upon the paved or unpaved part of a freeway, except in an emergency
or mechanical difficulty.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.20, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.672.
Sec. 18-356. - Parking of commercial vehicles.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicle as
defined in section
18-63 or any commercial motor vehicle as defined in section
18-63.1 on any street within the city or upon private property within a
residential area of the city.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to commercial vehicles or commercial
motor vehicles when the operation of such is necessary for the purpose of
making deliveries, picking up persons, materials, goods or merchandise, or
providing service.
   (c)   If a breakdown of a commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle
prevents its removal from any street, that vehicle shall display warning
devices as set forth in section
18-440.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" shall
also include a trailer used as, or customarily attached to, a commercial
vehicle.
   (e)   This section shall not apply to pick-up trucks and vans utilized as
family vehicles and which bear no commercial message, logo, symbol or
equipment.
   (f)   Exception: An individual whose employment requires him/her to be on
call 24 hours a day, and whose employment requires the use of a commercial
vehicle, may present proof of such employment to the traffic commission. The
proof presented must include an affidavit from the employer verifying the on-
call status and indicating the approximate number of times per month the
employee will be called in to work. Upon review of the proof presented, the
traffic commission may issue a permit allowing the commercial vehicle to be
parked in a residential neighborhood contrary to this section, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   Conditions:
         a.   If the individual has a garage on the residential property
identified on the petition for a permit, and the dimensions of the garage door
opening would allow the vehicle to be parked fully inside the garage, the
commercial vehicle shall be parked within that garage.
         b.   If the commercial vehicle does not fit through the door opening
of the garage on the residential property identified in the petition for a
permit, or if no garage exists, the vehicle shall be parked in the driveway for
that property and not on the residential street. When possible, the commercial
vehicle shall be parked at the back of the driveway, furthest from the street.
         c.   If the commercial vehicle does not fit through the door opening
of the garage and there is no driveway on the residential property identified
in the petition for a permit, a permit may be issued to allow the commercial
vehicle to be parked on the residential street. A permit to park on a
residential street shall not be issued if there is a driveway on the
residential property identified in the petition for a permit.
         d.   Only one commercial vehicle shall be permitted on the residential
property identified in the petition for a permit if a permit is granted by the
traffic commission or city council. If it is determined that the permit-holder
has more than one commercial vehicle on the residential property identified in
the petition for a permit, or if it is determined that the permit-holder has
obtained additional permits for other residential property within the City of
Dearborn, all permits shall be revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.19, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 03-965, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 03-989,
11-5-03; Ord. No. 05-1033, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 06-1066, 4-3-06; Ord. No. 11-1335,
10-24-11; Ord. No. 16-1529, 3-15-16)
Sec. 18-357. - Parking ban; declaration; parking restriction; towing.
   (a)   Whenever the mayor or his duly designated representative finds, on the
basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a weather
service forecast, that weather conditions will make it necessary that parking
on any city street be restricted or prohibited to facilitate snow plowing, the
mayor may cause to be put into effect a parking ban and may restrict or
prohibit parking on parts of or all streets within the city. The mayor shall
cause each declaration made by him to be publicly announced by providing such
information through one or more of the following methods: radio and/or
television stations with a normal operating range covering the city, newspapers
of general circulation, automated telephone answering or calling systems,
outdoor early warning siren system. When feasible, each announcement shall
describe the action taken by the mayor, including the time it became or will
become effective.
   When a parking ban announcement is communicated, residents may refer to
CDTV, contact the city at 313.943.2085, or call the Snow Hotline at
313.943.2444 for further information.
   (b)   Whenever a parking ban is caused to be put into effect by the mayor or
his duly designated representative, all vehicles shall be prohibited from
parking on all city streets except those streets posted as snow emergency
temporary parking streets.
   (c)   Once in effect, a parking ban shall remain in effect until terminated
by announcement of the mayor, except that any street which has become clear of
ice and snow from curb to curb for the length thereof lying between two
successive street intersections shall be automatically excluded therefrom.
   (d)   Any vehicle parked contrary to the restriction or prohibition, or any
vehicle abandoned on any street affected, may be cited by the police department
for prohibited parking and may be towed away at the risk and expense of the
owner by an authorized employee or agent of the department of public works or
the police department.
      (1)   If supported by evidence that demonstrates a vehicle was parked on
a street during a snow emergency, enforcement may occur after the termination
of the snow emergency.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.16, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 93-554, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 05-
1061, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 09-1202, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 12-1343, 1-10-12; Ord. No.
14-1444, 11-12-14)
Sec. 18-358. - Public service day.
   (a)   "Public service day" shall occur annually on a weekly basis on the day
designated as trash collection day, beginning the first full calendar week of
March and shall continue through the second full calendar week of December. For
the purpose of this section, Monday shall be considered the first full day of a
full week.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be parked on any residential street in the city
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the day designated as public
service day (regularly scheduled trash collection day), to create the
opportunity for the department of public works to provide concentrated city
services, e.g., street sweeping, tree trimming, and catch basin cleaning.
   (c)   The city, at its sole discretion, may designate certain areas such as
those around schools or other intense uses or those streets with narrow
residential lots and limited off-street parking for alternate parking
restrictions. In those areas, parking may be restricted to one side of the
street, or restricted on alternating months.
      (1)   Where parking is restricted to one side of the street on public
service day, residents on both sides of the street that have driveways must
park their vehicle in the driveway; residents with an alley, but without a
driveway, must park in their residential alley.
   Any vehicle parked in a residential alley pursuant to this subsection shall
not block ingress, egress or through traffic in the alley.
      (2)   Residents with a disability who have obtained a permit to park on a
residential street from the traffic commission are exempted from public service
day.
   (d)   Any vehicle parked contrary to the provisions of this section may be
ticketed and/or towed away at the risk and expense of the owner by any
authorized agent or employee of the department of public works or the police
department.
   (e)   A violation of this section is a civil infraction.
      (1)   Enforcement of this section will be suspended during the weeks of:
         a.   Memorial Day;
         b.   Independence Day;
         c.   Labor Day;
         d.   Thanksgiving Day.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.17, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 07-1146, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 08-
1160, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 08-1175, 8-4-08; Ord. No. 09-1198, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 09-
1203, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 09-1255, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 12-1344, 1-10-12; Ord. No.
15-1494, 11-24-15; Ord. No. 16-1543, 9-6-16)
Sec. 18-359. - Parking on private property—General restriction.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any
private property without the express or implied consent, authorization or
approval of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such
property. No person shall stand or park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to
stand or park upon any private property for the principal purpose of displaying
such vehicle for sale, without securing and displaying on the vehicle the prior
written authorization of the owner of such private property. Such written
authorization shall indicate that the displaying for sale is a permitted
activity with the zoning district of the private property.
   (b)   The owner of private property upon which an alleged violation has
occurred shall request in writing that the police department enforce this
section. If the owner of the private property has given reasonable notice of
the prohibited activities by posting and requested in writing that the police
department enforce this regulation on his private property, the police
department and/or parking meter division of the city shall enforce this
section.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-360. - Same—Special security officers.
   (a)   The chief of police may appoint and deputize security officers who
need not be regular employees of the city to enforce parking regulations or
ordinances on specified private property in the city or on specified property
owned by a school board or an educational institution. The security officer may
enforce parking regulations on a public street within 200 feet of a school
boundary for 30 minutes prior to the start of classes and 30 minutes after
school dismissal.
   (b)   Security officers appointed pursuant to this section are hereby
authorized to enforce on such specified property the provisions of this
chapter, or any other city ordinance pertaining to, regulating or restricting
the parking of motor vehicles.
   (c)   Such security officers are further authorized to enforce any parking
rules or regulations adopted by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter.
If the specified property is owned or occupied by a school board or a state
educational institution, the security officers are further authorized to
enforce any parking ordinances, rules or regulations adopted by the school
board or the governing board of the educational institution.
   (d)   Security officers appointed pursuant to this section are hereby made
and empowered as special police officers for the purpose of enforcement of
parking ordinances, rules and regulations, and they shall have the power and
authority to issue citations for violations. When any enforcement action or
measures are taken pursuant to this section, security officers shall be subject
to the supervision and control of the police department.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 8.14a, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 12-1349, 2-7-12)
Sec. 18-361. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-1063, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, deleted §
18-361 in its entirety. Former §
18-361 pertained to abandoned vehicle procedures. For a complete history of §
18-361 see the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 18-362. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-1063, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, deleted §
18-362 in its entirety. Former §
18-362 pertained to vehicle removal from private property. For a complete
history of §
18-362 see the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 18-363. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-1063, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, deleted §
18-363 in its entirety. Former §
18-363 pertained to vehicle removed by police. For a complete history of §
18-363 see the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 18-364. - Overnight parking of boats, motor homes, campers, trailers, and
recreational vehicles prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful within the limits of the city for any person, firm or
corporation to park overnight, or permit the parking overnight, of any boat,
motor home, trailer or recreational vehicle, on any public highway, street,
alley, park, parking lot, or other public place. However, the parking of a
boat, motor home trailer or other recreational vehicle upon the street or other
public property may be permitted for loading or unloading purposes only, for a
time not to exceed 48 hours, provided that the boat, motor home, trailer or
other recreational vehicle be parked within the linear frontage of the user's
property, or adjacent sideyard. Incidental movement of the boat, motor home,
trailer or other recreational vehicle shall not result in the renewal of the
48-hour limit.
(Ord. No. 93-581, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 98-745, 10-20-98)
Sec. 18-364.1   Parking of tarped vehicles prohibited; exceptions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful within the limits of the city for any person,
firm or corporation to park or permit the parking of a tarped vehicle. For the
purpose of this section the term “tarped vehicle” shall include any vehicle, as
that term is defined in Section
18-124 of the Code of Ordinances, regardless of whether it is operative,
registered, or affixed with a license plate, that is covered, either completely
or partially, with a tarp or tarpaulin meant to protect the exterior of the
vehicle from exposure to the elements or conceal its appearance. This parking
prohibition is subject to the following exceptions:
      (1)   The parking of a vehicle covered with a form fitting or semi-form
fitting vehicle cover specifically designed to cover a vehicle and protect the
exterior from exposure to the elements, such as a historic or antique vehicle
that is specially registered with the state or a high-performance sports
vehicle, may be parked for a time not to exceed 72 hours, provided that the
vehicle be parked on the owner's residential driveway, residential parking pad,
or lawfully within the public right-of-way adjacent to the owner’s residential
property. Incidental movement of the vehicle shall not result in the renewal of
the 72-hour limit.
      (2)   Pursuant to Zoning Ordinance
Article 4.00, the parking of vehicles covered with a tarp, tarpaulin, or form
fitting or semi-form fitting cover, is allowed when the subject land is used as
permitted storage space in direct connection with a legitimate business.
   (b)   A violation of this section is punishable as a civil infraction with a
$250.00 fine.
   (c)   Pursuant to Section
18-147 of the Code, and in addition to the enforcement by the police
department, the provisions of this section may also be enforced by the
Department of Economic Development, and their deputies, agents, and inspectors.
(Ord. No. 22-1779, 12-6-22; Ord. No. 25-1853, 9-9-25)
Sec. 18-365. - Liability for use or ownership of vehicle after transfer of
endorsed certificate of title; conditions; violation of subsection (b); civil
infraction; fine; towing and storage fees.
   (a)   The owner of a motor vehicle who has made a bona fide sale by transfer
of his or her title or interest and who has delivered possession of the vehicle
and the certificate of title to that vehicle properly endorsed to the purchaser
or transferee is not liable for any damages or a violation of law that
subsequently results from the use or ownership of the vehicle by another, if
the owner, other than a licensed dealer, satisfies the conditions prescribed
under subsection (b).
   (b)   The owner of a motor vehicle, other than a licensed dealer, shall
satisfy one of the following conditions:
      (1)   Accompany the purchaser of the vehicle to a Secretary of State
branch office to assure that the title of the vehicle being sold is
transferred.
      (2)   Maintain a record of the sale for not less than 18 months. As used
in this subdivision, "record of the sale" means either a photocopy of the
reassigned title or a form or document that includes the name, address, driver
license number, and signature of the person to whom the vehicle is sold and the
purchase price and date of sale of the vehicle.
   (c)   A person who violates subsection (b) is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of $15.00
   (d)   A person who violates subsection (b) is presumed to be the last title
owner and to be liable for towing fees and daily storage fees for an abandoned
motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-366. - Reports of stolen and recovered vehicles.
   A police agency, upon receiving reliable information that any vehicle
registered under this act has been stolen, shall immediately report the theft
through the law enforcement information network. Upon receiving information
that a vehicle previously reported as stolen has been recovered, the police
agency shall immediately report the fact of the recovery through the law
enforcement information network.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-367. - Abandoned vehicle; presumption of responsibility; violation;
penalty; "abandoned vehicle" defined; duties of police agency; contest by
owner; hearing; request; fee; towing and storage charges; obtaining release of
vehicle; public sale; inability to determine ownership of abandoned vehicle;
entry into law enforcement information network.
   (a)   A person shall not abandon a vehicle in this state. It is presumed
that the last titled owner of the vehicle is responsible for abandoning the
vehicle unless the person provides a record of sale as that term is defined in
section
18-365. A person who violates this subsection and who fails to redeem the
vehicle before disposition of the vehicle under section
18-372 is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be ordered to pay a
civil fine of $50.00
   (b)   As used in this section and sections
18-367 through
18-375, "abandoned vehicle" means either of the following:
      (1)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner.
      (2)   A vehicle that has remained on public property for a period of not
less than 48 hours, or on a state trunk line highway as described in Section 1
of MCL 247.651, as follows:
         a.   If a valid registration plate is affixed to the vehicle, for a
period of not less than 18 hours.
         b.   If a valid registration plate is not affixed to the vehicle.
   (c)   If a vehicle has remained on public property for the period of time
described in subsection (b)(2) so that it qualifies as abandoned, a police
agency having jurisdiction over the vehicle or the agency's designee shall
determine whether the vehicle has been reported stolen and may affix a written
notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The date and time the notice was affixed.
      (2)   The name and address of the police agency taking the action.
      (3)   The name and badge number of the police officer affixing the
notice.
      (4)   The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and stored
at the owner's expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed.
      (5)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle,
if available.
   (d)   If the vehicle is an abandoned vehicle, the police agency or the
agency's designee may have the towing agency take the vehicle into custody.
   (e)   A police agency that has received a vehicle taken into custody as
abandoned shall do all the following:
      (1)   Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
      (2)   Within 24 hours after the vehicle is taken into custody, enter the
vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information network, and notify
the Secretary of State through the law enforcement information network that the
vehicle has been taken into custody as abandoned. Each notification shall
contain the following information:
         a.   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle,
if available.
         b.   The address or approximate location from which the vehicle was
taken into custody.
         c.   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
         d.   The name and address of the police agency that had the vehicle
taken into custody.
         e.   The name and business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
         f.   The name of the court that has jurisdiction over the case.
      (3)   Within seven days after receiving notice under subdivision (2) that
the vehicle has been taken into custody, the Secretary of State shall do both
of the following:
         a.   Send to the last titled owner and secured party, as shown by the
records of the Secretary of State as described in MCL 257.221 or MCL 257.237,
by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle is considered
abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the Secretary of
State. Each notice form shall contain the following information:
      1.   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if
available.
      2.   The address or approximate location from which the vehicle was taken
into custody.
      3.   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
      4.   The name and address of the police agency that had the vehicle taken
into custody.
      5.   The name and business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
      6.   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
      7.   The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle is considered
abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees.
      8.   A form petition that the owner may file in person or by mail with
the specified court that requests a hearing on the police agency's action.
      9.   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a
hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of
the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured
party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale.
         b.   Enter the information described in subparagraph (i) on a website
maintained by the department for public use in locating vehicles that are
removed under this section as abandoned. The department shall maintain the data
on the website for one year or until the vehicle is disposed of under this act,
whichever occurs first.
   (f)   The owner may contest the fact that the vehicle is considered
abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by
requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a
petition with the court specified in the notice described in subsection (e)(3)
within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing,
the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted under sections
18-370 and
18-371. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by
posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to the $40.00 plus the
accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who
requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00
to the court and the accrued towing and storage fees instead of posting the
towing and storage bond.
   (g)   If the owner does not request a hearing under subsection (f), he or
she may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 and the
accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian
of the vehicle shall forward $25.00 of the fee to the Secretary of State within
30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the Secretary of State, who
shall deposit the fee into the abandoned vehicle fund created in MCL 257.252h.
   (h)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within
20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (e)(3), the
secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a $40.00 fee plus
the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian of the
vehicle shall forward $25.00 of the fee to the Secretary of State, who shall
deposit the fee into the abandoned vehicle fund created in MCL 257.252h.
   (i)   If a vehicle has remained on private property without the consent of
the property owner, the owner of the private property may have the vehicle
taken into custody as an abandoned vehicle by contacting a local towing agency.
   (j)   Before removing the vehicle from private property, the towing agency
shall notify a police agency having jurisdiction over the vehicle that the
vehicle is being removed. The police agency shall determine if the vehicle has
been reported stolen and have the vehicle entered into the law enforcement
information network as an abandoned vehicle.
   (k)   Within 24 hours after taking the abandoned vehicle into custody, the
police agency shall notify the Secretary of State through the law enforcement
information network that the vehicle has been taken into custody as abandoned.
Each notification shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if
available.
      (2)   The address or approximate location from which the vehicle was
taken into custody.
      (3)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
      (4)   The name and address of the police agency that had the vehicle
taken into custody.
      (5)   The name and business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
      (6)   The name of the court that has jurisdiction over the case.
   (l)   Within seven days after being notified under subsection (k), the
Secretary of State shall do both of the following:
      (1)   Send to the owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the
Secretary of State, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the
vehicle is considered abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by
the Secretary of State. Each notice form shall contain the following
information:
         a.   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle
if available.
         b.   The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
         c.   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
         d.   The name of the towing agency that had the vehicle taken into
custody.
         e.   The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
         f.   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
         g.   The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle is considered
abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees.
         h.   A form petition that the owner may file in person or by mail with
the specified court that requests a hearing on the custodian's action.
         i.   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a
hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of
the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured
party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale.
      (2)   Enter the information described in subdivision (1) on a website
maintained by the department for public use in locating vehicles that are
removed under this section as abandoned.
   (m)   The owner may contest the fact that the vehicle is abandoned or,
unless the towing fees and daily storage fees are established by contract with
the local governmental unit or local law enforcement agency and comply with
section
18-373, the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by
requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a
petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date
of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved
after a hearing conducted under section
18-371. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by
posting with the court a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to $40.00
plus the accrued towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a
hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 to the
court plus the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and
storage bond.
   (n)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the accrued charges to
the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward $25.00 of the fee
collected under this subsection to the Secretary of State within 30 days after
receipt in a manner prescribed by the Secretary of State, who shall deposit the
fee into the abandoned vehicle fund created in MCL 257.252h.
   (o)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within
20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release
of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 and the accrued towing and storage
fees to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward $25.00 of the
fee collected under this subsection to the Secretary of State within 30 days
after receipt in a manner prescribed by the Secretary of State, who shall
deposit the fee into the abandoned vehicle fund created in MCL 257.252h.
   (p)   Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described
in subsection (f) or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days
after the date of the notice, the police agency if the abandoned vehicle is
found on public property, or the custodian of the vehicle if the vehicle is
found on private property, shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale
under section
18-372.
   (q)   If the ownership of a vehicle that is considered abandoned under this
section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle
identification numbers or because a check with the records of the Secretary of
State as described in MCL 257.221 or MCL 257.237 does not reveal ownership, the
police agency may sell the vehicle at public sale as provided in section
18-372 not less than 30 days after public notice of the sale has been
published.
   (r)   The Secretary of State shall release a vehicle for disposition under
section
18-368 or 18-372 within 45 days after the vehicle is entered into the law
enforcement information network as an abandoned vehicle.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-368. - Registered and unregistered abandoned scrap vehicles; duties of
police agency; release of vehicle; certificate of title or certificate of
scrapping; release form; retention of records and photographs; taking
registered abandoned scrap vehicle into custody; contest of registered owner;
hearing; request; obtaining release of vehicle; fee.
   (a)   As used in this section: 
   Registered abandoned scrap vehicle means a vehicle that meets all of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Is on public or private property.
      (2)   Is seven or more years old.
      (3)   Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent
that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as
required by MCL 257.683 would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle.
      (4)   Is currently registered or titled in the State of Michigan or
displays current year registration plates from another state.
   Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle means a vehicle that meets all of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Is on public or private property.
      (2)   Is seven or more years old.
      (3)   Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent
that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as
required by MCL 257.683 would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle.
      (4)   Is not currently registered in this state and does not display
current year registration plates from another state.
   (b)   A police agency or the agency's designee or, if the vehicle is on
private property, the property owner may have an unregistered abandoned scrap
vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
      (2)   Take two photographs of the vehicle.
      (3)   Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered
abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:
         a.   The year, make, and vehicle identification number if available.
         b.   The date of abandonment.
         c.   The location of abandonment.
         d.   A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
         e.   The reporting officer's name and title.
         f.   The location where the vehicle is being held.
      (4)   Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the
vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
   (c)   Within 24 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after
taking the vehicle into custody, the police agency or the agency's designee
shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or
a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then
transmit that release form to the Secretary of State and apply for a
certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form and application, the
Secretary of State shall issue a certificate of title or a certificate of
scrapping.
   (d)   The release form described in subsection (c) shall be furnished by the
Secretary of State and shall include a certification executed by the applicable
police agency or the agency's designee when the abandoned scrap vehicle is
released. The certification shall state that the police agency has complied
with all the requirements of subsection (b)(2) and (3).
   (e)   The Secretary of State shall retain the records relating to an
abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than 2 years. The 2 photographs taken
under subsection (2)(b) shall be retained by the police agency or the agency's
designee for not less than 2 years. After the certificate of scrapping has been
issued, a certificate of title for the vehicle shall not be issued again.
   (f)   A police agency or the agency's designee or, if the vehicle is on
private property, the property owner may have a registered abandoned scrap
vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency or the towing
service shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
      (2)   Take two photographs of the vehicle.
      (3)   Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered abandoned
scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:
         a.   The year, make, and vehicle identification number if available.
         b.   The date of abandonment.
         c.   The location of abandonment.
         d.   A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
         e.   The reporting individual's name and title.
         f.   The location where the vehicle is being held.
      (4)   Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, cause the
vehicle to be entered into the law enforcement information network.
   (g)   Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, the Secretary
of State shall send to the last titled owner and secured party, as shown by the
records of the Secretary of State, by first-class mail or personal service,
notice that the vehicle is considered abandoned. The form for the notice shall
be furnished by the Secretary of State. Each notice form shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if
available.
      (2)   The address or approximate location from which the vehicle was
taken into custody.
      (3)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
      (4)   The name and address of the police agency that had the vehicle
taken into custody. If the vehicle was towed from private property, the notice
shall contain the name and address of the custodian of the vehicle.
      (5)   The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
      (6)   The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
      (7)   The name of the court that has jurisdiction of the case.
      (8)   The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle is abandoned or
the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees.
      (9)   A form petition that the owner may file in person or by mail with
the specified court that requests a hearing on the custody of the vehicle.
      (10)   A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a
hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the
termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle.
   (h)   The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may
contest the fact that the vehicle is abandoned or the reasonableness of the
towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a
hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the
notice in subsection (g) within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the
owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing
conducted under section
18-371. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by
posting a towing and storage bond equal to the $40.00 plus the accrued towing
and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing
may obtain release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the towing and
storage fees to the court instead of posting the towing and storage bond.
   (i)   If the owner does not request a hearing under subsection (g), he or
she may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the
accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward
$25.00 of the fee collected under this subsection to the Secretary of State
within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the Secretary of State,
who shall deposit the fee into the abandoned vehicle fund created in MCL
257.252h.
   (j)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within
20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (g), the secured
party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the
accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward
$25.00 of the fee collected under this subsection to the Secretary of State
within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the Secretary of State,
who shall deposit the fee into the abandoned vehicle fund created in MCL
257.252h.
   (k)   Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described
in subsection (h), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days
after the date of the notice described in subsection (g), the police agency or
the agency's designee shall follow the procedures established in subsections
(c) to (e).
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-369. - Removal of vehicle from public or private property to place of
safekeeping; circumstances; arrival of owner; duties of police agency.
   (a)   A police agency or a governmental agency designated by the police
agency may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from public or
private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the registered
owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued operation
of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard to the
public.
      (2)   If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the highway in such a
manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic.
      (3)   If a vehicle is parked in a posted tow away zone.
      (4)   If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any
part of the vehicle is stolen.
      (5)   If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime, or
if there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the
commission of a crime.
      (6)   If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of
fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or manmade disaster, or other emergency.
      (7)   If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the
owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which
impedes the movement of another vehicle.
      (8)   If the vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked in a space
designated as parking for persons with disabilities and is not permitted by law
to be stopped, standing, or parked in a space designated as parking for persons
with disabilities.
      (9)   If the vehicle is located in a clearly identified access aisle or
access lane immediately adjacent to a space designated as parking for persons
with disabilities.
      (10)   If the vehicle is interfering with the use of a ramp or a curb-cut
by persons with disabilities.
   (b)   If the owner or other person who is legally entitled to possess the
vehicle arrives at the location where a vehicle is located before the actual
towing or removal of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the
tow truck, and the owner or other person who is legally entitled to possess the
vehicle may take possession of the vehicle and remove it without interference
upon the payment of the reasonable service fee, for which a receipt shall be
provided.
   (c)   A police agency that authorizes the removal of a vehicle under
subsection (a) shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
      (2)   Follow the procedures set forth in section
18-367.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-370. - Jurisdiction to determine propriety of police action; venue in
district court; use of bond to pay towing or storage fees.
   (a)   The following courts have jurisdiction to determine if a police agency
has acted properly in processing a vehicle under section
18-367, 18-368(f) to (k), or 18-369:
      (1)   The district court.
      (2)   The municipal court.
   (b)   The court specified in the notice prescribed in subsection
18-367(e)(2) or 18-368(g) or as provided in subsection
18-369(3)(b) shall be the court that has territorial jurisdiction at the
location from where the vehicle was removed or deemed abandoned. Venue in the
district court shall be governed by Section 8312 of the Revised Judicature Act
of 196, 1961 PA 236, MCL 600.8312.
   (c)   If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the
towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure release of the vehicle
under section
18-367, 18-368, or 18-369 shall be used to pay the towing and storage fees.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-371. - Filing petition; hearing; notice; burden; decision.
   (a)   Upon the filing of a petition prescribed in section
18-367, 18-368, or 18-369, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has been
taken into custody, the court shall do both of the following:
      (1)   Schedule a hearing within 30 days for the purpose of determining
whether the police agency acted properly.
      (2)   Notify the owner, towing service, custodian of the vehicle, and
police agency of the time and place of the hearing.
   (b)   At the hearing specified in subsection (a) the police agency shall
have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it has
complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned vehicle
or vehicle removed under section
18-369.
   (c)   After the hearing, the court shall make a decision that includes one
or more of the following:
      (1)   A finding that the police agency complied with the procedures
established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed
under section
18-369, and an order providing a period of 20 days after the decision for the
owner to redeem the vehicle. If the owner does not redeem the vehicle within 20
days, the police agency shall dispose of the vehicle under section
18-368 or 18-372. The court shall forward $25.00 of the fee collected under
section
18-368 or 18-372 to the Secretary of State within 30 days after the court's
decision in a manner prescribed by the Secretary of State. The towing and
storage fees and $15.00 of the fee collected under section
18-368 or 18-372 shall be forwarded to the towing agency.
      (2)   A finding that the police agency did not comply with the procedures
established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed
under section
18-369. After making the finding, the court shall issue an order directing that
the vehicle immediately be released to the owner, and that the police agency is
responsible for the accrued towing and storage charges. The court shall also
order any fee or bond posted by the owner to be returned to the owner.
      (3)   A finding that the towing fees and daily storage fees were
reasonable.
      (4)   A finding that the towing fees and daily storage fees were
unreasonable and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-372. - Manner of conducting public sale; application of money received;
absence of bidders; acquisition of distressed vehicle; application for salvage
certificate of title; canceling entry in law enforcement information network.
   (a)   Subject to subsection
18-367(p), a public sale for a vehicle and its contents that has been
determined to be abandoned under section
18-367 or removed under section
18-369 shall be conducted in the following manner:
      (1)   It shall be under the control of the police agency or the agency's
designee or the custodian of the vehicle or the custodian's designee.
      (2)   It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction bidding
or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person submitting
the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police agency or the
agency's designee or, if the vehicle is being sold under subsection
18-367(p), the custodian of the vehicle.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
18-367(q) and 18-368(g), it shall be held not less than five days after public
notice of the sale has been published.
      (4)   The public notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper
having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle was
abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for sale
and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale.
   (b)   The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be
applied in the following order of priority:
      (1)   Towing and storage charges.
      (2)   Expenses incurred by the police agency or the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (3)   Payment of the $40.00 abandoned vehicle fee described in section
18-371(c)(1).
      (4)   Any extra money shall be sent to the department of treasury's
unclaimed property division to be disbursed as follows:
         a.   To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the debt
outstanding on the vehicle.
         b.   Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to
mail the remainder to the last titled owner. If delivery of the remainder
cannot be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the unit of
government governing the location from which the vehicle was towed.
   (c)   If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police agency or the
custodian of the vehicle may do one of the following:
      (1)   Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm or the custodian of the
vehicle to satisfy charges against the vehicle. However, if the value of the
vehicle does not satisfy the towing fees and accrued daily storage fees, the
custodian of the vehicle may collect the balance of those unpaid fees from the
last titled owner, subject to section
18-375.
      (2)   Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of
government the police agency represents, by doing the following:
         a.   Paying the towing and storage charges.
         b.   Applying for title to the vehicle.
      (3)   Hold another public sale under subsection (1).
   (d)   A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (a) or
(c) that has been designated as a distressed vehicle shall apply for a salvage
certificate of title within 15 days after obtaining the vehicle.
   (e)   Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall provide the
Secretary of State with the vehicle's disposition and the name of the agency
that disposed of it and shall cancel the entry in the law enforcement
information network.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-373. - Towing and storage fees.
   (a)   A towing service, custodian of a vehicle, or both, shall not be
precluded in the recovery of towing fees or, subject to subsection (b), storage
fees from the last titled owner of a vehicle deemed abandoned under section
18-367 or section
18-368, or removed under section
18-369.
   (b)   If a vehicle is released for disposition under section
18-368 or section
18-372, the amount of storage fees that may be collected is whichever one of
the following is the least amount:
      (1)   The daily storage rate established by contract or agreement with
the law enforcement agency or unit of government that authorized the towing and
storage of the vehicle.
      (2)   The daily storage rate charged by the storage facility.
      (3)   $1,000.00.
      (4)   Subsection (b) does not apply to a commercial vehicle or to a
vehicle that is owned or leased by an entity other than an individual.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-374. - Abandoned vehicles; number and placement of vehicles on private
property.
   Sections
18-367 and
18-368 do not apply to a vehicle that is owned by the same person who owns the
private real property on which the vehicle is located and do not prohibit or
preempt a local unit of government from regulating the number and placement of
vehicles on private property.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Sec. 18-375. - Towing or removing vehicle without owner's consent; notice;
requirements.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an owner or lessor of
private real property shall post a notice that meets all of the following
requirements before authorizing the towing or removal of a vehicle from the
real property without the consent of the owner or other person who is legally
entitled to possess the vehicle:
      (1)   The notice shall be prominently displayed at a point of entry for
vehicular access to the real property. If the real property lacks curbs or
access barriers, not less than one notice shall be posted for each 100 feet of
road frontage.
      (2)   The notice clearly indicates in letters not less than two inches
high on a contrasting background that unauthorized vehicles will be towed away
at the owner's expense.
      (3)   The notice provides the name and telephone number of the towing
service responsible for towing or removing vehicles from that property.
      (4)   The notice is permanently installed with the bottom of the notice
located not less than four feet from the ground and is continuously maintained
on the property for not less than 24 hours before a vehicle is towed or
removed.
   (b)   This section does not apply to either of the following:
      (1)   Real property that is appurtenant to and obviously part of a
single- or dual-family residence.
      (2)   An instance when notice is personally given to the owner or other
legally entitled person in control of a vehicle that the area where the vehicle
is parked is reserved or otherwise unavailable to unauthorized vehicles and
that the vehicle is subject to towing or removal from the private real property
without the consent of the owner or other legally entitled person in control of
the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 06-1063, 2-21-06)
Secs. 18-376—18-380. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - INTERSECTIONS, TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND
TURNING
Sec. 18-381. - Turning at intersections.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of roadway.
      (2)   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof in such a manner as not to
interfere with the progress of opposing traffic, and, after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
      (3)   Approach for a left turn from a two-way roadway into a one-way
roadway shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof, and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. Approach for a left turn from a one-way roadway into a
two-way roadway shall be made as close as practicable to the left curb or edge
of the roadway and by passing to the right of the centerline of the roadway
being entered.
      (4)   Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a
left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the lefthand
curb or edge of the roadway.
      (5)   Where pavement markers, signs or signals are placed within or
adjacent to street intersections and thereby require and direct that a
different course from that specified in the foregoing be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, signs or
signals; provided however, that where such markings, signs or signals indicate
that the center lane of traffic is reserved for providing a left turn lane at
designated intersections, no driver shall enter such left turn lane except for
the purpose of making a left turn at the next intersection. Such left turn
movements must be made in accordance with the pavement markings, signs and
signals, and drivers may not enter the restricted portion of a left turn lane
except to turn into a private drive in advance of the next intersection, in
which case the entry as well as the turn must be made with due care and
caution.
      (6)   When the center lane of any highway is designated for either a left
turn or for a reversible traffic lane, it shall be marked by either pavement
markings, signs or signals, sufficient to apprise the ordinary observant person
of the intent of the regulatory markings, signs or signals. When such a center
lane is designated for left turn only, a driver shall enter such lane only
within a reasonable distance of the intersection, or private drive at which he
intends to turn left. After entering such left turn lane, a driver must turn
left at the next intersection unless entering a private drive in advance of the
next intersection.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.647, MSA 9.2347.
Sec. 18-382. - Signals on starting, stopping or turning.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle upon a highway before starting, stopping or
turning from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in
safety and shall give a signal as required in this section.
   (b)   The signal herein required shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm in the manner herein specified or by a mechanical or electrical signal
device which conveys an intelligible signal or warning to another driver
approaching from the rear, except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of
this section. Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the
driver shall indicate his intention to start, stop or turn by extending the
hand and arm horizontally from and beyond the left side of the vehicle.
   (c)   Any commercial motor vehicle in use on a highway, other than those in
transit from a manufacturer to a dealer, shall be equipped with, and required
signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal-device
when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left
outside limit of the body, cab or load of such commercial motor vehicle exceeds
24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post
to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter
measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of
vehicles.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.648, MSA 9.2348.
Sec. 18-383. - Right-of-way at intersections; "stop," "yield right-of-way" and
"merge" signs.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
   (b)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (c)   The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) of this
section are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this
division.
   (d)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, in obedience to such
sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching
on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time such driver would be moving across or within the intersection. However, if
required for safety to stop, the driver shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, at
a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.
   (e)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, the driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there
is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if none, then at
the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After having stopped, the
driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the
highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver
would be moving across or within the intersection.
   (f)   When a vehicle approaches the intersection of a highway from an
intersecting highway or street which is intended to be, and is constructed as,
a merging highway or street, and is plainly marked at such intersection with
appropriate merge signs, the vehicle shall yield right-of-way to any vehicle so
close as to constitute an immediate hazard on the highway about to be entered
and shall adjust its speed so as to enable it to merge safely with the through
traffic.
   (g)   The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit
any right-of-way which he might otherwise have under this section.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.649, MSA 9.2349.
Sec. 18-384. - Turning left at intersection.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this division, may make such left turn and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from such opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn;
provided, that at an intersection at which a traffic signal is located, a
driver intending to make a left turn shall permit vehicles bound straight
through in the opposite direction which are waiting a "go" signal to pass
through the intersection before making the turn.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.650, MSA 9.2350.
Sec. 18-385. - Entering highway from alley, private driveway.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway or street from an
alley, private road or driveway shall come to a full stop before crossing the
nearest sidewalk and entering such highway and shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles proceeding on such street or highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.652, MSA 9.2352.
Sec. 18-386. - U-turns.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street, unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic; provided, however, no such
U-turn shall be made where a sign prohibiting such turn has been erected, or at
any intersection controlled by a traffic signal.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-387. - Backing a vehicle.
   No vehicle shall be reversed or backed, unless the driver shall first
ascertain by observation that such operation can be made safely; and no vehicle
shall be backed without first giving an unmistakable warning signal to
pedestrians and approaching vehicles; nor, in any case, shall it be backed a
distance of more than 60 feet. No vehicle shall be backed around a corner at an
intersection of streets or of a street and an alley, unless preceded by another
person to observe whether the road is clear and whether the backing may be
safely made.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-388. - Stop when traffic obstructed.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk or cross a
painted line on the pavement, if no crosswalk exists, at the approach to an
intersection unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk or such painted line to accommodate the vehicle he is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians
coming into such intersection from a side street, notwithstanding any traffic
control signal indication to proceed.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 9.10, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-389—18-405. - Reserved.
DIVISION 10. - EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES: LIGHTS, BRAKES, HORNS, MUFFLERS, MIRRORS,
WINDSHIELDS, TIRES, FLARES
Sec. 18-406. - General requirements.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner
to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway, street,
public way, or other place open to the general public in the city, any vehicle
or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped
with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment, as
required in this division, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of
this division, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any
act required under this division.
   (b)   Any police officer shall be authorized on reasonable grounds shown to
stop any motor vehicle and inspect the same. The operator of a motor vehicle
shall submit to inspection of the equipment of such vehicle upon the request of
a police officer, and he shall conform to such direction as the police officer
may give him in order to determine the adequacy of the equipment of such motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to prohibit the
use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with
the provisions of this division.
   (d)   The provisions of this division with respect to equipment on vehicles
shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers, or
farm tractors, except as herein made applicable.
   (e)   A violation of this division shall be considered a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.1, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 99-760, 2-16-99)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.683, MSA 9.2383.
Sec. 18-407. - Required lighting equipment on vehicles; times of day; mounted
height of lamps and devices.
   (a)   Every vehicle upon a highway within this city at any time from a half
hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when
there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and
vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall display lighted
lamps and illuminating devices, as required for different classes of vehicles,
subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as hereinafter stated.
When lighted lamps and illuminating devices are required, no vehicle shall be
operated upon any highway within this city with only the parking lights
illuminated.
   (b)   Whenever requirement is declared as to the distance from which certain
lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or
devices shall be visible, such provisions shall apply during the time stated in
subsection (a) of this section upon a straight, level, unlighted highway under
normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is expressly
stated.
   (c)   Whenever requirement is declared as to the mounted height of lamps or
devices it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the level
ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.684, MSA 9.2384.
Sec. 18-408. - Headlamps.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, or motor driven cycle,
shall be equipped with at least two headlamps with at least one on each side of
the front of the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the
requirements and limitations set forth in this division.
   (b)   Every motorcycle and every motor driven cycle shall be equipped with
at least one and not more than two headlamps which shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of this division.
   (c)   Every headlamp, upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle,
shall be located at a height measured from the center of the headlamp of not
more than 54 inches nor less than 24 inches above the level surface upon which
such vehicle stands.
   (d)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps, as herein required,
is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp or any other lamp on
the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower, not more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a
vehicle, shall be lighted at any one time when upon a highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.685, MSA 9.2385.
Sec. 18-409. - Rear lamps.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole-trailer and any other
vehicle which is being drawn in a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at
least one rear lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as required, shall
emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
   (b)   Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and
render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any taillamp
or taillamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear
registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps
or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.686, MSA 9.2386.
Sec. 18-410. - Clearance and marker lamps, reflectors and stoplights—Generally.
   The sections of this division immediately following relating to clearance
and marker lamps, reflectors and stoplights shall apply, as stated in such
sections to vehicles of the type therein enumerated, namely; passenger buses,
trucks, truck tractors, and certain trailer, semitrailers, and pole-trailers,
respectively, when operated upon any highway or street, and such vehicles shall
be equipped as required, and all lamp equipment required shall be lighted at
the times mentioned in section
18-408, except that clearance and side marker lamps need not be lighted on any
such vehicle inside the city where there is sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.5, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.687, MSA 9.2387.
Sec. 18-411. - Same—Requirements for certain vehicles.
   In addition to other equipment required in this division, the following
vehicles shall be equipped as herein stated under the conditions stated in
section
18-411.
      (1)   On every bus or truck, whatever its size, there shall be the
following: On the rear, two red reflectors, one on each side, and one red or
amber stoplight.
      (2)   On every bus or truck 80 inches or more in overall width, in
addition to the requirements in subsection (1) of this section:
         a.   On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side.
         b.   On the rear, two clearance lamps, one at each side.
         c.   On each side, two side marker lamps, one at or near the front and
one at or near the rear.
         d.   On each side two reflectors, one at or near the front and one at
or near the rear.
      (3)   On every truck tractor:
         a.   On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side.
         b.   On the rear, one stoplight.
      (4)   On every trailer or semitrailer having a gross weight in excess of
3,000 pounds:
         a.   On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side.
         b.   On each side, two side marker lamps, one at or near front and one
at or near the rear.
         c.   On each side, two reflectors, one at or near the front and one at
or near the rear.
         d.   On the rear, two clearance lamps, one at each side; also two
reflectors, one at each side, and one stoplight.
      (5)   On every pole-trailer:
         a.   On each side, one side marker lamp and one clearance lamp which
may be in combination, to show to the front, side or rear.
         b.   On the rear of the pole-trailer or load, two reflectors, one on
each side.
      (6)   On every trailer, or semitrailer weighing 3,000 pounds gross or
less, on the rear, two reflectors, one on each side if any trailer or
semitrailer is so loaded or is of such dimensions as to obscure the stoplight
on the towing vehicle, then such vehicle shall also be equipped with one
stoplight.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.688, MSA 9.2388.
Sec. 18-412. - Same—Color of lighting devices.
   (a)   Front clearance lamps and those marker lamps and reflectors mounted on
the front or on the side near the front of a vehicle shall display or reflect
an amber color.
   (b)   Rear clearance lamps and those marker lamps and reflectors mounted on
the rear or on the sides near the rear of a vehicle shall display or reflect a
red color.
   (c)   All lighting devices and reflectors mounted on the rear of any vehicle
shall display or reflect a red color, except the stoplight or other signal
device, which may be red or amber, and except that the light illuminating the
license plate shall be white.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.689, MSA 9.2389.
Sec. 18-413. - Same—Mounting.
   (a)   Reflectors shall be mounted at a height not less than 15 inches and
not higher than 60 inches above the ground on which the vehicle stands, except
that if the highest part of the permanent structure of the vehicle is less than
15 inches, the reflector at such point shall be mounted as high as that part of
the permanent structure will permit.
      (1)   The rear reflectors on a pole-trailer may be mounted on each side
of the bolster or load.
      (2)   Any required red reflector on the rear of a vehicle may be
incorporated with the taillamp, but such reflector shall meet all the other
reflector requirements of this division.
   (b)   Clearance lamps shall be mounted on the permanent structure of the
vehicle in such a manner as to indicate its extreme width and as near the top
thereof as practicable. Clearance lamps and side marker lamps may be mounted in
combination provided illumination is given as required herein with reference to
both.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.8, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.690, MSA 9.2390.
Sec. 18-414. - Same—Visibility.
   (a)   Every reflector upon any vehicle referred to in section
18-413 shall be of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be
readily visible at nighttime from all distances within 500 feet to 50 feet from
the vehicle, when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps.
Reflectors required to be mounted on the sides of the vehicle shall reflect the
required color of light to the sides, and those mounted on the rear shall
reflect a red color to the rear.
   (b)   Front and rear clearance lamps shall be capable of being seen and
distinguished under normal atmospheric conditions at the times lights are
required at a distance of 500 feet from the front and rear, respectively, of
the vehicle.
   (c)   Side marker lamps shall be capable of being seen and distinguished
under normal atmospheric conditions at the times lights are required at a
distance of 500 feet from the side of the vehicle on which mounted.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.9, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.691, MSA 9.2391.
Sec. 18-415. - Same—When lighting not required.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any lamp, except taillamps, need not be lighted
which, by reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination, would be
obscured by another vehicle of the combination, but this shall not affect the
requirement that lighted clearance lamps be displayed on the front of the
foremost vehicle required to have clearance lamps, nor that all lights required
on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be lighted.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.692, MSA 9.2392.
Sec. 18-416. - Load extending beyond body of vehicle.
   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more
beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load, at the times specified in section
18-408, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this
section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.
At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load
a red flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square and so hung that the entire
area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.11, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.693, MSA 9.2393.
Sec. 18-417. - Lights on parked vehicles.
   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a highway, whether attended or
unattended, during the times mentioned in section
18-408, there shall be displayed upon the left side of such vehicle one or more
lamps projecting a white or amber light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and
projecting a red light visible under like conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the rear, except no lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when
parked in accordance with this section upon a street or highway where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 500 feet from such
street or highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.12, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.694, MSA 9.2394.
Sec. 18-418. - Lighting of vehicles not specifically required to be equipped
with lamps.
   All vehicles, including animal-drawn vehicles and including those referred
to in section
18-407, not hereinbefore specifically required to be equipped with lamps,
shall, at the times specified in section
18-408, be equipped with at least one lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a
white light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle
and with a lamp or lantern exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of
300 feet to the rear.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.13, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.695, MSA 9.2395.
Sec. 18-419. - Spotlamps, auxiliary driving lamps.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed two spotlamps,
except that a motorcycle shall not be equipped with more than one spotlamp, and
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another
vehicle that no part of the beam will be directed into the eyes of the
approaching driver. Spotlamps may not emit other than either a white or amber
light.
   (b)   A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two foglamps
mounted on the front at a height of not less than 12 inches nor more than 30
inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands, which foglamps
shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded, none of the high-
intensity portion of the light to the left of center of the vehicle shall, at a
distance of 25 feet ahead, project higher than a level four inches below the
level of the center of the lamp from which it comes. Lighted foglamps meeting
the requirements of this subsection may be used with lower headlamp beams.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.14, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.696, MSA 9.2396.
Sec. 18-420. - Signal lamps or devices.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this
division shall be equipped with the following signal lamps or devices:
      (1)   A stoplamp on the rear which shall emit a red or amber light and
which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake and which
may but need not be incorporated with a taillamp.
      (2)   A lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device which conveys an
intelligible signal or warning to another driver approaching from the rear.
   (b)   A stoplamp shall be capable of being seen and distinguished from a
distance of 100 feet to the rear, both during normal sunlight and at nighttime
and a signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to turn shall be capable of
being seen and distinguished during daytime and nighttime from a distance of
100 feet both to the front and rear. When a vehicle is equipped with a stoplamp
or other signal lamps, such lamp or lamps shall at all times be maintained in
good working condition. No stoplamp or signal lamp shall project a glaring or
dazzling light.
   (c)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use at
the times mentioned in section
18-408.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.15, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.697, MSA 9.2397.
Sec. 18-421. - Cowl or fender lamps, running-board courtesy lamps, backing
lights; colors; use of flashing, oscillating or rotating red lights.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side cowl or
fender lamps, which shall emit an amber or white light without glare.
   (b)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running-board
courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light
without glare.
   (c)   Backing lights of any color may be mounted on the rear of any motor
vehicle if the switch controlling such light be arranged that it may be turned
on only when the vehicle is in reverse gear. Such backing lights when unlighted
shall be so covered or otherwise arranged as not to reflect objectionalble
glare in the eyes of drivers of vehicles approaching from the rear.
   (d)   Any lamps or reflectors on a vehicle other than those expressly
required or permitted by the provisions of this division shall, if visible from
the front, display or reflect a white or amber light; if visible from either
side, display an amber light; and if visible from the rear, display or reflect
a red light, except as otherwise provided by law. Flashing, oscillating or
rotating red lights may be used only as follows:
      (1)   By authorized emergency vehicles, as provided by section
18-153. State, county or municipal vehicles engaged in snow removal or ice
control operations shall be equipped with flashing, oscillating or rotating
amber lights placed in such position on the vehicle as to be visible throughout
an arc of 360 degrees.
      (2)   By public utility service vehicles, ambulances, authorized
emergency vehicles and automobile service cars engaged in removing or assisting
vehicles at the site of traffic accidents and state, county and municipal
vehicles actually engaged in the maintenance or repair of the highway.
      (3)   By school buses only when such school bus is stopped on the highway
for the purpose of permitting school children to board or alight therefrom.
      (4)   By farm tractors only when operated on the highway after dark or
when visibility is poor.
   (e)   Provisions of this section governing flashing, oscillating or rotating
red lights shall be made applicable and shall be given the same effect if such
red lights are replaced by flashing, oscillating or rotating blue lights,
pursuant to authorization granted by state law.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.16, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Permissible additional lights, MCL 257.698, MSA 9.2398.
Sec. 18-422. - Multiple-beam, road-lighting equipment—Requirements.
   Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps, or the auxiliary driving
lamps, or combinations thereof, on motor vehicles shall be so arranged that
selection may be made between distribution of light projected to different
elevations, subject to the following requirements and limitations:
      (1)   Headlamps shall in all cases emit a white light, auxiliary lamps
may emit either a white or amber light.
      (2)   There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a
distance of at least 350 feet ahead for all conditions of loading.
      (3)   There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a
distance of at least 100 feet ahead; and under any condition of loading none of
the high-intensity portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
      (4)   Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor driven cycles,
registered in this state which has multiple-beam road-lighting equipment shall
be equipped with a beam indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the
uppermost distribution of light from the headlamps is in use and shall not
otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so designed and located that,
when lighted, it will be readily visible without glare to the driver of the
vehicle so equipped.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.17, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.699, MSA 9.2399.
Sec. 18-423. - Same—Use.
   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a highway or shoulder adjacent
thereto during the times specified in section
18-407, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam,
directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements and limitations:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle
within 500 feet, such driver shall use a distribution of light or composite
beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the
oncoming driver.
      (2)   The lowermost distribution of light specified in the preceding
section shall be deemed to avoid glare at all times regardless of road contour
and loading.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.18, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.700, MSA 9.2400.
Sec. 18-424. - Single-beam, road-lighting equipment.
   Headlamps arranged to provide a single distribution of light, not
supplemented by auxiliary driving lamps, shall be permitted on motor vehicles
in lieu of multiple-beam, road-lighting equipment, herein specified, if the
single distribution of light complies with the following requirements and
limitation:
      (1)   The headlamps shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded
none of the high-intensity portion of the light shall, at a distance of 25 feet
ahead, project higher than a level of five inches below the level of the center
of the lamp from which it comes, and in no case higher than 42 inches above the
level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet ahead.
      (2)   The intensity shall be sufficient to reveal persons and vehicles at
a distance of at least 200 feet.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.19, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.701, MSA 9.2401.
Sec. 18-425. - Motorcycle headlamps.
   The headlamp or headlamps upon every motor driven cycle may be of the single
beam or multiple beam type, but in either event shall comply with the
requirements and limitations as follows:
      (1)   Every headlamp on a motor driven cycle shall be of sufficient
intensity to reveal a person or a vehicle at a distance of not less than 100
feet when the motor driven cycle is operated at any speed less than 25 miles
per hour and at a distance of not less than 200 feet when the motor driven
cycle is operated at a speed of 25 or more miles per hour, and any such motor
driven cycle shall be subject to the speed restrictions in division 5 of
article II of this chapter.
      (2)   If the motor driven cycle is equipped with a multiple beam
headlamp, the upper beam shall meet the minimum requirements set forth above
and shall not exceed the limitations set forth in section
18-422(2), and the lowermost beam shall meet the requirements applicable to the
lowermost distribution of light, as set forth in section
18-422(3).
      (3)   If the motor driven cycle is equipped with a single-beam lamp, such
lamp shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is loaded none of the high-
intensity portion of light, at a distance of 25 feet ahead, shall project
higher than the level of the center of the lamp from which it comes.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.20, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.702, MSA 9.2402.
Sec. 18-426. - Front lamps, low candle power, slow speed.
   Any motor vehicle may be operated at any time from a half hour after sunset
to a half hour before sunrise when equipped with two lighted lamps upon the
front thereof capable of revealing persons and objects 75 feet ahead in lieu of
lamps required in section
18-422 or section
18-424; provided, however, that at no time shall it be operated at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.21, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.703, MSA 9.2403.
Sec. 18-427. - Lamps over 300 candlepower restricted.
   Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than
headlamps, spotlamps, auxiliary lamps, or flashing front direction signals
which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower,
shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the
roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the
vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.22, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.704, MSA 9.2404.
Sec. 18-428. - Required brake equipment; maintenance.
   (a)   Brake equipment for motor vehicles shall be required as follows:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor driven cycle,
when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control
the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means
of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effec-tive to apply the
brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle
without brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle or motor driven cycle, when operated upon a
highway, shall be equipped with at least two brakes, one on the front wheel and
one on the rear wheel, which may be operated by hand or foot.
      (3)   Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or
more, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to
control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as
to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab.
      (4)   Every new motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer sold in this
state and operated upon the highways shall be equipped with service brakes upon
all wheels of every such vehicle, except any motorcycle or motor driven cycle,
and except that any trailer or semitrailer of less than 1,500 pounds gross
weight need not be equipped with brakes.
      (5)   In any combination of motor-driven vehicles, means shall be
provided for applying the rearmost trailer brakes, for any trailer equipped
with brakes, in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle
and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the
fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on
the rearmost trailer equipped with brakes, or both of the above means capable
of being used alternately may be employed.
      (6)   Every motor vehicle and combination of vehicles, except pole-
trailers, motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
         a.   The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in
conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort, by
spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the
service brakes or other source of power if failure of the service brake
actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the
parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing
requirements.
         b.   The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied
they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of
any source of energy or leakage of any kind. The same brake drums, brake shoes
and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation
mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for
both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the
parking brakes and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be
so constructed that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without
operative brakes.
      (7)   The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums of the vehicle
wheels of any motor vehicle may be used for both service and hand operation.
   (b)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be
capable at all times, under all conditions of loading, of being stopped on a
dry, smooth, level road free from loose material within the distances specified
below, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances upon initial application of the service (foot)
brake.
 
                           Feet to stop from 20 miles Deceleration in feet per
                           per hour                   second
Vehicles or combination of
vehicles having brakes on  30                         14
all wheels
Vehicles or combination of
vehicles not having brakes 40                         10.7
on all wheels
 
   (c)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so
adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on
the opposite side of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.23, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.705, MSA 9.2405.
Sec. 18-429. - Horns and warning devices; theft alarm signals.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or
other warning device shall emit an unreasonable loud or harsh sound or a
whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to
insure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn but shall not
otherwise use such horn when upon a highway.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this
section.
   (c)   It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is arranged that it cannot be
used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal.
   (d)   Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren,
whistle, or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from
a distance of not less than 500 feet, but such siren shall not be used except
when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which such
latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren when necessary
to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.24, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.706, MSA 9.2406.
Sec. 18-430. - Radios and electronically amplified sound systems.
   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a radio and/or
electronically amplified sound system in, on, or from any motor vehicle so as
to produce sound that is clearly audible more than 25 feet from the vehicle.
      (1)   This section shall make no distinction between parked and moving
motor vehicles.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to emergency vehicles or those
vehicles emitting a warning sound necessary for the protection of public
safety.
      (3)   Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $500.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. No. 90-502, 9-18-90)
Sec. 18-431. - Noise levels.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   Combination vehicle means any combination of truck, truck-tractor,
trailer, semi-trailer or pole trailer used upon the highways or streets in the
transportation of passengers or property.
      (2)   Decibel shall mean a unit of sound level on a logarithmic scale
measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in
compliance with American National Standards Institute Standard S1.1-1960.
      (3)   Decibels on the A-weighted network or dBA means decibels measured
on a A-weighted network of a sound level meter, as specified in American
National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1971.
      (4)   Exhaust system shall mean the system comprised of a combination of
components which provides for enclosed flow of exhaust gas from engine parts to
the atmosphere.
      (5)   Fast meter response shall mean the meter ballistics of meter
dynamic characteristics as specified by American National Standard S1.4-1971.
      (6)   Gross vehicle weight rating shall mean the value specified by the
manufacturer as loaded weight of a vehicle.
      (7)   Maximum noise shall mean the noise emitted from a vehicle during
that manner of operation which causes the highest dBA level possible from that
vehicle.
      (8)   Muffler shall mean a device for abating the sound of escaping gases
of an internal combustion engine.
      (9)   Noise shall mean any sound.
      (10)   Total noise shall mean noises radiating from a vehicle but does
not include noises emitted from a horn, siren, bell or other similar devices of
an authorized emergency vehicle.
   (b)   Exhaust system required. A motor vehicle, while being operated on a
highway or street, shall be equipped with an exhaust system in good working
order to prevent excessive or unusual noise and shall be equipped to prevent
noise in excess of the limits established in this section.
   (c)   Exception. For purposes of this section, a "motor vehicle" does not
include special mobile equipment.
   (d)   Total noise limits. A motor vehicle shall not be operated or driven on
a highway or street if the motor vehicle produces total noise exceeding one of
the following limits at a distance of 50 feet, except as provided in
subsections (2)c. and (3)c. of this subsection:
      (1)   A motor vehicle with a gross weight or gross vehicle weight rating
of 8,500 pounds or more, combination vehicle with gross weight or gross vehicle
weight or gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or more.
         a.   90 dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is
greater than 35 mph.
         b.   86 dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is
not more than 35 mph.
         c.   88 dBA under stationary run-up test.
      (2)   A motorcycle or a moped:
         a.   86 dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is
greater than 35 mph.
         b.   82 dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is
not more than 35 mph.
         c.   95 dBA under stationary run-up test at 75 inches.
      (3)   A motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles towed by a motor
vehicle not covered in subsection (1) or (2) of this section:
         a.   82 dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is
greater than 35 mph.
         b.   76 dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is
not more than 35 mph.
         c.   95 dBA under stationary run-up test 20 inches from the end of the
tail pipe.
   (e)   Application to newer vehicles. A dealer shall not sell or offer for
sale for use upon a street or highway in this city a new motor vehicle
manufactured after April 1, 1978, which produces a maximum noise exceeding the
following limits:
      (1)   A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds
or more, 83 dBA.
      (2)   A motorcycle or a moped, 83 dBA.
      (3)   A motor vehicle not covered in subsection (1) or (2) of this
section, 80 dBA.
   (f)   Defects, modifications. A person shall not operate a vehicle on a
highway or street if the vehicle has a defect in the exhaust system which
affects sound reduction, is not equipped with a muffler or other noise
dissipative device, or is equipped with a cutout, bypass, amplifier or a
similar device.
      (1)   A person, either acting for himself or as the agent or employee of
another, shall not sell, install or replace a muffler or exhaust part that
causes a motor vehicle to which the muffler or exhaust part is attached to
exceed the noise limits established by this section.
      (2)   A person shall not modify, repair, replace or remove a part of an
exhaust system causing the motor vehicle to which the system is attached to
produce noise in excess of the levels established by this section, or operate a
motor vehicle so altered on a street or highway.
      (3)   A dealer shall not sell a used or secondhand motor vehicle for use
upon a street or highway which is not in compliance with this section.
   (g)   Penalties for violations. The penalties for violations of this section
shall be as follows:
      (1)   A person who violates subsection (d), (e)(1), or (e)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $100.00.
      (2)   A person who violates subsection (b), (c), (e) or (e)(2) is
responsible for a civil infraction.
      (3)   A person who, at the time of installation, knowingly installs a
muffler or exhaust system which exceeds the decibel limits of this section
shall be liable to the person who receives a citation for violation of
subsections (c) through (e) of this section for the amount of not less than
$100.00, plus reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
      (4)   If it is shown that the noise level of a motor vehicle is in excess
of the dBA levels established in this section, that evidence shall be prima
facie evidence that the motor vehicle was producing excessive noise in
violation of this section.
      (5)   A violation of subsection (e)(1) or (e)(3) of this section by a
dealer licensed under laws of the state is prima facie evidence of a fraudulent
act under MCL 257.249, MSA 9.1949.
   (h)   Test procedures. Test instrumentation and procedures used for
implementation and enforcement of this section shall substantially conform with
applicable standards and recommended practices established by the Society of
Automotive Engineers, Inc. and the American National Standards Institute, Inc.,
for the measurement of motor vehicle sound levels. Rules establishing these
test procedures shall be promulgated by the department of state highways and
transportation. The rules may provide for measurement at other than the
distance specified in subsections (c) through (e) of this section, provided
that the decibel limits applied at the other distances are adjusted
accordingly, to meet standards in subsections (c) through (e) of this section.
The rules shall be promulgated pursuant to Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq., MSA 3.560(101) et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-103, §§ 10.25a—10.25e, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-432. - Mirrors.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway which motor vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the
highway to the rear by looking backward from the driver's position, unless such
vehicle is equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view
of the highway to the rear of such vehicle. In addition, all motor vehicles
shall be equipped with an outside rear view mirror on the driver's side which
shall be positioned to give the driver a rear view angle from the driver's side
of the vehicle. Every commercial vehicle of one-half ton capacity or more,
operating upon the public highways of this state, shall be equipped with two
mirrors, one on each side, so adjusted that the operator shall have a clear
view of the highway behind such commercial vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.26, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.708, MSA 9.2408.
Sec. 18-433. - Windshields.
   (a)   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle with any of the following:
      (1)   A sign, poster, nontransparent material, window application,
reflective film or nonreflective film upon or in the front windshield, the side
windows immediately adjacent to the driver or front passenger, or the sidewings
adjacent to and forward of the driver or front passenger, except that a tinted
film may be used along the top edge of the windshield, the side windows or
sidewings immediately adjacent to the driver or front passenger if the material
does not extend more than four inches from the top of the windshield, or lower
than the shade band, whichever is closer to the top of the windshield.
      (2)   A rear window or side window to the rear of the driver composed of,
covered by, or treated with a material that creates a total solar reflectance
of 35 percent or more in the visible light range, including a silver or gold
reflective film.
      (3)   A dangling ornament or other suspended object, except as authorized
by law, which obstructs the vision of the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle if driver visibility through
the rear window is obstructed unless the vehicle is equipped with two rearview
mirrors, one on each side, adjusted so that the operator has a clear view of
the highway behind the vehicle.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The use of draperies, louvers or other special window treatments,
except those specifically designated in this section, on the rear window or a
side window to the rear of the driver if the vehicle is equipped with two
outside rearview mirrors, one on each side, adjusted so that the driver has a
clear view of the highway behind the vehicle.
      (2)   The use of a nonreflective, smoked or tinted glass, nonreflective
film, perforated window screen, or other decorative window application on the
rear window or a side window to the rear of the driver.
      (3)   The placement of a necessary certificate or sticker that does not
obstruct the driver's clear view of the roadway or an intersecting roadway.
      (4)   A vehicle registered in another state, territory, commonwealth of
the United States or another country or province.
      (5)   A special window treatment or application determined necessary by a
physician, for the protection of a person who is light or photosensitive, if
the owner or operator of a motor vehicle has in possession a letter signed by a
physician, indicating the need for the special window treatment or application
as a medical necessity. However, the special window treatment or application
shall not interfere with or obstruct the driver's clear vision of the highway
or an intersecting highway.
   (d)   The windshield on each motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device
shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the
vehicle. A vehicle licensed as a historical vehicle is exempt from this
subsection if the vehicle was not originally equipped with such a device.
   (e)   Each windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good
working order.
   (f)   A licensed commercial vehicle shall not be operated on the highways at
any time from December 15, to March 15, unless it is equipped with a hot air
windshield defroster or an electrically heated windshield or other scientific
method that is devised so long as the windshield is heated and maintained in
operable condition at all times.
   (g)   A licensed motor vehicle which is manufactured after January 1, 1956,
shall not be operated on the highways unless it is equipped with a windshield
washer maintained in operable condition at all times and capable of cleaning
the windshield so as to leave the driver with a clear view of the highway or an
intersecting highway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.27, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.709, MSA 9.2409.
Sec. 18-434. - Tires; farm equipment, tire chains.
   (a)   No vehicle nor special mobile equipment shall be operated on the
public highways of this city on metal track or on tires which are equipped with
metal that comes in contact with the surface of the road or which have a
partial contact of metal with the surface of the road.
   (b)   No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery
any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberances of any
material other than rubber which project beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible to use farm machinery
with tires having protuberances which will not injure the highways, and except
that it shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon
any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions
tending to cause a vehicle to skid.
   (c)   A pneumatic tire may have embedded in it wire not to exceed .075
inches in diameter if so constructed that under no condition shall the percent
of metal in contact with the highway exceed five percent of the total tire area
in contact with the roadway, except that during the first 1,000 miles of use or
operation of any such tire the metal in contact with the highway shall not
exceed 20 percent of such area.
   (d)   Pneumatic tires may have inserted ice grips or tire studs of wear-
resisting plastic or metal material, installed in such manner as to provide
resiliency upon contact with the road, with projections not to exceed 3/32 of
an inch beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, and constructed
to prevent any appreciable damage to the road surface. Pneumatic tires so
equipped may be used on motor vehicles between November 1 of each year and May
1 of the following year. Copies of this subsection shall be posted in all
places at which tires are sold.
   (e)   A printed or written warning on the time limitation for the use of
such studded tires shall be furnished each buyer, purchaser or user by the
seller of such studded tires.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.28, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.710, MSA 9.2410.
Sec. 18-435. - Safety belt required; driver or passenger to which section
inapplicable; transporting child four years of age but less than 16 years of
age; enforcement of section; violation as evidence of negligence; reduction of
recovery for damages; violation as civil infraction.
   (a)   This section does not apply to a driver or passenger of any of the
following:
      (1)   A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1965.
      (2)   A bus.
      (3)   A motorcycle.
      (4)   A moped.
      (5)   A motor vehicle if the driver or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician that the driver or passenger is unable to utilize
a passenger restraint system for physical or medical reasons.
      (6)   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with passenger
restraint systems under federal law.
      (7)   A commercial or United States Postal Service vehicle that makes
frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of goods or services.
      (8)   A motor vehicle operated by a rural carrier of the United States
Postal Service while serving his or her rural postal route.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to a passenger of a school bus.
   (c)   Each operator and front-seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on
a street or highway or other place open to the general public in this city
shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt, except as follows:
      (1)   A child less than four years of age shall be protected as required
in section
18-436.
      (2)   A child who is four years of age or older but less than eight years
of age and who is less than four feet nine inches in height shall be properly
secured in a child-restraint system in accordance with the child-restraint
manufacturer's and vehicle manufacturer's instructions and the standards
prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213.
   (d)   If there are more passengers than safety belts available for use, and
all safety belts in the motor vehicle are being utilized in compliance with
this section, the driver of the motor vehicle is in compliance with this
section.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2), each operator of a
motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more but less than 16
years of age in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted
and fastened safety belt and seated as required under this section. If the
motor vehicle is transporting more children than there are safety belts
available for use, all safety belts available in the motor vehicle are being
utilized in compliance with this section, and the operator and all front seat
passengers comply with subsection (c) of this section, then the operator of a
motor vehicle transporting a child 8 years of age or more but less than 16
years of age, for which there is not an available safety belt is in compliance
with this subsection, if that child is seated in other than the front seat of
the motor vehicle. However, if that motor vehicle is a pickup truck without an
extended cab or jump seats, and all safety belts in the front seat are being
used, the driver may transport such a child in the front seat without a safety
belt.
   (f)   If, after December 31, 2005, the office of highway safety planning
certifies that there has been less then 80 percent compliance with the safety
belt requirements of this section during the preceding year, then enforcement
of this section by state or local law enforcement agencies shall be
accomplished only as a secondary action when a driver of a motor vehicle has
been detained for a suspected violation of another section of this chapter.
   (g)   Failure to wear a safety belt in violation of this section may be
considered evidence of negligence and may reduce the recovery for damages
arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
However, such negligence shall not reduce the recovery for damages by more than
five percent.
   (h)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (i)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on July 1, 2008.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.38, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 99-761, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 00-812,
2-15-00; Ord. No. 08-1167, 6-2-08)
State Law reference— Mandatory safety belt use, MCL 257.710e.
Sec. 18-436. - Child restraint system required; exceptions; violation as civil
infraction; points; abstract; exemption by rules; alternate means of
protection.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise provided by law, a
rule promulgated pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA
306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328, or federal regulation, each driver transporting a
child less than four years of age in a motor vehicle shall properly secure that
child in a child restraint system, that meets the standards prescribed in 49
CFR 571.213.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any child being nursed.
   (c)   This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being driven is a
bus, school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not
required to be equipped with passenger restraint systems under state or federal
law or regulations.
   (d)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (e)   The secretary of state may exempt by rules promulgated pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328, a
class of children from the requirements of this section, if the secretary of
state determines that the use of the child restraint system required under
subsection (a) is impractical because of physical unfitness, a medical problem,
or body size. The secretary of state may specify alternate means of protection
for children exempted under this subsection.
   (f)   The amendments to this section shall take effect on March 10, 2000.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.37, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 00-812, 2-15-00)
State Law reference— Mandatory child restraints, MCL 257.710d.
Sec. 18-436.5. - Person less than 18 years of age prohibited in the open bed of
a pickup truck; exceptions.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, an operator shall not permit a
person less than 18 years of age to ride in the open bed of a pickup truck on a
highway, road, or street in the city at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour.
   (b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to the operator of any of the following:
      (1)   A motor vehicle operated as part of a parade pursuant to a permit
issued by the governmental unit having jurisdiction over the highway or street.
      (2)   A military motor vehicle.
      (3)   An authorized emergency vehicle.
      (4)   A motor vehicle controlled or operated by an employer or an
employee of a farm operation, construction business, or similar enterprise
during the course of work activities.
      (5)   A motor vehicle used to transport a search and rescue team to and
from the site of an emergency.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 01-850, 5-1-01)
Sec. 18-437. - Flame, smoke emitting device on motor vehicle.
   Any person who shall install, sell or distribute any device for the purpose
of causing flame or smoke to be emitted from a motor vehicle, except highway
maintenance vehicles, and any person who is not legally authorized so to do,
who shall use any such device on a motor vehicle on any highway of this city,
shall be responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.30, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-438. - Emergency signal equipment for trucks.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor truck, of a gross weight of more
than 10,000 pounds, or truck tractor upon any street or highway in the city at
any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise unless
there shall be carried in such vehicle the following equipment, except as
provided in subsection (b) of this section:
      (1)   At least three flares or three red electric lanterns, each of which
shall be capable of being seen and distinguished at a distance of 500 feet
under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime. Each flare (liquid-burning
pot torch) shall be capable of burning for not less than 12 hours in a five
miles per hour wind velocity and capable of burning in any air velocity from
zero to 40 miles per hour. Every such flare shall be substantially constructed
so as to withstand reasonable shocks without leaking. Every such flare shall be
carried in the vehicle in a metal rack or box. Every such red electric lantern
shall be capable of operating continuously for not less than 12 hours and shall
be substantially constructed so as to withstand reasonable shock without
breakage.
      (2)   At least three red-burning fuses unless red electric lanterns are
carried. Every fuse shall be made in accordance with specifications of the
Bureau of Explosives, New York, and so marked, and shall be capable of burning
at least 15 minutes.
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than 12 inches square, with
standards to support same.
   (b)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in
subsection (a) of this section any motor vehicle used in the transportation of
inflammable liquids in bulk or transporting compressed inflammable gases,
unless there shall be carried in such vehicle three red electric lanterns
meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and there shall not
be carried in any such vehicle any flares, fuses or signal produced by a flame.
   (c)   In the alternative, it shall be deemed a compliance with this section
if the person operating any motor vehicle described in this section shall carry
in such vehicle three portable reflector units or standards of a type approved
by the director of public safety. No portable reflector unit shall be approved
unless it is so designed and constructed that it will reflect red light clearly
visible for a distance of at least 300 feet under normal atmospheric conditions
at nighttime when directly in front of lawful upperbeams of headlamps.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.31, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.712.
Sec. 18-439. - Warning devices for disabled vehicles.
   (a)   A person shall not operate a motor truck of a gross weight of more
than 10,000 pounds, truck tractor, bus, or a truck, regardless of weight, when
carrying hazardous materials on which a placard is required to be posted
pursuant to 49 CFR 171.100—171.199 upon a highway outside the corporate limits
of municipalities unless there shall be carried in the vehicle the following
equipment, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section:
      (1)   At least three flares or three red electric lanterns, each of which
shall be capable of being seen and distinguished at a distance of 500 feet
under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime. A flare, liquid-burning pot
torch, shall be capable of burning for not less than 12 hours in five miles per
hour wind velocity and capable of burning in any air velocity from zero to 40
miles per hour. A flare shall be substantially constructed so as to withstand
reasonable shocks without leaking. A flare shall be carried in the vehicle in a
metal rack or box. A red electric lantern shall be capable of operating
continuously for not less than 12 hours and shall be substantially constructed
so as to withstand reasonable shock without breakage.
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees unless red electric lanterns are
carried. A fusee shall be made in accordance with specifications of the bureau
of explosives, New York, and so marked, and shall be capable of burning at
least 15 minutes.
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than 12 inches square, with
standards to support same.
      (4)   A fire extinguisher that is properly filled and located so that it
is readily accessible for use. The fire extinguisher shall be securely mounted
on the vehicle. The fire extinguisher shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to permit a determination of whether it is fully charged and in
proper operating condition. The fire extinguisher shall have an extinguishing
agent that does not need protection from freezing. The fire extinguisher shall
not use a vaporizing liquid that gives off vapors more toxic than those
produced by the substances shown as having a toxicity rating of five or six in
the underwriters publication entitled "Classification of Comparative Life
Hazard of Gases and Vapors." Fire extinguishers are to be inspected and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the national fire protection
association pamphlet No. 10, 1974 edition.
      (5)   A motor vehicle that is used to transport hazardous materials shall
be equipped with a fire extinguisher having an Underwriters' Laboratories
rating of 10 B:C or more. This paragraph applies to a vehicle that is required
to be marked or placarded, or tows a vehicle that is required to be marked or
placarded, pursuant to the provisions of 49 CFR 171.100—171.199. A fire
extinguisher required by this subsection shall be labeled or marked with its
Underwriters' Laboratories rating and shall meet the requirements of subsection
(a) of this section.
      (6)   A motor vehicle that is not used to transport hazardous materials
shall be equipped with either a fire extinguisher having an Underwriters'
Laboratories rating of 5 B:C or more, or two fire extinguishers, each of which
has an underwriters' Laboratories rating of 4 B:C or more. A fire extinguisher
required by this paragraph shall be labeled or marked with its Underwriters'
Laboratories rating and shall meet the requirements of the subsection (a) of
this section.
   (b)   A person shall not operate at the time and under the conditions stated
in subsection (a) of this section a motor vehicle used in the transportation of
inflammable liquids in bulk or transportation of compressed inflammable gases
unless there shall be carried in the vehicle three red electric lanterns
meeting the requirements stated in subsection (a) of this section and there
shall not be carried in the vehicle any flares, fusees, or signal produced by a
flame.
   (c)   In the alternative, it shall be deemed a compliance with this section
if the person operating a motor vehicle described in this section carries in
the vehicle three portable reflector units on standards of a type approved by
the commissioner. A portable reflector unit shall not be approved unless it is
so designed and constructed that it will reflect red light clearly visible for
a distance of at least 300 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at
nighttime when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of headlamps.
   (d)   In lieu of the equipment requirements of subsection (a) of this
section, the following equipment may be carried: three bidirectional emergency
reflective triangles without self-contained energy sources. Each of the three
sides of the triangular portion of the warning device shall not be less than 17
and not more than 22 inches long, and not less than two and not more than three
inches wide. Each face of the triangular portion shall have an outer border of
red reflex material and an inner border of orange fluorescent material.
   (e)   A warning device, when erected on a horizontal concrete surface, and
subjected to a horizontal wind of 40 miles per hour in any direction for three
minutes, shall not slide more than three inches from its initial position. A
warning device shall be carried in the vehicle in an opaque protective reusable
container. Every device shall be erected and replaced in its container without
the use of tools. Warning devices shall be in conformance with federal motor
vehicle safety standard no. 125.
Sec. 18-440. - Display of warning devices.
   (a)   When a motor truck of a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, truck
tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, bus, or a truck, regardless of
weight, when carrying hazardous materials on which a placard is required to be
posted pursuant to 49 CFR 171.100—171.199 is stopped upon the traveled portion
of a highway or the shoulder of a highway for any cause, other than necessary
traffic stops, the driver of the stopped vehicle shall immediately flash the
two front and two rear turn signals simultaneously as a vehicular traffic
hazard warning and shall continue the flashing until he places the warning
devices required by this subsection in use on the highways, except as provided
in subsection (b) of this section. The flashing signals shall be used during
the time the warning devices are picked up for storage before movement of the
vehicle. The flashing lights may be used at other times while a vehicle is
stopped in addition to, but not in place of, the following warning devices
required by this subsection:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, when a
vehicle described in this subsection is stopped upon the traveled portion of a
highway or the shoulder of a highway for any cause, other than necessary
traffic stops, the driver shall, as soon as possible, but not later than ten
minutes, place the warning devices with which his vehicle is equipped pursuant
to section
18-439, which shall be three emergency reflective triangles, three electric
emergency lanterns, three liquid-burning emergency flares, or three red
emergency reflectors. The warning devices shall be placed in the following
manner:
         a.   One at the traffic side of the stopped vehicle, within ten feet
of the front or rear of the vehicle.
         b.   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the rear of the
stopped vehicle or load, in the center of the traffic lane or shoulder occupied
by the vehicle, and facing traffic approaching the rear of the vehicle.
         c.   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the front of the
stopped vehicle, in the center of the traffic lane or shoulder occupied by the
vehicle, and facing oncoming traffic in the opposite lane.
      (2)   The following special rules apply to the placement of warning
devices:
         a.   The driver of a vehicle equipped with liquid-burning flares or
pot torches shall first place a fusee at the locations specified in subsection
(a)(1) of this section.
         b.   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2)c. of this section
relative to business and residential districts, during the period lighted lamps
are not required, three emergency triangles shall be placed as specified in
subsection (a)(1) of this section, or two red flags shall be placed as
specified in subsections (a)(1)a. and (a)(1)c. of this section.
         c.   The placement of warning devices is not required within the
business or residential district of a municipality, except during the time
lighted lamps are required and when street or highway lighting is insufficient
to make a vehicle clearly discernible to persons on the highway at a distance
of 500 feet.
         d.   If a vehicle is stopped within 500 feet of a curve, crest of a
hill, or other obstruction to view, the driver shall place the warning signals
required by subsection (a)(1) of this section in the direction of the
obstruction to view at a distance of 100 feet to 500 feet from the stopped
vehicle, so as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway.
         e.   If a vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion or the shoulder
of a divided or one-way highway, the driver shall place the warning devices
required by subsection (a)(1) of this section so that one warning device is at
a distance of 200 feet and one warning device is at a distance of 100 feet in
the direction of approaching traffic. The devices shall be placed in the center
of the lane or shoulder occupied by the vehicle. The driver shall place one
warning device at the traffic side of the vehicle within ten feet of the rear
of the vehicle.
         f.   If gasoline or any other flammable liquid, combustible liquid, or
gas seeps or leaks from a fuel container or a vehicle stopped upon a highway,
an emergency warning signal producing a flame shall not be lighted or placed,
unless it is lighted or placed at a distance from the liquid or gas which
assures that a fire or explosion will not occur.
   (b)   When a vehicle used in the transportation of inflammable liquids in
bulk or transporting compressed inflammable gases is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the driver of
the vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following lighted warning
devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern shall be immediately placed on the roadway
at the traffic side of the vehicle, and two other red electric lanterns shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed in
subsection (a) of this section for flares.
      (2)   When a vehicle of a type specified in this subsection is disabled,
the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning signals
is prohibited.
   (c)   When a vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled upon
the traveled portion of a highway or the shoulder of the highway, outside of a
municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares, or electric
lanterns is not required, the driver of the vehicle shall display two red flags
upon the roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one
at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a
distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle.
   (d)   In the alternative, it shall be considered compliance with this
section if three portable reflector units on standards of a type approved by
the department of state police are displayed at the times and under the
conditions specified in this section, either during the daytime or at
nighttime. The portable reflector units shall be placed on the roadway in the
locations, as described, with reference to the placing of electric lanterns and
lighted flares.
   (e)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, portable reflectors, flags, and
bidirectional emergency reflective triangles to be displayed, as required in
this section, shall conform with the applicable requirements of MCL 257.712.
Sec. 18-441. - Commercial vehicles; wheel flaps.
   A commercial vehicle, except a truck tractor traversing between terminals at
a speed of not to exceed 25 miles per hour, and a combination of a commercial
vehicle and trailer or semitrailer, when used on a highway, shall be so
constructed or equipped, or so operated, as to prevent water or other road
surface substances from being thrown from the rear wheels of the vehicle, or
combination, at tangents exceeding 22½ degrees measured from the road surface.
If a flap type device is used, it shall not have attached any type of lamp,
breakable reflective material, or reflecting buttons; nor may the device extend
beyond the 96-inch maximum width of the vehicle or combination.
Sec. 18-442. - Fuel system, auxiliary equipment of large vehicles.
   (a)   This section applies to systems for containing and supplying fuel for
the operation of a truck over 10,000 pounds, truck tractor, road tractor, or
bus or for the operation of auxiliary equipment installed on, or used in
connection with, any of these vehicles.
   (b)   A fuel system shall be located on the vehicle so that:
      (1)   No part of the system extends beyond the widest part of the
vehicle.
      (2)   No part of a fuel tank is forward of the front axle of a power
unit.
      (3)   Fuel spilled vertically from a fuel tank while it is being filled
does not contact any part of the exhaust or electrical systems of the vehicle,
except the fuel level indicator assembly.
      (4)   Fill pipe openings are located outside the vehicle's passenger
compartment and its cargo compartment.
      (5)   A fuel line does not extend between a towed vehicle and the vehicle
that is towing it while the combination of vehicles is in motion.
   (c)   A fuel tank shall be securely attached to the vehicle in a workmanlike
manner.
   (d)   A fuel system shall not supply fuel by gravity or syphon feed directly
to the carburetor or injector.
   (e)   If a fuel system includes a selection control valve which is operable
by the driver to regulate the flow of fuel from two or more fuel tanks, the
valve shall be installed so that either of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   The driver may operate it while watching the roadway and without
leaving his or her driving position.
      (2)   The driver shall stop the vehicle and leave his or her seat in
order to operate the valve.
   (f)   A fuel line, which is not completely enclosed in a protective housing,
shall not extend more than two inches below the fuel tank or its sump. Diesel
fuel crossover, return, and withdrawal lines which extend below the bottom of
the tank or sump shall be protected against damage from impact. A fuel line
shall be:
      (1)   Long enough and flexible enough to accommodate normal movements of
the parts to which it is attached without incurring damage.
      (2)   Secured against chafing, kinking, or other causes of mechanical
damage.
   (g)   When pressure devices are used to force fuel from a fuel tank, a
device which prevents the flow of fuel from the fuel tank if the fuel feed line
is broken shall be installed in the fuel system.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 10.33, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.714.
Sec. 18-443. - Operating motor vehicle with television or similar electronic
device viewable by operator prohibited.
   (a)   A person shall not operate a motor vehicle that is to be used upon the
streets of this city with a television or other similar electronic device that
displays a video image that can be viewed by the operator while the motor
vehicle is in motion.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   An audio entertainment system, heating or air conditioning
controls, or other accessory controls in the motor vehicle.
      (2)   A vehicle information or navigation system for use in displaying
only information pertaining to vehicle location, available routes and
destinations, road layouts, weather conditions, traffic and road conditions,
vehicle conditions, or traveler services.
      (3)   A research vehicle if the test plan for the vehicle has been
approved by a process meeting federal guidelines established in 45 CFR part 46
for the protection of human beings and the vehicle has been issued a special
registration permit by the secretary of state.
      (4)   A motor vehicle equipped with a video display to enhance or
supplement the driver's view.
      (5)   A police vehicle, fire vehicle, or ambulance equipped with a
monitor for use with a computer-aided dispatch system or emergency equipment
controls.
      (6)   A police vehicle equipped with a monitor for use with recording
equipment.
      (7)   A motor vehicle equipped with a video display to exclusively
communicate vehicle, driver, or safety conditions.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a visual device
permitted under subsection (b)(1) or (2) shall be built into the dashboard,
center console, instrument panel, rearview mirror, or other control areas of
the vehicle and shall meet all applicable federal motor vehicle dash safety
standards. An aftermarket visual device described in subsection (b)(1) or (2)
may be installed or mounted on the windshield or above the dashboard, but shall
not be mounted within the deployment profile of the vehicle airbags or in a
manner that interferes with the operator's view or control. This subsection
does not apply to a research vehicle described in subsection (b)(3).
   (d)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 08-1158, 4-21-08)
Secs. 18-444. - Equipment requirements for low-speed vehicles.
   As required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.25b, and all other applicable
laws, low-speed vehicles shall be equipped with all of the following:
   (1)   Headlamps. At least two headlamps with at least one head lamp on each
side of the front of the low-speed vehicle in compliance with Public Act 300 of
1949, MCL 257.685.
   (2)   Turn signals. Front and rear turn signal lamps.
   (3)   Tail lamps. At least one rear lamp mounted on the rear, which, when
lighted as required by this section and Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.686,
shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
   (4)   Tail lamps. As required by this section and Public Act 300 of 1949,
MCL 257.686, either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be constructed and
placed so as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and
render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. A tail lamp
or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear
registration plate, shall be wired so as to be lighted whenever the head lamps
or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
   (5)   Stop lamps. A stop lamp as required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL
257.697, which shall emit a red or amber light and which shall be actuated upon
application of the service or foot brake and which may but need not be
incorporated with a tail lamp. A stop lamp shall be capable of being seen and
distinguished from a distance of 100 feet to the rear both during normal
sunlight and at nighttime and a signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to
turn shall be capable of being seen and distinguished during daytime and
nighttime from a distance of 100 feet both to the front and rear. When a
vehicle is equipped with a stop lamp or other signal lamps, the lamp or lamps
shall at all times be maintained in good working condition. A stop lamp or
signal lamp shall not project a glaring or dazzling light.
   (6)   Reflectors. One red reflex reflector on each side as far to the rear
as practicable, and one red reflex reflector on the rear.
   (7)   Windshield. A windshield as required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL
257.708a, of sufficient dimensions to protect the driver and occupants from
insects, other airborne objects, and highway surface water and debris, when the
motor vehicle is moving forward.
   (8)   Windshield. As required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.709, the
windshield shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other
moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the driver. Each windshield wiper upon a low-speed
vehicle shall be maintained in good working order.
   (9)   VIN. A low-speed vehicle shall have permanently affixed to its frame a
manufacturer's identification number, commonly referred to as a VIN number, as
required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.217b.
   (10)   Safety-belt. A safety-belt, safety restraining device, or attachments
thereto that conform with the standards and specifications established by rules
and regulations which have been established by the commissioner of the Michigan
state police, pursuant to Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.710a.
   (11)   Safety-belt. Each operator, front seat passenger, and child under the
age of 16 of a low-speed vehicle operated on a street or highway shall wear a
properly adjusted and fastened safety belt as required by as required by Public
Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.710e.
   (12)   Mirror. One exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either
one exterior mirror mounted on the passenger side or one interior mirror.
   (13)   Horn. A horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but
a horn or other warning device shall not emit an unreasonably loud or harsh
sound or a whistle, as required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.706. The
driver of a low-speed vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to insure safe
operation give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use the
horn when upon a highway.
   (14)   Brakes. When operated upon a highway a low-speed vehicle shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold
the vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which
means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels, as
required by Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.705. If these two separate means of
applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be constructed in a
way that failure of one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the
motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. A new motor vehicle,
including a low-speed vehicle, shall be equipped with brakes on all wheels.
   (15)   Parking brake. Parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any
grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading on a surface
free from snow, ice, or loose material, as required by Public Act 300 of 1949,
MCL 257.705.
   (16)   Bumper. A bumper or other energy absorption system with an analogous
function which bumper or system is securely bolted or permanently attached on
both the front and rear of the vehicle, as required by Public Act 300 of 1949,
MCL 257.710c. The bumper or energy absorption system shall be maintained in
good operational condition. If the vehicle is designed for cargo, then the max
frame height shall be 24 inches and the max bumper height shall be 26 inches.
If the vehicle is designed for passengers, then the max frame height shall be
12 inches and the max bumper height shall be 22 inches.
   (17)   Crash helmet. A person operating or riding in a low-speed vehicle
shall wear a crash helmet on his or her head as required by Public Act 300 of
1949, MCL 257.658b. This subsection does not apply to a person operating or
riding in a low-speed vehicle equipped with a roof that meets or exceeds the
standards for roof-crush resistance provided under 49 C.F.R. 571.500.
   (18)   A violation of this section shall be considered a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 19-1657, 9-10-19)
State law reference - MCL 257.25b, MCL 257.217b, MCL 257.658b, MCL 257.685, MCL
257.686, MCL 257.697, MCL 257.698, MCL 257.705, MCL 257.706, MCL 257.708a, MCL
257.709, MCL 257.710a, MCL 257.710c, MCL 257.710e.
Secs. 18-445-18-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - LOADED VEHICLES; WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, WEIGHT; TRAILERS, TOWED
VEHICLES, DRIVER'S VIEW
Sec. 18-461. - Enforcement.
   (a)   All the provisions of this division shall be enforced by the director
of, and inspectors in, the division of weights and measures, and by any officer
of the police department of the city. Such supervisor, each of the inspectors
of the division of weights and measures, and any officer of the police
department may, and each of them is hereby authorized to, enforce all the
provisions of this division. Each of such officers and employees of the
division of weights and measures is hereby made a police officer for such
purpose.
   (b)   When any such police officer, supervisor or inspector is performing
his duties under this section, he shall have all the powers conferred upon
peace officers by the general laws of this state, and especially all such
powers conferred on officers authorized to enforce the provisions of law
dealing with the weights and dimensions of trucks.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.17, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-462. - Obstruction of driver's view, control.
   (a)   A person shall not drive a vehicle when it is loaded or when there are
in the front seat a number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to
the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   A passenger in a vehicle shall not ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver's or operator's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere
with the driver's or operator's control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.677, MSA 9.2377.
Sec. 18-463. - Size, weight limitations generally.
   (a)   Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a
misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit
to be driven or moved on any street or highway in the city a vehicle or
vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in this division.
   (b)   The provisions of this division governing size, weight and load shall
not apply to fire apparatus, to implements of husbandry incidentally moved upon
a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued,
as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.716, MSA 9.2416.
Sec. 18-464. - Width of vehicle or load.
   (a)   The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall
not exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (b)   The total outside width of a farm tractor or farm implement or
machinery shall not exceed 186 inches. An agricultural implement wider than 108
inches shall not be moved on the highway between the hours of sunset and
sunrise.
   (c)   The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete
pipe, agricultural products or unprocessed logs, pulpwood or wood bolts shall
not exceed 108 inches.
   (d)   When pneumatic tires, in substitution for the same type or other type
of tires, have been or are placed upon a vehicle in operation on a highway, the
maximum width from the outside of one wheel and tire to the outside of the
opposite wheel and tire shall not exceed 102 inches, but the outside width of
the body of the vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches.
   (e)   The total outside width of a bus shall not exceed 102 inches.
   (f)   A vehicle or farm tractor, farm implement or machinery shall not
extend beyond the centerline of a state trunk line highway except when legally
authorized by law. If the width of the farm implement or machinery would make
it impossible to stay away from the centerline, a permit shall be obtained.
   (g)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.717, MSA 9.2417.
Sec. 18-465. - Width of load carried on passenger-type vehicle.
   (a)   A passenger-type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a
load carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the
left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the right side of the vehicle.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.718, MSA 9.2418.
Sec. 18-466. - Height, length limitations generally.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a vehicle
unloaded or with load shall not exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches. The
owner of a vehicle which collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct
shall be liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by
the height of the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is
posted or not.
   (b)   A truck, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer manufactured on or
after July 27, 1978, shall not be used to transport flammable liquids, in bulk,
having a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, if the truck, truck
tractor, semitrailer, or trailer exceeds 11 feet, 8½ inches in height. However,
safety equipment and those appurtenances which are required by state law, when
added to a vehicle, may cause the vehicle height to exceed 11 feet, 8½ inches,
but shall not cause the vehicle height to exceed 13 feet, 6 inches. A person
who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (c)   A vehicle, except a truck tractor, trailer, or semitrailer, including
load, or articulated buses operated by a local public transit system shall not
exceed a total length of 40 feet. The total length of a semitrailer operating
in a truck tractor and semitrailer combination shall not exceed 53 feet,
including load. All semitrailers longer than 50 feet shall have a wheelbase of
40.5 feet plus or minus 0.5 feet, measured from the kingpin coupling to the
center of the rear axles or to the center of the tandem axle assembly, if
equipped with two axles. Articulated buses operated by a local public transit
system may operate with a maximum length of 65 feet. A combination of truck
tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck and semitrailer or trailer, or a
combination of truck tractor and two semitrailers, including load, shall not
exceed a total overall length of 59 feet, except as provided for on routes
designated and approved by the state transportation department and by local
authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction on which a person
may operate a combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer or a
truck tractor and two semitrailers, with no limit on the overall combination
length, if the length of each semitrailer or trailer including load does not
exceed 28½ feet or the overall length of the semitrailer and trailer or two
semitrailers, as measured from the front of the first towed unit to the rear of
the second towed unit while the units are coupled together, does not exceed an
overall length of 58 feet, including load. The state transportation department
and local authorities, with respect to highways under their jurisdiction, may
designate highways where the overall length of a truck and trailer or
semitrailer shall not exceed 65 feet. A truck tractor and semitrailer
combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be allowed
to operate with more than two axles on the semitrailer. All truck tractor and
semitrailer combinations with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall
travel exclusively on highways designated by the appropriate road authority.
City, village, or county authorities shall have the option of prohibiting stops
within their jurisdictions unless the stop occurs along appropriately
designated routes, or is necessary for emergency purposes or to reach shippers,
receivers, warehouses, and terminals along designated routes. A truck tractor
shall not haul more than one trailer and one semitrailer or more than two
semitrailers in combination at any one time, except that a farm tractor may
haul two wagons or trailers or garbage and refuse haulers may, during daylight
hours, haul up to four trailers for garbage and refuse collection purposes, not
exceeding in any combination a total length of 55 feet at a speed of not to
exceed 15 miles per hour. In determining the length of a vehicle or a vehicle
combination under this subsection, the length shall not be considered to
include safety and energy conservation devices including, but not be limited
to, impact absorbing bumpers, rear view mirrors, turn signals lamps, marker
lamps, steps and handholds for entry and egress, flexible fender extensions,
mud flaps, or splash and spray suppressant devices; load induced tire bulge;
refrigeration or heating units; or air compressors. A device shall be excluded
from a determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the
carrying of cargo. Semitrailers and trailers shall be measured from the front
vertical plane of the foremost transverse load supporting structure to the
rearmost transverse load supporting structure.
   (d)   If a combination of two semitrailers is pulled by a truck tractor, a
fifth wheel connecting assembly, which conforms with motor carrier safety rules
promulgated by the department of state police, pursuant to the motor carrier
safety act of 1963, as amended, shall be used on each semitrailer.
   (e)   A train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load
extending more than three feet beyond the front of the train of vehicles or
vehicle.
   (f)   A motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer whose frame or body extends
more than 36 inches beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches
above the roadway shall not be operated on the highways of this state unless
equipped with a fender or bumper on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The
bumper shall extend downward from the rear of the frame or body to within 30
inches of the roadway and be of substantial construction. In addition to the
requirements of subsection (g) of this section, no vehicle which is required by
federal law to have an underride guard of not more than 22 inches above the
roadway shall be operated upon the highways of this state without such an
underride guard.
   (g)   A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length
longer than 50 feet, whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches beyond the
rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the roadway, shall not
be operated on the highways of this state unless equipped with an underride
guard on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The underride guard shall meet
all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground
clearance of 22 inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on level ground.
      (2)   Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the
trailer on both left and right sides.
   (h)   A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length
longer than 50 feet shall not be operated on the highways of this state at the
times specified in MCL 257.684, MSA 9.2384, unless equipped with all of the
following lamps and reflectors, in addition to any other lamps and reflectors
required under this act:
      (1)   Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one on each
side of the semitrailer, located at one-half the distance from the front to the
rear of the semitrailer.
      (2)   Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of
the semitrailer, located at one-half the distance from the front to the rear of
the semitrailer.
      (3)   Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semitrailer, located
at one-half the distance from the front to the rear and as near to the top of
the semitrailer as practicable.
   (i)   A lamp required under subsection (h) of this section shall be lighted
at the times specified in MCL 257.684, MSA 9.2384, and shall be visible when
lighted at a distance of 500 feet from the side of the semitrailer on which it
is mounted. A reflector required under subsection (h) of this section shall be
visible at the times specified in MCL 257.684, MSA 9.2384, from all distances
from 50 to 500 feet from the semitrailer when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps.
   (j)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may
operate a combination of truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck
tractor and semitrailer or trailer designed and used exclusively to transport
assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles, or boats, which does
not exceed a total length of 65 feet. Stinger-steered combinations of truck
tractor and semitrailer shall not exceed a total length of 75 feet. The load on
the combination of vehicles may extend an additional three feet beyond the
front and four feet beyond the rear of the combination of vehicles. Retractable
extensions used to support and secure the load that do not extend beyond the
allowable overhang for the front and rear shall not be included in determining
the length of a loaded vehicle or combination of vehicles. As used in this
subsection, "stinger-steered" means a semitrailer combination in which the
fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the rearmost
axle of the power unit.
   (k)   A combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles.
   (l)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a number of
motor vehicles, wholly or partially assembled, may be transported over the
highways of this city in combination, utilizing one tow bar or three saddle
mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one of the
vehicles in combination. The combination may not exceed the maximum length of
65 feet for the transportation of assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in
the combination shall be adequately and securely fastened together in
compliance with regulations of the state and of any federal agency having
jurisdiction over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by means of
triple saddle mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all wheels
which are in contact with the roadway. A combination exceeding 55 feet in
length may be operated only on highways and routes approved and designated for
that operation by the state transportation commission and by the city engineer.
   (m)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may
operate a truck and semitrailer or trailer designed and used to transport saw
logs, pulpwood, and tree length poles that does not exceed an overall length of
70 feet including load. These combinations of vehicles shall only be operated
upon highways designated by the state transportation department or local
authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction.
   (n)   The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer
combination or a truck tractor and two semitrailers combination which exceeds
59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per engine net
horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in the SAE handbook
published by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., (1977).
   (o)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person who
violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.5, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.719, MSA 9.2419.
Sec. 18-467. - Protection of load; carrying logs or tubular products.
   (a)   A vehicle, except a commercial vehicle carrying logs or tubular
products, shall not be driven or moved on a highway unless the vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking, blowing off or otherwise escaping therefrom. The tailgate, faucets and
taps shall be securely closed to prevent spillage during transportation,
whether loaded or empty, and the body of the vehicle shall not have any holes
or cracks through which material can escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle
engaged in either ice or snow removal shall be exempt from this section.
   (b)   Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage
is not necessary to prove a violation of this section.
   (c)   A commercial vehicle carrying a load, other than logs or tubular
products, which is not completely enclosed shall either:
      (1)   Have the load covered with firmly secured canvas or a similar type
of covering. A device used to comply with this requirement shall not exceed a
width of 108 inches nor by design or use have the capability to carry cargo by
itself.
      (2)   Have the load securely fastened to the body or the frame of the
vehicle with binders of adequate number and of adequate breaking strength to
prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load.
   (d)   A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to
be loaded or unloaded, with knowledge that it is to be driven on a public
highway, in a manner as to cause a violation of subsection (a) of this section,
shall be prima facie liable for a violation of this section.
   (e)   A person shall not operate a motor vehicle carrying logs or tubular
products on a highway unless the following conditions are complied with:
      (1)   If the logs or tubular products are loaded crosswise or at right
angles to the side of the vehicle, the logs or tubular products shall be
securely fastened to the body or frame of the vehicle with not less than two
binders which are secured to the frame at each end of the load and pass over
the load so that the frame and binders completely encircle the load.
      (2)   If the vehicle is a truck or trailer carrying logs which has a
loading surface more than 33 feet in length and the logs are loaded crosswise
or at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be equipped
with a center partition located approximately one-half the distance from the
front to the rear of the loading surface of the truck or trailer. The center
partition shall be either a center mounted hydraulic loader or a center set of
stakes and shall be pinned, bolted, or otherwise securely fastened to the
frame. The load shall be secured as required by subsection (e)(1) of this
section and, in addition, the two lengthwise tiedowns shall be attached or
threaded through the center partition at a level not less than one foot below
the load height.
      (3)   If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the
vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, with metal stakes and pockets, the
load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
         a.   With two tiedowns from frame to frame for every tier.
         b.   So that not more than one-half the diameter of the top log or
tubular product extends higher than the stake tops.
         c.   With two cross chains per tier if the load extends more than five
feet above the loading surface.
         d.   So that every ten linear feet, and any remaining fraction
thereof, has not less than one tiedown from frame to frame.
      (4)   If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the
vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, with permanent metal gusseted
bunks, the load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
         a.   With two tiedowns from frame to frame for every tier.
         b.   So that not more than one-half the diameter of the top log
extends higher than the stake tops.
         c.   So that every ten linear feet, and any remaining fraction
thereof, has not less than one tiedown from frame to frame.
      (5)   The tiedowns, cross chains, stakes, and other materials used to
secure loads of logs or tubular products, as required under subsections (e)(1)
through (e)(4) of this section shall meet the following minimum requirements:
         a.   Chain shall be of steel and shall be of a strength not less than
5/16 inch in diameter "transport," which is embossed with a grade stamp
representative of grade 70, or not less than three-eighths inch in diameter
"high test," which is embossed with a grade stamp representative of grade 40.
Chain shall not be repaired by welding, wire, or cold shuts.
         b.   Wire rope shall be of improved plow steel and not less than
three-eighths inch in diameter.
         c.   Webbing strap shall be not less than three inches in width and
shall have a minimum breaking strength of 14,000 pounds.
         d.   Metal stakes shall be of sufficient strength to hold and contain
the load.
         e.   Connecting links and hooks shall be at least as strong as the
tiedown material used.
   (f)   Subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to a person operating a
vehicle to transport agricultural commodities in the normal operation of a
farm. However, a person operating a vehicle to transport agricultural
commodities in the normal operation of the farm who violates subsection (a) or
(d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in subsection (i) of this section.
   (g)   Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to a motor vehicle
transporting items of a load which because of their weight will not fall off
the moving vehicle and which have their centers of gravity located at least six
inches below the top of the enclosure, nor to a motor vehicle carrying metal
which because of its weight and density is so loaded as to prevent it from
dropping or falling off the moving vehicle.
   (h)   Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles
and other equipment engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street in
a designated work area.
   (i)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Cross chain" means a chain which extends through the load of logs
or tubular products and is connected at each end to a side stake.
      (2)   "Logs" means sawlogs, pulpwood, or tree length poles.
      (3)   "Tiedown" means a high strength material which is used to secure
the load of logs or tubular products to the frame or the bed of the vehicle.
      (4)   "Tier" means a vertical pile or stack of logs or tubular products.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.720, MSA 9.2420.
Sec. 18-468. - Trailers and towed vehicles.
   (a)   A passenger vehicle shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or
having attached to the passenger vehicle more than one vehicle or trailer.
   (b)   The drawbar or other connection between two vehicles, one of which is
towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in length
from one vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a chain, rope, or
cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a red flag or other signal
or cloth not less than 12 inches both in length and width.
   (c)   A vehicle or trailer drawn by a motor propelled vehicle shall be so
attached to the vehicle with forms of coupling devices which will prevent the
vehicle or trailer from being deflected more than six inches from the path of
the towing vehicle's wheels. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected to
the towing vehicle, by suitable safety chains or devices, one on each side of
the coupling and at the extreme outer edge of the vehicle, and each chain or
device and connection used shall be of sufficient strength to haul the trailer
when loaded.
   (d)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.721, MSA 9.2421.
Sec. 18-469. - Weight of axle loads; wheel load.
   (a)   The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds designated
in the following provisions which prescribe the distance between axles:
      (1)   When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the
maximum axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with
high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
      (2)   When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles but
more than 3½ feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 13,000 pounds for
high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
      (3)   When two axles are spaced less than 3½ feet apart, the maximum axle
load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
      (4)   Subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section shall be
known as the normal loading maximum.
   (b)   When normal loading is in effect, the state highway commission and the
city engineer may designate certain highways, or sections of those highways,
where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier loading, which
designation may be revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle assembly
loading shall not exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section on a legal
combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on
the designated highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds for a
tandem axle, and no other tandem axle assembly in the combination of vehicles
shall exceed a gross weight of 13,000 pounds for a tandem axle. When the
maximum gross weight of a combination of vehicles with load does not exceed
73,280 pounds, two tandem axle assemblies shall be permitted on the designated
highways at a gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds for a tandem axle.
   (d)   The normal size of tires shall be the rated size, as published by the
manufacturers and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel shall not
exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
   (e)   During the months of March, April, and May in each year, the maximum
axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavements with a concrete base,
shall be reduced by 25 percent from the maximum axle loads, as specified in
this division, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other types of roads
during these months shall be reduced by 35 percent from the maximum axle loads,
as specified. The maximum wheel load shall not exceed 525 pounds per inch of
tire width on concrete and concrete base or 450 pounds per inch of tire width
on all other roads during the period the seasonal road restrictions are in
effect.
   (f)   The state highway commission or county road commission, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, or the city engineer may suspend the
restrictions imposed by this section when and where in their discretion
conditions of the highways or the public health, safety, and welfare so warrant
and may impose the restricted loading requirements of this section on
designated highways at any other time that the conditions of the highway may
require.
   (g)   For the purpose of enforcement of this section, the gross vehicle
weight of a single vehicle and load, or a combination of vehicles and loads,
shall be determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the
total weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight.
   (h)   The state highway commission or the city engineer may designate a
highway, or a section of a highway, for the operation of vehicles which do not
exceed any of the following:
      (1)   Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle.
      (2)   A tandem axle weight of 34,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances.
      (3)   An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
equaling:
 
        (LN                )
W = 500 ( _____ + 12N + 36 )
        (N - 1             )
 
where W equals overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals distance in feet between the extreme of a
group of two or more consecutive axles, and N equals number of axles in the
group under consideration; except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each if the first and last axles of the
consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than 36 feet apart. The gross
vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances. Except for five axle truck tractor, semitrailer combinations having
two consecutive sets of tandem axles, vehicles having a gross weight in excess
of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross weight determined by
application of the formula in this subsection shall be subject to the maximum
axle loads of subsections (1), (2) and (3). As used in this subsection, tandem
axle weight means the total weight transmitted to the road by two or more
consecutive axles, the centers of which may be included between parallel
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches, but not more than 96
inches, apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
   (i)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck tractor
pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination shall not transport, except
between the hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m. on routes and at times designated by
the department of state police, a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit within a county having a
population of 600,000 or more. In addition, a truck, a truck pulling a trailer
or a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport, except between
the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m., on routes and at times designated by
the department of state police, a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, in a quantity of more than 9,000
gallons within a county having a population of 600,000 or more. The exceptions
provided by this subsection for transport on routes designated by the
department of state police shall be construed to permit that transport only for
the purpose of picking up or delivering a flammable liquid at a supply depot.
   (j)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck, truck
pulling a trailer, truck tractor pulling a semitrailer, or truck tractor
pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination shall not transport a flammable
liquid, in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit
within this city, unless the truck, truck and trailer combination, truck
tractor and semitrailer combination, or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer
combination meet safety standards, as determined by the state fire safety
board.
   (k)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck tractor
pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination shall not transport a flammable
liquid in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit within
this city.
   (l)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section other than
subsections (c) and (e) of this section, a truck with a water capacity of more
than 9,500 gallons, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer with a water capacity
of more than 9,500 gallons, a truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling
a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two
semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit in this state, unless the existing
manhole or inspection ports of each truck, semitrailer, or trailer in the
vehicle combination has been equipped with devices which are capable of
withstanding the forces caused by an internal pressure of 50 pounds per square
inch, applied and held at least 50 milliseconds, and then released to two
pounds per square inch, without having any residual venting of flammable liquid
during the subsequent two pounds per square inch condition.
   (m)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or a
truck tractor pulling a semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer combination, or
two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit in this state, if the truck or
semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer combination, or two semitrailers are
manufactured after July 1, 1982, or was manufactured before July 1, 1982, but
was not a vehicle registered in this state by the secretary of state at any
time between January 1, 1985, and October 1, 1985, unless the truck or the
semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer combination, or two semitrailers have a
water capacity of less than 13,800 gallons.
   (n)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck
tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk,
which has a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit in a quantity of more
than 13,400 gallons.
   (o)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck
tractor pulling a trailer or semitrailer, a semitrailer or trailer combination,
or two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has
a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, in a quantity of more than
13,400 gallons, unless the owner of the truck or truck tractor pulling the
trailer or semitrailer, combination semitrailer or trailer, or two semitrailers
files with the department of state police, within 60 days after the effective
date of this act, a notarized statement that the truck or truck tractor pulling
the trailer or semitrailer, semitrailer or trailer combination, or two
semitrailers did transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, having a flashpoint at
or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, at any time between March 1, 1985, and October
1, 1985. Attached to the notarized statement shall be one of the following:
      (1)   A copy of the bill of lading containing the date the flammable
liquid was transported and the permanent identification number of the trailer
or semitrailer in which the flammable liquid was transported.
      (2)   A copy of the daily log prepared by the driver of the vehicle
transporting the flammable liquid which contains the date the flammable liquid
was transported and the permanent identification number of the trailer or
semitrailer in which the flammable liquid was transported.
   (p)   The owner or driver of a vehicle which transports a flammable liquid
in violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $3,000.00 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
   (q)   Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section, a person who
violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
   (r)   This section shall be enforced only by a police officer.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.8, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.722, MSA 9.2422.
Sec. 18-470. - Identification of certain vehicles.
   (a)   All motor trucks or truck tractors, except as provided in subsection
(b) of this section, of more than 5,000 pounds registered weight and all towing
or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles in operation upon the public
highways of this state shall have the name, city, and state or the registered
logo or emblem of the registered owner of the vehicle and lessee of the
vehicle, if the vehicle is being operated under lease, painted or permanently
attached on each side of the cab on a motor truck or truck tractor in letters
of not less than three inches in height, not lower than the bottom edge of the
door, except that motor trucks with closed van bodies may place the information
on each side of the van body not lower than the bottom edge of the cab door.
This information shall be in sharp color contrast to the background.
   (b)   Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the
identification requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be met
through the use of removable devices which meet the requirements of subsection
(a) of this section. These devices shall be of durable construction and
securely attached to each side of the motor truck or truck tractor. The
removable devices shall be attached so that the identification is in a
horizontal position.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with
farm license plates.
   (d)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.9, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.723, MSA 9.2423.
Sec. 18-471. - Stopping vehicles for weighing.
   (a)   A police officer or a weights and measures inspector having reason to
believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful may require the
driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by means of either
portable or stationary scales, approved and sealed by state department of
agriculture as a legal weighing device, and may require that the vehicle be
driven to the nearest weighing station to determine whether the conveyance is
loaded in conformity with this division.
   (b)   When the officer or inspector, upon weighing a vehicle and load,
determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer or inspector may require
the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until
that portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross
axle load weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted under this chapter. All
material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle
at the risk of the owner or operator. A judge or magistrate imposing a civil
fine and costs under this section, which are not paid in full immediately or
for which a bond is not immediately posted in double the amount of the civil
fine and costs, shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at the
driver's own risk to a place of safekeeping within the jurisdiction of the
judge or magistrate, inform the judge or magistrate in writing of the place of
safekeeping, and there keep the vehicle until the fine or costs are paid or
sufficient bond furnished or until the judge or magistrate is satisfied that
the fine and costs will be paid. The officer or inspector who has determined,
after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful, may require the
driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the county. If the judge or
magistrate is satisfied that the probable civil fine and costs will be paid by
the owner or lessee, the judge or magistrate may allow the driver to proceed,
after the load is made legal. If the judge or magistrate is not satisfied that
the owner or lessee, after a notice and a right to be heard on the merits is
given, will pay the amount of the probable civil fine and costs, the judge or
magistrate may order the vehicle to be impounded until trial on the merits is
completed under conditions set forth in this section for the impounding of
vehicles after the civil fine and costs have been imposed. Removal of the
vehicle and forwarding, care, or preservation of the load shall be under the
control of and at the risk of the owner or driver. Vehicles impounded shall be
subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona fide lien of prior record, in
the amount of the civil fine and costs, and, if the civil fine and costs are
not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the judge or magistrate shall
certify the unpaid judgment to the prosecuting attorney who shall proceed to
enforce the lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in
the case of chattel mortgage foreclosures. When the duly authorized weights and
measures inspector is performing duties under this division, the inspector
shall have all the powers conferred upon peace officers by the general laws of
this state.
   (c)   An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator
who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved on a highway,
when the weight of that vehicle violates section
18-469, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil
fine in an amount equal to $0.03 per pound for each pound of excess load over
1,000 pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $0.06 per pound of excess
load when the excess is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pounds; $0.09 per
pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 3,000 pounds but
not over 4,000 pounds; $0.12 per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000 pounds; $0.15 per pound for each
pound of excess load when the excess is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000
pounds; and $0.20 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is
over 10,000 pounds. However, the court shall have discretionary power as to the
amount of the civil fine within the schedule provided by this subsection and
may impose the civil fine for a civil infraction where at the time of the
violation either the motor vehicle, motor vehicle and semitrailer, or trailer
did not exceed the total weight which would be lawful for each unit by a proper
distribution of the load upon the various axles supporting each unit.
   (d)   A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when
requested or ordered to do so by a police officer, or a duly authorized weights
and measures inspector authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the vehicle and load by means of a portable scale, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (e)   A driver or owner of a vehicle, truck or truck tractor, truck or truck
tractor with other vehicles in combination, or special mobile equipment who
knowingly fails to stop at or who knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing
station is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.724, MSA 9.2424.
Sec. 18-472. - Truck routes—Designation.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any truck, whether loaded or unloaded,
weighing more than 4,000 pounds, as determined by its certificate of
registration, to be operated or parked on any street in the city except those
streets hereinafter designated as "truck routes"; provided, however, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to trucks in excess of the weight
limit herein specified when the operation of such truck is necessary for the
purpose of making one or more deliveries or pickups of materials, manufactured
products, goods, wares or merchandise on streets other than those designated
"truck routes" in the city; provided further, that such operation shall be
permitted only for the shortest possible distance when necessary to effect such
delivery or pickups; provided further, that trucks operated by the city in
connection with the rendering of necessary service to the residents of the city
may be operated on any or all streets in the city; provided further, that all
trucks permitted to operate on streets other than the streets designated as
"truck routes" shall not be driven at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour
when operating on streets other than truck routes.
   (b)   A person who violates a prohibition or limitation established pursuant
to this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.12, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.726, MSA 9.2426.
Sec. 18-473. - Same—Enumeration.
   The streets referred to as truck routes in section
18-472 are hereby designated as follows:
   Brandt Avenue
   Butler Road, Schaefer to Greenfield
   Chase Road, Warren Avenue to Henn Street
   Dix Avenue
   Eagle Pass between Wyoming and Miller
   Edsel Ford Expressway, also known as Detroit Industrial Expressway
   Ford Road
   Greenfield Road
   Haggerty Avenue, Schaefer Road west to Maple
   Industrial Avenue
   Lonyo Avenue, Warren to south city limits
   Maple Avenue, Michigan to New York Central Railroad right-of-way
   Mercier Street between Wyoming and Robert
   Michigan Avenue
   Miller Road, south city limits to Warren
   Oakman Boulevard, Miller Road to Ford Road
   Oakwood Boulevard, Michigan to south city limits
   Outer Drive, Michigan to Park
   Park, Outer Drive to Geneva
   Robert Street between Eagle and Mercier
   Rotunda Road, between Miller Road and the former intersection with Village
Road
   Schaefer Road, south city limits to Michigan Avenue and Ford Road to north
city limits
   Schaefer Road, between Michigan Avenue and Ford Road, limited to four axles
   Southern Avenue
   Southfield Road
   Telegraph Road
   Tireman Avenue
   Warren Avenue
   Wyoming Avenue, Dix Avenue to Tireman Avenue
   Yinger Avenue, Tireman Avenue south to railroad
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.13, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 96-671, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 22-1759,
8-23-22)
Sec. 18-474. - Same—Posting.
   The streets designated in section
18-474 as truck routes shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon or at the
entrance to the street or highway or part thereof affected, with a suitable
sign indicating the words "truck route."
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-475. - Mobile homes.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, a person shall not
operate a towing vehicle, having attached a mobile home having a body length in
excess of 45 feet and having a combined length of over 60 feet, a realistic
body width of over 100 inches at base rail, and a height of over 12½ feet, on
the highways of this state. However, the jurisdictional authority may issue
permits to mobile home transport companies or to mobile home manufacturers or
dealers, for the movement, in the ordinary course of their business, of mobile
homes to a width of 14 1/3 feet, plus normal appurtenances not to exceed six
inches; of mobile homes to a realistic body length of 80 feet and having a
combined length of 95 feet; of combinations of prebuilt housing modules or
mobile homes having a total length not to exceed 80 feet and having a combined
length of 95 feet; of prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes to a width of 14
1/3 feet, plus an eave not to exceed two feet in width; or of prebuilt housing
modules or mobile homes to a width of 16 feet moved in the upper peninsula of
this state; over all highways, including interstate and defense highways.
Special permits for the movement of prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes,
whose width, including an eave of two feet, exceeds 14 feet and are transported
on interstate highways, may be issued on a single trip basis only in accordance
with MCL 257.725, MSA 9.2425. A prebuilt housing module or mobile home whose
width, including an eave of two feet exceeds 14 feet shall be moved only on the
lane furthest to the right of the operator of the vehicle moving the module or
mobile home and shall be moved in a manner so that the eave portion of the
module or mobile home shall overhang on the shoulder of the highway on which
the module or mobile home is moved. The permit shall provide the days and the
times of day, but not on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, or the noon before until
the noon after a holiday, during which the movement shall take place. The
permit shall be issued only upon the condition that the permittee comply with
permit requirements and limitations of law, to insure the operation of a mobile
home under permit in a manner which will not impede traffic on the highways and
with safety in the movement of a mobile home, and only at a safe speed and when
the pavement is not slippery. A mobile home that is 14 or more feet in width
shall not be moved when the wind velocity exceeds 25 miles per hour. On units
exceeding 80 feet in overall combination length, or 12 feet in overall width,
the permit shall provide that the mobile home be equipped with two flashing
amber lights on the rear of the mobile home and one flashing amber light on the
top of the towing vehicle. Signs with the words "oversize load" shall be
displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the back of the mobile
home. The signs shall be of durable material, in good condition, with black
lettering on interstate yellow background. Each letter shall be of block
lettering not less than 12 inches high at the front and not less than 16 inches
high at the rear of the unit. A vehicle escort shall be required on those roads
where the state police consider escort vehicles necessary for highway safety.
The distance between mobile home axle centers shall not be less than 34 inches.
The axles and tires shall meet standards established by the state
transportation department.
   (b)   As used in this section, "mobile home" means a prebuilt housing module
or a home which is designed to be transported by a motor vehicle upon a public
highway and designed, equipped, and used for sleeping, eating, and living
quarters, or is intended to be so used.
   (c)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 11.15, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.719(a), MSA 9.2419(1).
Secs. 18-476—18-495. - Reserved.
DIVISION 12. - MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES AND BICYCLES
Sec. 18-496. - Lease, sale or furnishing restricted.
   A dealer shall not rent, lease or furnish a motorcycle or motor driven cycle
to any person for use on public streets and highways who is not licensed to
operate a motor vehicle by the state, if a resident, and by the state of which
he is a resident, if a nonresident.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.251b, MSA 9.1951(2).
Sec. 18-497. - Responsibilities of dealer.
   The dealer shall maintain in safe operating condition all motorcycles and
motor driven cycles rented, leased or furnished by him. The dealer, his agents
or employees shall explain the operation of the motorcycle or motor driven
cycle being rented, leased or furnished and if such dealer, his agent or
employee believes the person to whom the motorcycle or motor driven cycle is to
be rented, leased or furnished is not competent to operate such motorcycle or
motor driven cycle with competency to himself and to the safety of persons or
vehicles on public streets and highways, he shall refuse to rent, lease or
furnish the same.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.2, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.251c.
Sec. 18-498. - Unauthorized transfer.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to whom a motorcycle or motor driven cycle
is rented, leased or furnished, to rent, sublease or otherwise authorize the
use of the motorcycle or motor driven cycle on public streets and highways to
any person who is not licensed to operate a vehicle in this state.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.3, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.251d.
Sec. 18-499. - Liability insurance policies.
   Any dealer renting, leasing or furnishing any motorcycle or motor driven
cycle shall carry a motor vehicle liability insurance policy of the same type
and coverage, as outlined in section 520 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL
257.520, as amended, for each motorcycle or motor driven cycle so rented,
leased or furnished or, in the alternative, demand and be shown proof that the
person renting, leasing or being furnished a motorcycle or motor driven cycle
carries a motor vehicle liability policy of at least the type and coverage as
aforementioned.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.251e.
Sec. 18-500. - Operator, passenger accommodations.
   (a)   A person propelling a bicycle or operating a motorcycle or motor
driven cycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto.
   (b)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (c)   No motor driven cycle shall be used to carry more than one person at
any one time.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.5(a)—(c), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-501. - Helmets.
   A person operating or riding on a motorcycle or motor driven cycle on a
public thoroughfare within the city shall wear a crash helmet on his head. The
crash helmet shall be approved by the department of state police. The
department shall promulgate rules for the implementation of this section in
accordance with the provisions of Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1943 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.5(d), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-502. - Operation regulations.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle, a motor driven cycle or a motorcycle
upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles, motor driven cycles or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of such vehicles.
   (c)   Whenever usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
   (d)   No person operating a motor driven cycle, a motorcycle or a bicycle
shall pass between lines of traffic, but may pass on the left of traffic moving
in his direction in the case of a two-way street, or on the left or right of
traffic in the case of a one-way street, in an unoccupied lane.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-503. - Control of handlebars.
   No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall carry
any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping both
hands upon the handlebars of such vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.7, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.661.
Sec. 18-504. - Minimum required equipment.
   (a)   Every bicycle when in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be
visible from all distances from 50 to 300 feet to the rear, when directly in
front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
   (b)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that such vehicles shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon such vehicles any siren or whistle.
   (c)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
   (d)   Any person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.8(a), (e), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-505. - Operations of bicycles on sidewalks.
   Persons may ride registered bicycles upon the sidewalks but shall give the
right-of-way to pedestrians, and shall give audible signal before overtaking
and passing such pedestrians, except in public parks and areas the director of
parks and recreation may by rule prohibit bicycles from being operated on
sidewalks or in areas where it would be unsafe for persons playing therein.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.8(b), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-506. - Attaching toy vehicles; unlawful riding.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled or toy vehicle, shall attach or hitch them or himself or
cling to any moving motor vehicle upon a roadway, and no person shall ride upon
the fender, running board or outside steps of any vehicle, or upon the frame or
tank of any moving vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.8(c), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-507. - Responsibility of parent, guardian.
   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
division.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 12.8, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.659 MCL 257.662.
Secs. 18-508—18-525. - Reserved.
DIVISION 13. - RAILWAYS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1495, adopted October 20, 2015, renamed division 13
from railway crossing as railways.
Sec. 18-526. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train.
   (a)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the following circumstances, the driver shall stop within
50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and
shall not proceed until he can do so safely:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train.
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train.
      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing gives a signal audible from such distance and the train, by
reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard.
      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 13.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.667.
Sec. 18-527. - Certain vehicles to stop at grade crossings.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section,
the driver of a motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, before crossing a
railroad track at grade, shall stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less
than ten feet or not less than fifteen feet in the case of a vehicle carrying
hazardous materials on which a placard is required to be posted pursuant to 49
CFR 171.100—171.199, from the nearest rail and, while stopped, shall listen and
look in both directions along the track for an approaching train and for
signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the
driver can do so safely. After stopping as required in this subsection, and
upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of the vehicle shall cross
only in a gear of the vehicle that does not require changing gears while
traversing the crossing. The driver shall not shift gears while crossing the
track or tracks.
   (b)   A stop need not be made at a railroad track grade crossing where a
police officer or a traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed.
   (c)   A stop need not be made at an abandoned railroad track grade crossing.
As used in this subsection, "abandoned railroad track" means a railroad track
which meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The track has been abandoned pursuant to state or federal law.
      (2)   The track has been covered or removed.
      (3)   All signs, signals, and other warning devices are removed.
   (d)   A stop shall not be made at a railroad track grade crossing on a
freeway or limited access highway where the crossing is protected by a clearly
visible signal, crossing gate, or barrier at a time when the signal, crossing
gate, or barrier is not activated.
   (e)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.669.
Sec. 18-528. - Unusually heavy, constructed vehicles at grade crossings;
procedures.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any caterpillar tractor, steam shovel,
derrick, roller, boiler, machinery, or any structure or object upon rollers or
any equipment or structure, which, because of the limited power thereof, or the
weight or character of the same or of the load thereon, shall have a normal
operating speed of four miles or less per hour, or which shall have a vertical
load or body clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of the
roadway upon or across any tracks of any steam railroad at grade level without
first complying with this section; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to the movement of electrically propelled cars on fixed rails nor to
their loads.
   (b)   Notice of such intended crossing shall be given to the nearest agent
or officer of such steam railroad in time to afford protection to its
locomotives, trains or cars at such crossing.
   (c)   Before making any such crossing the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than ten feet nor
more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of any such track and, while so
stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
   (d)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a
railroad train or car.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 13.9, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.670.
Sec. 18-529. - Trains blocking streets, highways.
   No railroad corporation or company operating a railroad in this state shall
permit its engines, cars or trains to obstruct any public street or highway for
a period longer than five minutes at any one time; nor permit successive train
movements to obstruct any vehicular traffic on any public streets or highways
until all vehicular traffic previously delayed by such train movements has been
cleared or a period of five minutes has elapsed between train movements. Any
railroad company, railway engineer or railway conductor violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or
by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in
the discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 13.10, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 466.22.
Sec. 18-530. - Loitering on railroad property prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall loiter on the premises of any railroad company or
about any railway cars, nor shall any person get on, under or between such
cars, except in the ordinary transaction of business.
   (b)   A violation of this section is a civil infraction subject to a fine of
$200.00.
(Ord. No. 15-1495, 10-20-15)
Secs. 18-531—18-550. - Reserved.
DIVISION 14. - PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 18-551. - Right-of-way at crosswalks.
   Where traffic control signals are in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to
yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. And
when any vehicle is stopped to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear, shall not overtake and
pass such vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-552. - Crossing at other than crosswalks.
   Pedestrians shall not cross the street or roadway at any point, other than
at the crosswalks at intersections. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian upon any street or roadway, and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon
observing any person, and especially a child or any confused or incapacitated
person upon a street or roadway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-553. - Use right half of crosswalk.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the
crosswalk.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-554. - Driving through safety zone.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not at any time drive through or over a safety
zone when such safety zone contains any person therein.
(Ord. No. 81-103, §13.4, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.666.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-555. - Handicapped persons; white canes.
   Blind persons or persons incapacitated to the extent that their movement on
foot is retarded shall be given the right of way over all vehicles and
pedestrians, by holding out horizontally a white cane in the direction they
desire to travel over crosswalks or sidewalks on any street in the city. The
use of white canes is hereby exclusively reserved to blind persons or other
persons incapacitated to the extent that their movement by foot is retarded.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-556. - Obedience to traffic control signals; pedestrian control
signals.
   (a)   Whenever special pedestrian control signals are not utilized, the
regular traffic control signals, as indicated in section
18-159, shall apply to pedestrians as follows:
      (1)   Green indication. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
      (2)   Steady yellow indication. Pedestrians facing such signal are
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any
pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
      (3)   Steady red indication. Pedestrians facing such signal shall not
enter the highway unless they can do so safely and without interfering with any
vehicular traffic.
      (4)   Red with arrow. Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the
highway unless they can do so safely without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.
   (b)   Whenever special pedestrian control signals are installed, they shall
be placed at the far end of each crosswalk and shall indicate a "walk" or
"don't walk" interval. These special signals shall apply to pedestrians only to
the exclusion of any regular traffic control signal or signals which may be
present at the same location.
      (1)   Walk interval. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across
the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way
by the drivers of all vehicles.
      (2)   Don't walk interval (steady burning or flashing). No pedestrian
shall start to cross the highway in the direction of such signals, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "walk" interval of
such signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "don't walk"
interval of the signal is showing.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.6, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.612, MSA 9.2312.
Sec. 18-557. - Duty at uncontrolled crossings.
   (a)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway when the pedestrian
is upon half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall
suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of
a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (b)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
   (c)   Before entering any street or roadway, a pedestrian must come to a
full stop at the curb or edge of the roadway and then look for oncoming
vehicles, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for a pedestrian to cross a
street against a red light or to cross a street at some place other than a
crosswalk so as to interfere with vehicular traffic, except that a pedestrian
is not required to make such stop when crossing with a green or "walk" signal,
or at the direction of a police officer. For additional rights and duties of
pedestrians see section
18-159.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-558. - Walking on highways.
   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for pedestrians to walk
upon the main traveled portion of the highway. Where sidewalks are not
provided, pedestrians shall, when practicable, walk on the left side of the
highway facing traffic which passes nearest.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.8, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Similar provision, MCL 257.655, MSA 9.2355.
Sec. 18-559. - Interference with flow of traffic.
   (a)   No person, without authority, shall block, obstruct, impede or
otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
upon a public street or highway in this city by means of a barricade, object or
device, or with his person. This section shall not apply to persons
maintaining, rearranging or constructing public utility facilities in or
adjacent to a street or highway.
   (b)   Subsection (a) and any provision of the Michigan Administrative Code
that prohibits a person from standing in a roadway other than a limited access
highway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or business from the
occupant of any vehicle do not apply to a person who is soliciting
contributions on behalf of a charitable or civic organization during daylight
hours, if all of the following are satisfied:
      (1)   The charitable or civic organization complies with applicable
regulations which include, but is not limited to, a resolution approving the
solicitation passed by the City Council.
      (2)   The charitable or civic organization maintains at least $500,000.00
in liability insurance.
      (3)   The persons soliciting contributions are 18 years of age or older.
      (4)   The persons soliciting contributions are wearing high-visibility
safety apparel that meets current American standards promulgated by the
International Safety Equipment Association.
      (5)   The portion of the roadway upon which the solicitation occurs is
not a work zone and is within an intersection where traffic control devices are
present.
   (c)   A local government or road authority that has jurisdiction over a
roadway upon which solicitation occurs as described in subsection (b) is not
liable for any claim for damages arising out of the use of the roadway as
described in subsection (b).
   (d)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (e)   As used in this section, "charitable or civic organization" means a
nonprofit organization that is qualified under section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4)
of the internal revenue code, 26 USC 501, or a veterans' organization that has
tax-exempt status under the internal revenue code.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 14.9, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 17- 1595, 9-12-17)
Secs. 18-560—18-575. - Reserved.
DIVISION 15. - VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Sec. 18-576. - Created; jurisdiction.
   There is hereby created and established under the supervision, direction and
control of the district judges of the city, a violation bureau, to be
administered by the clerk of the court and such deputy clerks as are designated
by him to assist with the clerical work, such violations bureau being hereby
authorized to handle all such minor ordinance violations which the judges may
designate, including traffic violations other than failure to stop in the event
of an accident, driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or
narcotics, reckless driving, or speeding in excess of 35 miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 15.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Authority to establish a parking violations bureau, MCL
600.8395, MSA 27A.8395.
Sec. 18-577. - Determination of fines.
   The district judges shall jointly from time to time determine a schedule or
amendments thereto setting forth the fines to be paid for minor violations of
any and all ordinances in the city, provided such fines, as so designated, do
not conflict with any of the provisions of the charter or the ordinances of the
city, and provided further such fines are within the limits established as
penalties under the law. Acceptance of the prescribed fine by the bureau shall
be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall
be given a receipt which so states.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 15.2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-578. - Duties.
   The following duties are hereby imposed upon the violations bureau:
      (1)   It shall accept designated fines and issue receipts.
      (2)   It shall receive appearances of persons who must or wish to be
heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket and
notify the arresting officer.
      (3)   It shall have no discretion for the determination of the guilt or
innocence of the person notified to appear before it, and shall have only the
right to receive a plea of guilty and to receive the fine therefor.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 15.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-579. - Records, reports.
   The violations bureau shall keep appropriate records and shall, on or before
the tenth day of each following calendar month, submit summarized monthly
reports to the controller, city treasurer, chief of police and to each judge of
all violation notices settled, of all fines collected by the bureau, and of the
final disposition or present status of every case of violation for which a
violation notice issued, during the calendar month covered by the report. Such
records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations, the total
number of each and the total fines received therefrom. The violations bureau,
through the clerk of the court, shall make a daily report and remittance to the
city treasurer of all such fines collected and received by it.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 15.5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-580—18-595. - Reserved.
DIVISION 16. - PENALTIES AND MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 18-596. - Penalties.
   (a)   Any provision of this chapter which describes an act or omission which
constitutes a civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code
shall be processed as a civil infraction, and any person found to have
committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more
than $100.00 and costs in accordance with section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle
Code.
   (b)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter not constituting a
civil infraction, as herein provided, shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 16.1, 11-4-81)
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 257.678, MSA 9.2378.
Sec. 18-597. - Opening door into roadway.
   No person shall open a door of a motor vehicle on the side facing the
traveled portion of the roadway in such a manner as to interfere with vehicles
lawfully proceeding on such public roadway.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 16.3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-598. - Splashing.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle recklessly,
willfully, wantonly or carelessly, or in such a manner as to splash snow, rain,
water, mud, dirt or debris on any person who is then upon a sidewalk,
crosswalk, safety zone or bus stop, or who is lawfully upon the surface of any
street.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 16.4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-599. - Hedges, plants or shrubs at intersections.
   (a)   No hedges, plants or shrubbery shall be allowed on private property,
including corner lots, adjacent to a public street or sidewalk in such a manner
so as to obstruct the view of any driver of a motor vehicle approaching a
street intersection or entering or exiting from a private or public driveway,
alley or apron leading to any street.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the police department or the department of
building and safety in such cases to order the owner of such hedge, plant or
shrubbery to cut the same within ten days to the maximum legal height of 36
inches above street level.
   (c)   If such owner shall fail to cut such hedge, plant or shrubbery to the
lawful height within ten days after having been notified so to do, the police
department or the department of building and safety shall report such failure
to the department of public works, who shall then cut such hedge, plant or
shrubbery to the height specified, and the cost of such work shall be levied
against such owners and shall be collected by special assessment.
(Ord. No. 81-103, § 16.5, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-600—18-615. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
DIVISION 1. - IDLING
Sec. 18-616.   Intent and Purpose.
   (a)   The City of Dearborn has determined that the unnecessary operation of
internal combustion engines poses a number of public health concerns. In
particular, airborne pollutants from engine emissions cause or aggravate
pulmonary diseases, including asthma, lung cancer, bronchitis, acute
respiratory infections, and emphysema. In addition to public health concerns,
idling engines also impose economic costs, including wasted energy, consumption
of non-renewable resources, and business and personal expenses for medical care
and loss of productivity due to pollution-related illness. Idling engines also
reduce citizens' quality of life due to noise, odor, and air pollution.
   (b)   The City has determined that unnecessary idling contributes to general
environmental degradation by emitting greenhouse gases, hydrocarbons, nitrogen
oxides, and particulate matter, and that City Council has determined that
although technological refinements have mitigated some of the adverse effects
of internal combustion engines, their use continues to increase and many older
engines continue in service, offsetting many of the benefits of new technology.
City Council recognizes that activities within Dearborn impact the environment
both locally and regionally.
   (c)   The City is committed to eliminating air toxins, criteria pollutants
and persistent bio-accumulative toxins, as well as eliminating net greenhouse
gas emissions and other destabilizing climate impacts.
   (d)   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate the operation
of internal combustion engines within the City of Dearborn in order to protect
public health and the environment, conserve energy and resources, promote
economic efficiency, and improve quality of life
(Ord. No. 22-1751, 7-12-22)
Sec. 18-617.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings described in this section:
   Commercial vehicle shall have the same meaning as in the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., as amended, means all motor vehicles used for
the transportation of passengers for hire; constructed or used for
transportation of goods, wares or merchandise; and/or all motor vehicles
designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry
any load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle
or load so drawn.
   Idle or Idling means to operate a motor vehicle's internal combustion engine
while the motor vehicle is stationary.
   Motor vehicle means any vehicle that is propelled by an internal combustion
engine, including but not limited to automobiles, motorcycles, buses,
recreational vehicles, trucks, tractors, earth moving equipment, hoists,
cranes, boats and other watercraft, snowmobiles, self-propelling lawnmowers,
and off-road vehicles. This definition of motor vehicle includes commercial
vehicles.
   Official traffic control device means a sign, signal, marking, or device,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   Operator means a person who has actual control of an internal combustion
engine.
(Ord. No. 22-1751, 7-12-22)
Sec. 18-618.   Regulation of motor vehicle idling; exceptions.
   (a)   No operator of a commercial vehicle shall cause or permit the
commercial vehicle to idle:
      (1)   For any period of time while the commercial vehicle is unoccupied;
or
      (2)   For more than 5 minutes in any 60-minute period while the
commercial vehicle is occupied.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit the motor vehicle
to idle within a posted “No Idling” zone designated by the Chief of Police or
designated pursuant to local, state, or federal law:
      (1)   For any period of time while the motor vehicle is unoccupied; or
      (2)   For more than 5 minutes in any 60-minute period while the motor
vehicle is occupied.
   (c)   Exceptions. Unless otherwise noted, the provisions of subsections (a)
and (b) of this section shall not apply in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Armored and mail delivery. An armored or mail-delivery vehicle
idles while in the course of business.
      (2)   Auxiliary and special equipment. Idling is necessary to power
auxiliary or special work equipment that is actively in use, including cargo
refrigeration units with perishable goods; waste collectors/compactors;
vehicles operating special equipment, such as lifts, winches, pumps,
compressors, drills, mixers, and safety and other construction equipment;
wheelchair lifts in buses, vans, or other motor vehicles that require engine
power to operate; “bucket” trucks that allow a worker to reach wires on a
telephone or utility pole or tree branches for trimming. Auxiliary work
equipment does not include equipment primarily intended for vehicle cabin
comfort, such as air conditioning, heating, radio, TV, or kitchen appliances.
      (3)   Diesel engines. When idling is necessary in the warm-up or cool
down of diesel engines in accordance with instructions from the manufacturer
for proper operation. This exception shall not apply if the vehicle in question
is parked or otherwise stopped in a “No Idling” zone designated pursuant to
this division.
      (4)   Emergency, law enforcement, and military vehicles. An emergency or
law enforcement vehicle, including police, fire, ambulance, public safety, and
military vehicles, or any vehicle being used in an emergency capacity, idles in
the course of or in preparation for its emergency or law enforcement duties.
      (5)   Maintenance, service, repair, etc. Idling is necessary for any
maintenance, service, repair, inspection, research and development, or
diagnostics.
      (6)   Mandated rest or sleep period. An occupied vehicle idles primarily
for purposes of air conditioning or heating during a legally mandated rest or
sleep period, if the vehicle has no functional alternative power source (e.g.,
an auxiliary power unit or generator), and it is not within 25 miles of a
parking facility with available truck stop electrification or shore power
compatible with the vehicle’s equipment. This exception shall not apply if the
vehicle in question is parked or otherwise stopped in a “No Idling” zone
designated pursuant to this division.
      (7)   Manufacture recommended. An engine is operated in accordance with
instructions from the manufacturer for proper operation.
      (8)   Other law. Applicable federal, state, or local law requires idling.
      (9)   Passenger transport. A motor vehicle designed to carry 16 or more
passengers idles to maintain comfortable cabin temperatures while non-driver
passengers are on board for up to 10 minutes before a scheduled embarkation.
      (10)   Remote start. Per MCL 257.676, a motor vehicle that is standing in
place and is equipped with a remote start feature, if the remote start feature
is engaged.
      (11)   School busses. When idling is necessary for school buses to
operate flashing lights or other safety equipment while picking up or dropping
off passengers.
      (12)   Security vehicles. A licensed private security provider idles a
vehicle in the course of performing security duties.
      (13)   Traffic conditions. When a motor vehicle is forced to remain
stationary because of an official traffic control device, direction of a law
enforcement officer, or traffic conditions beyond the operator’s control,
including but not limited to traffic congestion, railroad crossings,
construction zones, security checkpoints, and vehicle queues for drive-through
goods and services.
      (14)   Weather and comfort conditions.
         a.   Idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air
conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency for
human or animal occupants.
         b.   If idling is necessary to provide heat to an occupied motor
vehicle when the outside ambient temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit and
there is no accessible temperature- controlled area within a reasonable
distance; or idling is necessary to provide cooling within the cab of the
vehicle if the outside temperature is more than 80 degrees Fahrenheit and there
is no accessible temperature-controlled area within a reasonable distance.
         c.   Idling is necessary to power heaters or air conditioners to
maintain the comfort of vehicle occupants while waiting for assistance when a
vehicle is immobilized due to mechanical problems beyond the operator’s
immediate control.
(Ord. No. 22-1751, 7-12-22)
Sec. 18-619.   Regulation of generators and other internal combustion engines.
   (a)   Excluding motor vehicle, no internal combustion engine shall be
operated except when it is providing power or electrical energy to equipment, a
tool, a machine, or an appliance that is actively in use.
   (b)   This section shall not apply in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Engine operation is necessary to prevent a health or safety
emergency, or to provide power to a residence, business, or building due to a
power outage.
      (2)   Engine operation is necessary for any maintenance, service, repair,
inspection, research and development, or diagnostics.
      (3)   An engine is operated in accordance with instructions from the
manufacturer for proper operation.
(Ord. No. 22-1751, 7-12-22)
Sec. 18-620.   Penalties; repeat violation; rebuttable presumption.
   (a)   Each violation of this division shall be a civil infraction punishable
by a fine of $250.00, plus any additional costs or conditions imposed by the
court.
   (b)   An increased fine schedule shall be imposed for repeat violations of
this division. A repeat violation shall mean a violation committed within 30
days of an admission or determination of responsibility in court for a
violation of this division. The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall
be a civil fine of $500.00, plus any additional costs or conditions imposed by
the court.
   (c)   Where a responsible operator is not immediately apparent, there shall
be a rebuttable presumption of responsibility on the part of the person in
whose name the offending motor vehicle or engine is registered at the time of
the violation.
(Ord. No. 22-1751, 7-12-22)
Secs. 18-621 - 18-670. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PARKING LOTS
Subdivision I. - In General
Sec. 18-671. - Definition.
   For the purposes of this division, an "automobile parking lot" or an "open
parking station" shall be construed to be any plot, piece or parcel of land
used for the purpose of storing or parking more than two motor vehicles and
shall include such premises where shelters that are not completely enclosed are
erected. Such establishments shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   Class I. Such automobile parking lots wherein space is let leased
for a fee or other consideration for the storage or parking of more than two
motor vehicles.
      (2)   Class II. Such automobile parking lots that are maintained and
operated by any person in the city in connection with and for the benefit of
patrons or customers of any establishment, store, theatre, amusement, dance
hall, apartment, hotel or other business or enterprise.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-672. - License required for Class I.
   No person, except the city, shall maintain or conduct an automobile parking
lot or an open parking station within the city of Class I without first having
obtained a license therefor from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-673. - Permits required for Class I parking lots.
   (a)   Permits shall be obtained before starting work on development of all
Class I parking areas.
   (b)   The fees to be paid for permits shall be in accordance with chapter 9,
article XVI, section
9-262.
(Ord. No. 81-125, §§ 2a, 2b, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 07-1141, 11-5-07)
Sec. 18-674. - Application for license.
   (a)   Applications for licenses to conduct an automobile parking lot of
Class I shall be made by the persons intending to conduct such business upon
forms to be furnished by the city clerk, and shall set forth:
      (1)   The name under which and the place where the parking lot is to be
operated.
      (2)   Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation.
      (3)   If an individual, the name and business and residence address of
the applicant.
      (4)   If a partnership, the name, business and residence address of each
partner; if a corporation, the name, date and state under which such
corporation was organized, the amount and value of the capital stock, and the
names, business and residence addresses of the officers, managers in charge and
directors thereof.
      (5)   Whether the premises to be used as a parking lot are owned or
leased by the applicant, and, if leased, the name and address of each owner
thereof.
      (6)   The maximum number of motor vehicles which may at any one time be
stored upon the premises.
      (7)   The hours during which such motor vehicles may be stored thereon.
      (8)   A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing motor
vehicles.
   (b)   Such application shall be signed and verified under oath by the
applicant, if an individual or by a duly authorized agent, if a partnership or
corporation.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-675. - License, annual inspection fees.
   An annual license and inspection fee shall be paid to the city treasurer
prior to the issuance of any Class I license under this division as follows:
      (1)   Lots accommodating 10 cars or less ..... $ 10.00
      (2)   Lots accommodating 25 cars or less, but more than 10 ..... 20.00
      (3)   Lots accommodating 50 cars or less, but more than 25 ..... 50.00
      (4)   Lots accommodating over 50 cars shall pay $50.00, plus an
additional license fee for each car over 50 ..... 1.00
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-676. - Issuance of license.
   Each applicant for a Class I license under this division, together with all
employees and servants to be employed or subsequently thereto employed on the
licensed premises, shall, for the purpose of identification, be fingerprinted
at the record bureau in the police department and shall prior to issuance of a
license, pay the requisite fee to the city treasurer, whereupon the council may
grant a license to conduct an automobile parking lot if the chief of the police
department shall certify that the applicant is a fit and suitable person, which
license shall continue in full force and effect until 12:00 midnight following
the first Tuesday in May of each year, or until such license is revoked.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-677. - Entrance, exits, paving.
   Prior to the issuance of any license for a Class I parking lot, the building
and safety department shall cause an inspection to be made of the proposed
parking lot and shall certify that the entrances and exits thereto from the
public way have the proper curb cuts, and the space between the sidewalk and
curb, where it is adjacent to a concrete roadway, shall be paved with cement
concrete. In the case of Class I parking lots, the parking surface and aisles
shall be covered with a pavement of asphaltic or cement concrete and shall be
graded and drained to catch basins connected to the city sewer. Driving of cars
across curbs or sidewalks at any location other than a proper driveway entrance
or exit is prohibited at any time.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-678. - Signs required.
   Each Class I licensee shall maintain at the entrance to such automobile
parking lot a permanently affixed sign of sufficient size and suitable to
apprise persons using such parking lot of the name of the licensee, the hours
of the day and/or night during which such places are open for storing motor
vehicles, the rates charged and the closing hour of such parking lots.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 7, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-679. - Unauthorized operation of parked cars prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any Class I licensee, his agent, servants or
employees to drive, or suffer or permit to be driven by any other person, from
the licensed premises, any parked or stored motor vehicle without the consent
of the owner.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 8, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-680. - Claim checks.
   (a)   At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for storing or parking in an
open parking lot by a Class I licensee, the person conducting the same, his
agent, servant or employee shall furnish such person parking his motor vehicle
a distinctive check which shall be numbered to correspond to a coupon placed
upon such motor vehicle, which check shall contain the name and address of the
person owning or operating such open parking lot and upon which shall be
written or stamped the date and the license number of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   The above provisions shall not be applied where automobiles are stored
on a weekly or monthly fee basis.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 9, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-681. - Notification to police of claims.
   (a)   Each Class I licensee shall immediately notify the police department
of any claim made by reason of any loss, theft or conversion occurring upon his
premises or of any claim for damages arising from the operation of such parking
lot.
   (b)   The obligation created by this section of any person operating or
conducting an open parking lot, under the terms of this division to the owner
of a motor vehicle parked therein, is not extended beyond the regular posted
hours of attendance, as posted upon such open parking lot and printed upon the
regular receipt furnished to such motor vehicle owner.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 10, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-682. - Limitation of liability.
   No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation shall exempt any
person operating an open parking station of Class I from damage or loss caused
by the neglect of such person or any employee of such person, or while in the
employment of such person.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 11, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-683. - Revocation of license.
   The council may revoke any Class I license if at any time:
      (1)   A licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect
statement in the application.
      (2)   A licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances
a violation of any provisions of this division.
      (3)   A licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances
the violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft,
larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a motor vehicle
stored on such parking lot without the owner's consent; whether such licensee
or other person is convicted of such an offense or not.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 12, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-684. - Fire hazard prohibited.
   Class I parking lots licensed under this division shall be equipped with
proper fire extinguishing apparatus, subject to the approval of the fire
department. All motor vehicles shall be so stored that they may be readily
reached in case of fire or other emergency.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 13, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-685. - Dust control.
   Class I parking lot licensees shall keep the parking lot at all times free
from dust by frequent sprinkling with water or the use of calcium chloride or
other means so that the parking lot shall not become a nuisance to adjoining
property owners or others.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 14, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-686. - Vending of goods, wares or merchandise.
   No Class I parking lot licensee shall sublet, sublease or otherwise permit
any parking lot or any portion thereof to be used by any vendor of goods, wares
or merchandise or services for the conduct of such vendor's business, unless
the same is conducted in a permanent building or structure.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 15, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-687. - Regulation of class II parking lots.
   Automobile parking lots of Class II shall not need a license for their
operation or maintenance, but shall be subject to the following regulations,
failure to observe which shall subject violators to the penalties set forth in
section
1-9.
      (1)   A permit will be required and shall be applied for on forms to be
furnished by the department of building and safety.
         a.   A plot plan shall be submitted with the application which shall
show size of lot, property lines, street and alley lines, adjacent building
lines, location and size of entrances and exits and drainage facilities and any
other information pertinent to the construction.
         b.   The fees to be paid for permits shall be in accordance with
Chapter 9, Article XI, Section
9-262.
      (2)   Such parking lots shall be laned and provided adequate ingress and
egress for automobile parking so that in case of fire or other emergency each
vehicle may be easily reached or removed.
      (3)   Entrances and exits from such parking lots shall be only at
properly established curb cut driveways with paved cement concrete aprons from
sidewalks to curb. Driving of cars across curb or sidewalk, except at curb cut
driveways, is prohibited.
      (4)   The parking surface shall be covered with asphaltic or cement
concrete pavement and shall be graded so as not to drain on adjoining property
or across the city sidewalk. Parking lots will not be required to install
drainage facilities, provided such lots are accessible to the public alley
where drains or catch basins are available. Otherwise, it will be necessary to
install catch basins in parking lot area and connect to city sewer. Parking
lots located in industrial zones need not be paved but must be covered with a
base course of crushed stone, slag or gravel, rolled in place and finished with
a penetration type bituminous binder course.
      (5)   All parking lots shall be kept free from dust, ruts and pits and
shall have a seal coat applied wherever necessary.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 16, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 07-1142, 11-5-07)
Sec. 18-688. - Barriers.
   A barrier consisting of a concrete wall, precast concrete, or bituminous
curb of a steel guard rail not over 18 inches high above the grade, as
established by the city, shall be maintained on all parking lots between the
parking area and the side yards abutting any partition fence and along any part
of the area which abuts a public street or highway. All such barriers shall be
placed a sufficient distance from adjoining property lines to prevent car
bumpers from projecting over such property lines.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 6(a), 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-689. - Specifications for asphaltic concrete pavement.
   (a)   All pavement shall consist of a base course constructed of good
quality 100 percent crushed stone, 100 percent crushed slag or 100 percent
natural aggregate, uniformly spread upon a prepared subgrade and compacted with
a power roller weighing not less than eight tons to a minimum depth of six
inches after compaction.
   (b)   To the base course shall be applied a minimum thickness of two inches
of hot asphaltic concrete applied in two courses; a binder course of 9a or 25a
aggregate and a surface course of 31a aggregate. In the case of parking lots of
6,000 square feet or less, the asphaltic surface pavement may be placed in one
course of 1½-inch minimum thickness, using 31a aggregate. All materials,
methods of construction and mixing of asphaltic concrete shall be in accordance
with the standard specifications for parking lot construction of the city on
file in the city engineer's office and available there for public inspection.
The construction shall be subject to inspection by the division of building and
safety.
(Ord. No. 81-125, § 16(e), 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-690—18-705. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Shopping Centers
Sec. 18-706. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Duly posted regulations shall mean a sign or other traffic control device
shall be deemed duly posted in compliance with the requirement of this
subdivision if:
      (1)   Such sign or traffic control device is placed within the shopping
center parking area in a manner so as to adequately advise any person of the
restricted conduct and is of size and shape and contains lettering approved by
the police department.
      (2)   Such sign or traffic control device is placed within the shopping
center parking area after a request for such sign or traffic control device has
been made to the police department by either the owner or the person in charge
of the general operation and control of the parking area, and the police
department determines that such regulation is required by local conditions for
the safety and convenience of the public or the users of the shopping center.
      (3)   Such sign or traffic control device shall be purchased, installed
and maintained at the sole expense of the property owner.
   Parking area shall mean an area near or contiguous to a shopping center,
used by the public as the means of access to and egress from the stores and
business establishments at the shopping center and for the free parking of
motor vehicles of patrons of the shopping center.
   Shopping center shall mean a minimum area of three acres of land on which
there is located one or more stores or business establishments and where there
is provided a parking area.
(Ord. No. 81-110, § 1, 11-4-81)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 18-707. - Enforcement.
   The police department of the city shall enforce this subdivision and have
the power and authority to issue citations for any violation pursuant to this
subdivision.
(Ord. No. 81-110, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-708. - Unlawful acts.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a
shopping center parking area in violation of any of the following duly posted
regulations or operative control devices in the shopping center parking lot:
      (1)   Stop signs, yield signs or other traffic control devices erected at
specified entrance or exit locations to a shopping center or at any
intersection in the parking area.
      (2)   Directional signs prohibiting or regulating the turning of vehicles
or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other designated locations
in the parking area.
      (3)   Signs regulating the crossing of any roadway in the parking area by
pedestrians.
      (4)   Directional signs designating any separate roadway, drive or lane
in the parking area for one-way traffic.
      (5)   Signs prohibiting, regulating, restricting or limiting the stopping
or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
      (6)   Signs designating safety zones and other restricted area in the
shopping center.
      (7)   Signs prohibiting, regulating, restricting or limiting the flow of
traffic and/or parking in such shopping center parking area where such
prohibition, regulation, restriction, or limitation is reasonably required by
local conditions for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users
of the shopping center.
(Ord. No. 81-110, § 2, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-709—18-725. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Handicapped Parking
Sec. 18-726. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Duly posted regulations shall mean a sign or other traffic control device in
a parking area shall be deemed duly posted in compliance with the requirement
of this subdivision if:
      (1)   Such sign or traffic control device is placed within the parking
area in a manner so as to adequately advise any person of the restricted
conduct and is of size and shape and contains lettering approved by the police
department.
      (2)   Such sign or traffic control device is placed within the parking
area after a request for such sign or traffic control device has been made to
the police department by either the owner or the person in charge of the
general operation and control of the parking area, and the police department
determines that such regulation is required by local conditions for the safety
and convenience of the public or the users of the parking area. Such sign or
traffic control device shall be purchased, installed and maintained at the sole
expense of the property owner.
   Handicapped shall mean a person who has a physical characteristic
categorized as a handicap, which limits ambulation or necessitates the use of a
wheelchair for mobility, or a person who is blind.
   Handicapped parking space shall mean a parking space 12 feet wide, marked
off in traffic paint and inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol, or
a reasonable facsimile thereof. A sign located approximately six feet
abovegrade inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol, or a reasonable
facsimile thereof, shall identify the handicapped space and shall contain
notice of the possible fine for violation of the provisions of this subdivision
and a statement that a permit, certificate of identification or a special
registration plate, must be displayed.
   Parking area shall mean an area used by the public as a means of access to
an egress from, and for the free parking of motor vehicles by patrons of a
shopping center, business, factory, hospital, institution or similar building
or location.
   Shopping center shall mean a minimum area of three acres of private land on
which there is located one or more stores or business establishments, and where
there is provided a parking area.
(Ord. No. 82-262, § 1, 12-7-82)
Sec. 18-727. - Penalty.
   Except as otherwise provided, a person who violates this subdivision shall
be found to have committed a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil
fine of not more than $100.00. As part of the penalty imposed for violation of
this subdivision, the district judge shall order the certificate of
identification and/or special registration plate confiscated and returned to
the secretary of state, together with a certified copy of the sentence imposed.
(Ord. No. 82-262, § 4, 12-7-82; Ord. No. 96-668, 4-16-96)
Sec. 18-728. - Handicapper spaces.
   The city council shall provide, by local ordinance, for parking spaces
specifically designated for handicappers, in numbers to conform with the
requirements of MCL 125.1352, MSA 3.447(122), in each shopping center parking
area within its jurisdiction. If on March 30, 1979, a shopping center is in
compliance with a local ordinance relating to the number of parking spaces
which the shopping center is required to provide, the shopping center shall not
be held in violation of that ordinance if the designation of parking space
required by this section reduces the number of parking spaces below the minimum
number required by the local ordinance.
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.942a, MSA 9.2642(1).
Sec. 18-729. - Use of space; identification.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and this chapter, a
vehicle stopped or parked upon a highway or street shall be stopped or parked
with the wheels of the vehicle parallel to the roadway and within 12 inches of
any existing righthand curb.
   (b)   A local authority may by ordinance permit parking of vehicles with the
lefthand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the lefthand curb of a one-
way roadway.
   (c)   A local authority may by ordinance permit angle parking on a roadway,
except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state trunk line highway.
   (d)   The state transportation commission, with respect to state trunk line
highways, and the board of county road commissioners with respect to county
roads, acting jointly with the director of the department of state police, may
place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles on a highway where, in the opinion of the officials as determined by
an engineering survey, the stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those
using the highway or where the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would
unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic on the highway or street.
The signs shall be official signs, and a person shall not stop, stand, or park
a vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on the signs. The signs shall
be installed only after a proper traffic order is filed with the county clerk.
Upon the application to the state transportation commission by a home rule city
affected by an order, opportunity shall be given to the city for a hearing
before the state transportation commission, pursuant to the administrative
procedures act of 1969, as amended, except when an ordinance of the home rule
city prohibits or restricts the parking of vehicles on a state trunk line
highway; when the home rule city, by lawfully authorized official action,
requests the state transportation department to prohibit or restrict parking on
a state trunk line highway; or when the home rule city enters into a
construction agreement with the state transportation department providing for
the prohibition or restriction of parking on a state trunk line highway during
or after the period of construction. Traffic control orders, so long as they
affect parking upon a state trunk line highway within the corporate limits of a
home rule city, are considered "rules" and, upon application for a hearing by a
home rule city, the proceedings before the state transportation commission
shall be considered a "contested case" within the meaning of that act.
   (e)   A handicapper is entitled to receive, and the secretary of state may
issue, under the rules and upon the application as the secretary of state
prescribes, a serially numbered transferable certificate of identification for
the personal use of the handicapper. The rules shall provide that if the
handicapper personally applies at a branch office of the secretary of state and
if it appears obvious that the handicapper has a qualifying handicap, the
handicapper shall not be required to present a medical statement attesting to
the handicap. The secretary of state may issue a certificate of identification
valid for a period of not less than one month to a handicapper who has a
temporary handicap or a certificate of identification valid for at least four
years to a handicapper who has a permanent handicap. An original certificate of
identification issued to a handicapper with a permanent handicap shall expire
on the handicapper's fifth birthday after the date of issuance. A renewal
certificate issued to a permanent handicapper shall expire on the handicapper's
fourth birthday after its issuance. A person holding a certificate of
identification, at any time within 45 days before the expiration of his or her
certificate, may make application for a new certificate as provided for in this
section. However, if the person will be out of state during the 45 days
immediately preceding expiration of the certificate or for other good cause
shown cannot apply for a certificate within the 45-day period, application for
a new certificate may be made not more than six months before expiration of the
certificate. This new certificate, when granted shall expire as provided for in
this subsection. Upon application as prescribed by the secretary of state, a
handicapper may be issued a duplicate certificate of identification for a fee
of $10.00. The certificate may be used by a person other than the handicapper
for the sole purpose of providing transportation to the handicapper. An
organization which provides specialized services to handicappers may apply for
and receive a handicapper certificate of identification to be used in motor
vehicles used by the organization and used to transport handicappers who
receive services from the organization. If the organization ceases to provide
specialized services to handicappers, the certificate shall be returned to the
secretary of state for destruction.
   (f)   A handicapper holding a certificate of identification, a person having
special registration plates issued under MCL 257.803d, MSA 9.2503(4), a person
holding a special registration plate to which a handicapper tab is attached,
issued under section 803f, a handicapper holding a similar certificate of
identification from another state, or a person having special handicapper
registration plates from another state shall be entitled to courtesy in the
parking of a vehicle, including free parking in a metered parking space, which
courtesy shall relieve the handicapper or the person transporting the
handicapper from liability for a violation with respect to parking, other than
in violation of this act. A local authority may, by ordinance, prohibit parking
on a street or highway for the purpose of creating a fire lane or to provide
for the accommodation of heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours,
and the privileges extending to veterans and physically handicapped persons
under this subsection shall not apply on streets or highways where and at the
times the parking is so prohibited.
   (g)   A certificate of identification issued, as provided in subsection (d),
shall be displayed on the lower left corner of the front windshield of the
vehicle while being parked by or under the direction of a handicapper pursuant
to this section. Upon conviction of an offense involving a violation of the
special privileges conferred upon holders of the certificates of
identification, a magistrate or judge trying the case, as a part of any penalty
imposed, may confiscate the serially numbered certificate of identification and
return the certificate of identification to the secretary of state together
with a certified copy of the sentence imposed. Upon receipt of a certificate of
identification from a judge or magistrate, the secretary of state shall destroy
the certificate, and the handicapper to whom it was issued shall not receive
another certificate until he or she submits a completed application and
presents a current medical statement attesting to his or her handicap. A
person, other than a handicapper to whom the certificate of identification was
issued or a person who used a certificate of identification for the sole
purpose of providing transportation to a handicapper, who uses a certificate of
identification for the purpose of parking a vehicle as permitted by this
subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor, and a law enforcement officer who
observes this misuse of a certificate of identification may immediately
confiscate the certificate and forward it to the secretary of state, who may
return it to the handicapper.
   (h)   A person who intentionally makes a false statement of material fact or
commits or attempts to commit a deception or fraud on a medical statement
attesting to a handicap, submitted in support of an application for a
certificate of identification or a special registration plate or handicapper
tab under this section or section MCL 257.803d, f, MSA 9.2503(4), (6), is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
   (i)   A person who commits or attempts to commit a deception or fraud by one
or more of the following methods is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment not more than 30 days, or both:
      (1)   Using a handicapper certificate of identification issued under this
section or by another state to provide transportation to a handicapper, when
the person is not providing transportation to a handicapper.
      (2)   Altering, modifying, or selling a handicapper certificate of
identification issued under this section or by another state.
      (3)   Making a false statement of material fact to obtain a certificate
of identification under this section, a special registration plate or a
handicapper tab.
(Ord. No. 96-668, 4-16-96)
Secs. 18-730—18-745. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC VIOLATION NOTICES
Sec. 18-746. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Traffic violation notice shall mean a notice given by a member of the police
department to an alleged violator or attached to a parked vehicle, and which
can be disposed of in the violation bureau by payment of a prescribed penalty.
   Traffic violation summons shall mean a notice given by a member of the
police department to an alleged violator notifying such person to appear at the
court which has jurisdiction upon a date certain, and which notice cannot be
disposed of in the city violation bureau.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 1, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-747. - Form of notices.
   Traffic violation notice forms and traffic violation summons forms shall be
bound in books and shall be in a form prescribed by the chief of police and
corporation counsel. Books of notice forms and summons forms to be used for
traffic ordinance violations shall be provided by the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 2, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-748. - Records.
   The record bureau of the police department shall maintain a record of all
blank traffic violation notices and summonses in the possession of each and
every member of the police department.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 3, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-749. - Issuance.
   (a)   All traffic violation notices and traffic violation summonses shall be
issued in triplicate, one copy thereof shall be given to the violator or
affixed to his vehicle, as authorized by ordinance, and two copies shall be
filed in the record bureau of the police department.
   (b)   Within three days of the issuance of any such notice, the chief of
police, in the absence of any mitigating circumstances, shall cause to be filed
one copy with the violations bureau.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 4, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-750. - Payment of fines.
   Upon the issuance and filing with the violations bureau of any traffic
violation notice, it may be disposed of by payment to the traffic violation
bureau of the penalty prescribed for such alleged offense and in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 5, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-751. - Disposition.
   Upon the issuance and filing with the court of a traffic violation summons,
the same may be disposed of in the same manner as other complaints regularly
made in such court.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 6, 11-4-81)
Sec. 18-752. - Violations.
   Any person who cancels or in any manner disposes of any traffic violation
ticket or traffic violation summons in any other manner than as provided in
this division shall be guilty of a violation of this division; provided
however, that nothing contained in this division shall operate to preclude any
violator from his right of appeal or to pursue any remedy afforded by law.
(Ord. No. 81-131, § 7, 11-4-81)
Secs. 18-753—18-759. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - PAID PARKING
Sec. 18-760. - Installation and operation of parking meters.
   Parking meters shall be placed adjacent to each parking place. Each parking
meter shall display a signal that the adjacent parking space is or is not
legally in use. Each parking meter shall display, on deposit of a United States
coin of the denomination stated on the meter, a signal indicating legal parking
for that period of time which may be established for that area in which the
parking meter is installed and which is permitted for the deposit of the
specific coin inserted. Upon the expiration of the time limit the parking meter
shall indicate by a signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in
such cases, the right of the motor vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and
the person having control of the vehicle shall be subject to designated
penalties.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-761. - Space marking.
   The chief of police shall place or cause to be placed lines or marks on the
curb, street or other area about or alongside of each parking meter to
designate the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and no person
shall park or stand any vehicle across any such line or mark or park the
vehicle in such way that it will not be within the area so designated by the
lines or markings.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-762. - Parking by curb painted yellow.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle alongside any curb
painted yellow.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-763. - Time limits.
   (a)   The following time limits shall apply to parking spaces adjacent to
parking meters during the hours specified on the meters each day except Sundays
and holidays:
      (1)   Whenever a vehicle is parked in the space adjacent to a parking
meter, the operator of the vehicle shall immediately deposit or cause to be
deposited a coin of the United States in such parking meter of a denomination
specified on the parking meter except when the time on the meter has not yet
expired. He shall also place such meter in operation by turning or pressing any
lever, handle crank or other device provided upon such meter. Thereupon said
parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle only until the meter
indicates the time limit has expired.
      (2)   No person shall leave any vehicle in a metered space for longer
than the maximum time permitted by the meter. Each successive period of parking
longer than said maximum time period constitutes a separate offense. The time
limit is applicable regardless of whether or not the parking meter indicates
the time limit has expired.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-764. - Offenses.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metallic substitute for a United States coin.
      (2)   Remove, deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
   (b)   A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500.00 or both.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-765. - Gated parking facilities; failure to pay parking fee.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to enter a
gated facility without paying the parking fee if the facility is equipped for
payment of the fee on entering.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to enter a
gated parking facility without first obtaining a parking permit at the entrance
to the facility if the facility is equipped for such permit, which permit shall
indicate the time and date of entrance of the vehicle.
   (c)   If the facility is equipped for issuance of parking permits at the
entrance to that facility, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit a
vehicle to exit from the facility without first presenting said permit to the
attendant or inserting said permit in any device provided for measuring the
period during which the vehicle was parked.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-766. - Uses of entrance and exit.
   No person shall enter any municipal off-street parking lot over any area or
driveway or the portion between any curb returns which is not marked with the
work "entrance" or otherwise indicated by arrows, signs, or words that it is a
driveway or place for the entering of such parking lot.
   No person shall move any vehicle from any such parking lot into any public
way over any area except an area marked with the word "exit" or otherwise
indicated by arrows, signs, or words that it is a driveway or place for the
leaving of such parking lot.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-767. - Prima facie evidence; parking violators.
   In any proceeding for violation of the parking provisions of this division,
the registration plate displayed on such motor vehicle shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such motor vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the point where such
violation occurred.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-768. - Towing of vehicles.
   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking meter space
overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time established for such
space, or shall be found parked therein during any period when parking is
prohibited, or shall be found parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this division, the enforcing officer may serve upon the owner or operator of
such vehicle, or attach or fasten to such vehicle, a parking meter violation
notice; and may, in addition, cause such vehicle to be removed by, or under the
direction of, any person authorized to enforce this division by means of towing
the same, and such removal shall be at the risk and expense of the owner.
   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in a non-designated and/or
improper parking area, it shall be removed by, or under the direction of, any
person authorized to enforce this division by means of towing the same, and
such removal shall be at the risk and expense of the owner.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
Sec. 18-769. - Enforcement and penalty.
   (a)   The provisions of this division may be enforced by any police officer
and/or ordinance officer and/or private parking administrator so designated by
the chief of police.
   (b)   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
division or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this division for
which no other penalty is provided shall be responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 06-1085, 6-12-06)
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS
Sec. 18-770. - Parking in nearby residential areas to avoid paid parking.
   (a)   In order to protect nearby residential areas from the negative effects
of the parking of vehicles in those areas to avoid paid parking, a system of
residential parking permits shall be established. The goal of a system of
residential parking permits is to avoid the harm to residents that may be
caused by individuals attempting to avoid paid parking, not to grant any
additional privileges or entitlement to particular public parking spaces.
   (b)   Residential parking district shall be any public or private road and
private parking lot located within 1,500 feet of the downtown parking district.
The downtown parking district is defined as all of the business frontage north
and south of West Village Drive, Michigan Avenue, and Garrison between Oakwood
and Military. The downtown parking district includes all of the business
frontage south of Morley between Monroe and Mason. It also includes the city-
owned parking lot south of the railroad between Monroe and Mason.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to use the private parking of another business or
unmetered public streets in residential parking districts to avoid paid parking
when visiting, shopping, working, or recreating in the downtown parking
district.
   (d)   Downtown parking district. 
      (1)   A downtown parking district may contain multiple zoning
classifications; however, permit parking shall apply to public roads.
      (2)   Permits shall not be issued to businesses located within the
downtown parking district.
      (3)   Residential parking permits shall only be available to property
owners within residential A, B, C, D, E and residential preservation zoning
districts. However, residential parking permits will not be issued to property
within those zoning districts that are being used for office purposes.
   (e)   Residential parking permits; process. 
      (1)   Residential parking permits shall be available for vehicles owned
and operated by persons living full-time in the residential parking district.
      (2)   Residential parking permits shall be renewed annually.
      (3)   Residential parking permits are non-transferable and non-
assignable.
      (4)   A residential parking permit will be issued to a vehicle upon a
showing of the following:
         i.   Picture identification;
         ii.   Proof of residency in the residential parking district; and
         iii.   Vehicle registration.
      (5)   A maximum of four residential parking permits may be issued for a
dwelling zoned residential A or B and located in the residential parking
district. A maximum of two residential parking permits may be issued to the
occupant(s) of a dwelling zoned residential C, D, or E and located in the
residential parking district.
      (6)   A residential parking permit does not guarantee parking in any
particular location on the public street, but only reserves the right to park
on the public street during paid parking hours equal to the rights of any other
resident who lives in the residential parking district.
      (7)   If a resident requires more than four residential parking permits,
the resident may appeal to the parking advisory commission. An appeal for
additional residential parking permits will be considered only upon a showing
of the following:
         i.   The property provides the amount of off-street parking required
by the Dearborn Zoning Ordinance;
         ii.   Unique circumstances exist, and
         iii.   The resident demonstrates a critical need based on the lawful
use and occupancy of the property.
      (8)   Residential parking permits shall only be required during the hours
that paid parking is in effect.
      (9)   Temporary residential parking permits for guests may be obtained on
a daily or weekly basis so long as the total number of combined residential
parking permits and guest parking permits does not exceed six spaces on any
given day. Temporary residential parking permits are limited to four weekly
permits and 20 daily permits per year. Any resident requiring additional
temporary residential parking permits shall follow the appeal procedure set
forth in subsection (e)(7) above. An appeal for additional temporary
residential parking permits will be considered only upon a showing of the
following:
         i.   The occurrence of an event that does not exceed one day in
length; and
         ii.   The event at issue is one that is traditionally considered a
family event. This may include, but is not limited to: a birthday party,
graduation celebration, picnic, barbecue.
      (10)   Residences that have contracts for home health care or other
professional services on a regular basis may obtain a residential parking
permit for the individual providing those services upon a showing of the
following:
         i.   Proof of the contractual relationship, and
         ii.   The total number of permits issued to the residence shall not
exceed four.
   If the contract is for services provided one day per week, up to 52
temporary residential parking permits may be issued (an exception to subsection
(e)(9) above).
   If the contract is for services provided more than one day per week,
residential parking permit rules apply.
      (11)   This section shall not apply to commercial vehicles when the
parking of such is necessary for the purpose of making deliveries, picking up
persons, materials, goods, or merchandise, or providing service.
      (12)   There shall be no fee for residential parking permits or temporary
residential parking permits.
      (13)   Applications for parking permits may be obtained from the parking
office located in the east parking deck or on the city's web site. Completed
applications, along with supporting documentation, shall be delivered to the
parking office. Permits will be issued by the police department or its
designee.
      (14)   No provision in this section shall be interpreted to supersede
existing zoning laws.
      (15)   The requirements of this section shall be waived during any
special event sponsored by the city.
(Ord. No. 06-1086, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 06-1091, 8-7-06)
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES
Sec. 18-771. - Required.
   Every person who shall own any bicycle in the city shall register such
bicycle, as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 1, 7-15-80)
Sec. 18-772. - Application.
   The owner of a bicycle shall apply to the police department for registration
of such bicycle, and such registration shall be on a form furnished and
prescribed by the police department and shall provide a full description of
such bicycle, the former owner's name and the manufacturer's serial number.
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 2, 7-15-80)
Sec. 18-773. - Issuance of certificate.
   Upon registration of any bicycle, the owner thereof shall be given a
registration certificate. A duplicate of such certificate shall be kept in the
police department, and the owner shall preserve such certificate and present
the same upon demand of any officer of the police department to identify and
establish title to such bicycle.
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 3, 7-15-80)
Sec. 18-774. - Issuance of license.
   Upon registration of any bicycle, the owner thereof shall be furnished with
a license, the number of which shall correspond with the registration
certificate, such license to be permanently exhibited on the rear of such
bicycle.
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 4, 7-15-80)
Sec. 18-775. - Transfer.
   Any person owning a registered bicycle and desiring to sell or dispose of
same shall immediately execute the assignment upon the reverse side of the
certificate issued under this article and shall deliver the certificate to the
purchaser or recipient of such bicycle; such purchaser or recipient shall,
within five days from the assignment of such bicycle, re-register such bicycle
with the police department.
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 5, 7-15-80)
Secs. 18-776—18-795. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-578, adopted Dec. 21, 1993, repealed former art. V,
§§
18-796—18-803, 18-821—18-833, 18-851—18-883, 18-901—18-963, 18-981—18-987, 18-
1006—18-1009, which pertained to similar subject matter, and added a new art.
V, §
18-796, to read as herein set out.
State Law reference— Motor carrier safety act, MCL 480.11 et seq., MSA 9.1661
(1) et seq.
Sec. 18-796. - Motor carrier safety regulations; adoption by reference.
   The purpose of this article is to promote safety upon the public highways by
regulating the operation of certain vehicles, to establish the qualifications
of persons necessary for the safe operations of such vehicles, to limit the
hours of service of persons engaged in operating such vehicles, to require the
keeping of records of such operations, to provide for the assessment of fees,
and to provide penalties for the violations of this article. In so doing, Act
No. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, as amended by Act No. 339 of the Public
Acts of 1990, and Public Act 98 of 2000, are adopted by reference, as though
set forth herein in full.
   In adopting these Public Acts, where the term "department of state police"
appears, it refers to both the department of state police and to the Dearborn
Police Department, except in those sections referencing licensing, appeals or
waivers which fall under the sole authority of the department of state police.
(Ord. No. 93-578, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 06-1108, 12-4-06; Ord. No. 08-1168, 6-2-
08)
Secs. 18-797—18-809. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - WRECKERS; WRECKER AND TOWING SERVICES
Sec. 18-810. - Definitions.
   The following words, when used in this article, shall for the purpose of
this article, have the following meanings:
   Operator : Any person operating a wrecker or a towing vehicle for a wrecker
and towing service.
   Wrecker : Any motor vehicle adapted to or designed for towing, transporting,
conveying or moving any and all types of vehicles which are unable to be or
actually are not operated under their own power, such towing or transporting
being accomplished by means of lifting the towed vehicle totally or partially
off of the ground.
   Wrecker and towing service : The business of providing the services of one
or more wreckers for hire or use to tow, transport or move motor vehicles on
public streets.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-811. - Application of article.
   The operation of a wrecker or wrecker and towing service within the limits
of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-812. - Identification.
   Every wrecker shall be identified by letters showing the name under which
the wrecker and towing service is operated. Such identification shall be
clearly and permanently attached on both sides of the wrecker and shall be
visible at all times.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-813. - Duty of driver to clean streets when removing wrecked vehicle.
   Whenever any driver of a wrecker removes a motor vehicle from the scene of
an accident on a public street, it shall be his duty to simultaneously remove
and carry away from the public street all glass, metal and debris, which may
have been cast upon the street as the result of the accident or collision.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-814. - Required consent or authorization to remove vehicle from street.
   It shall be unlawful for any wrecker and towing service or operator to tow
or otherwise move a vehicle from any area or portion of a public street without
either the consent of the owner or custodian of such vehicle or authorization
by a policeman or other designated official of the city.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-815. - Required request to remove vehicle from private property.
   It shall be unlawful for any wrecker and towing service or operator to block
the movement of or tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any private road,
driveway of other privately owned land or property within the city except:
      (1)   When requested to do so by the owner or custodian of the vehicle.
      (2)   When specifically requested to perform such towing service by an
owner, his agent or licensee (other than the owner, employee or agent of the
wrecker and towing service) of the private property on which the vehicle is
parked.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-816. - Notice of police department when vehicle moved without consent
of owner or custodian.
   It shall be unlawful for any wrecker or towing service or operator to fail
to notify the police department within one hour of the removal of a vehicle
from public or private property, when such vehicle was removed without the
consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-817. - Blocking movement of vehicle by its owner or custodian.
   It shall be unlawful for a wrecker and towing service or operator to block
the movement of any vehicle, other than when on the property of the wrecker and
towing service, to prevent the movement thereof by its owner or custodian who
has appeared and desires to move the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-818. - Refusal to release vehicle prepared for towing from private
property.
   It shall be unlawful for a wrecker and towing service or operator to refuse
to release a vehicle to its owner or custodian after it has been prepared for
towing from any private property, provided that the vehicle has not yet been
towed onto a public street or highway, and further provided such owner or
custodian pays a service run fee, if demanded, of not more than the maximum
amount for such service authorized by the city council.
   For purposes of this section, "prepared for towing" means the attaching to
the vehicle of any device or object designed or intended to assist in the
moving of that vehicle.
   In the event that the owner or custodian of the vehicle demands its release
prior to the time it has been prepared for towing, it shall be unlawful for the
wrecker and towing service or operator to refuse to release the vehicle,
provided that the owner or operator promptly removes the vehicle from the
property where it is parked.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-819. - Maximum charges.
   (a)   The city council shall establish maximum service fees and charges for
wrecker and towing services involving the removal of vehicles from private
property at the direction of the property owner without the consent of the
owner or custodian of the vehicle. These fees and charges shall not apply to
the removal of commercial motor vehicles, as that term is defined in section
18-63.1 of this code, from private property at the direction of the property
owner without the consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle.
   (b)   A towing or wrecker service provider which removes a vehicle from
private property without the consent of the owner or custodian of that vehicle
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall, at the time it impounds the
vehicle, be open to the public 24 hours per day, seven days per week in order
to provide the owner or custodian of the impounded vehicle with an opportunity
to promptly reclaim the vehicle.
   (c)   A towing or wrecker service provider which removes a vehicle from
private property without the consent of the owner or custodian of that vehicle
shall accept any major credit card.
   (d)   A towing or wrecker service provider, or an employee of such a service
provider, who removes a vehicle from private property without the consent of
the owner or custodian of that vehicle, or which returns a vehicle which has
been prepared for towing from private property, shall provide a receipt when
payment in full for all charges due is received. This receipt shall contain the
following language in at least 11-point type: "The removal of vehicles from
private property, including all fees and charges related to that service, is
regulated by the City of Dearborn. Further information on these regulations and
on permitted fees can be obtained by calling the Dearborn Police Department at
(313)943-2240."
   (e)   Violation of this section constitutes a civil infraction punishable by
a civil fine of $1,000, plus costs imposed by the court. Increased fines shall
be imposed for repeat violations of this section by a person, agent,
partnership, corporation, association, company, or business.
      (1)   As used in this section, "repeat violation" means a violation
committed within six months of an admission or determination of responsibility
for a violation of this section committed by the same person, agent,
partnership, corporation, association, company, or business.
      (2)   The increased penalty for a repeat violation shall be a civil fine
of $2,500, plus costs imposed by the court.
   (f)   The chief of police, or their designee, shall review the maximum
allowable service fees and charges from other municipalities for wrecker and
towing services involving the removal of vehicles from private property at the
direction of the property owner without the consent of the owner or custodian
of the vehicle, and on an annual basis, provide a summary of their findings to
city council with a recommendation of whether the fees authorized under
subsection (a) of this ordinance should be amended.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06; Ord. No. 23-1784, 1-24-23)
Sec. 18-820. - Exception from sections 18-815 through 18-820.
   The provisions of sections
18-815 through
18-820 shall not apply when a wrecker and towing service or operator is acting
as an agent in a legal repossession of a vehicle.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Sec. 18-821. - Protection of impounded or stored vehicles and contents thereof;
insurance.
   (a)   Vehicles impounded, stored or held by a wrecker and towing service,
without the consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle or the direction
of the police, must be protected from theft, vandalism or damage of any type
and the wrecker and towing service operator or his employees shall do nothing
to render the vehicle inoperable other than to remove the ignition key and lock
the vehicle. Items of personal property in the vehicle, but not attached or
accessory thereto, shall be safeguarded and must be surrendered or delivered to
the owner or custodian of the vehicle upon demand or release of the vehicle.
The wrecker or towing service has no lien upon personal property not attached
to or accessory to the vehicle.
   (b)   Any wrecker and towing service doing business in the city shall
maintain a garage keeper's legal liability insurance policy with an occurrence
limit of not less than $35,000.00, in addition to any insurance required under
the laws of the State of Michigan.
(Ord. No. 06-1067, 4-3-06)
Secs. 18-822—18-849. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR VEHICLE CODE—ADOPTION BY REFERENCE
Sec. 18-850. - Code, amendments, and revisions adopted.
   The Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 et seq., and all
future amendments and revisions to the Motor Vehicle Code when they are
effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference.
(Ord. No. 10-1298, 10-25-10)
Sec. 18-851. - References in code.
   References in the Motor Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the
City of Dearborn.
(Ord. NO. 10-1298, 10-25-10)
Sec. 18-852. - Notice to be published.
   The city clerk shall publish this code amendment in the manner required by
charter and law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating that a
complete copy of the Motor Vehicle Code is available to the public at the
office of the city clerk for inspection.
(Ord. No. 10-1298, 10-25-10)
Sec. 18-853. - Penalties.
   The penalties provided by the Motor Vehicle Code are adopted by reference.
(Ord. No. 10-1298, 10-25-10)
Sec. 18-854. - MCL 257.625(1)(c); adoption by reference; penalty.
   (a)   MCL 257.625(1)(c), which prohibits a person from operating a vehicle
while having a bodily alcohol content (BAC) of 0.17 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine, is
incorporated and adopted by reference.
   (b)   A violation of this section is punishable by one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.
      (2)   Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.
      (3)   A fine of not less that $200.00 or more than $700.00.
(Ord. No. 12-1353, 3-27-12)
Chapter 19 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Charter reference— Department of public works, § 10.18.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; streets, sidewalks
and other public places, Ch. 17.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Director shall mean the director of public works.
   Premises shall include a lot or part of a lot, a building or a part of a
building, a structure, a project or any parcel or tract of land whatsoever, to
which water is being, or is to be, supplied.
   Private sewer means a drain or sewer that extends from the house or
commercial structure to the public sewer, including the wye and sewer tap.
   Public sewer means a common sewer controlled and maintained by a
governmental agency.
   Water supply system shall mean the feeder and supply mains, service pipes,
hydrants, meters and all their appurtenances, through which the city supplies
water to its consumers.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 03-986, 10-21-03)
Sec. 19-2. - Scope; enforcement.
   Every consumer of water, every owner, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any building, structure or premises having water service
from or through the water supply system shall be governed and be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations governing or
concerning the use of water as may, from time to time, be adopted. It is hereby
made the duty of the director of water supply to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and any rules and regulations that may be adopted.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 1, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-3. - Supervision, control of work.
   (a)   No water main shall be tapped, or service laid, within the street
boundaries by other than the duly authorized employees of the division of water
supply, and only under the authority of the director; provided, however, if a
labor or help shortage has been determined by the director to exist in the
division of water supply, the director in his discretion may authorize any
person qualified to do the work, to lay and install the service pipes and
connections within the street boundaries, subject to the supervision and
direction of the director or his assistant; provided further, that the work of
tapping the city water mains shall be done only by the division of water
supply.
   (b)   The person to whom permission is granted to connect to any service or
supply pipe under the provisions of this section shall see to it that the
service or supply pipe shall be turned off at the curb stop and such service
shall not be turned on until permission is granted by the division of water
supply.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 3, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-4. - Application for service.
   When the introduction of water service is desired from the water supply
system for any building, structure or premises and before any service pipe is
laid or any connection made with any service or supply pipes of the water
supply system, an application in writing shall first be made to the division of
water supply.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 3, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-5. - Water service to premises outside city limits.
   If the owner of premises situated outside, but adjacent to the corporate
limits of the city, may desire to connect such premises to the sewer facilities
of the city so as to dispose of the sanitary sewage originating on or in
connection with such premises, and if such premises are serviced by water mains
with meters attached which are under the control and supervision of the city,
such owner may apply for a permit to install or cause to be installed the
necessary tap and connection to such sewer and the disposal of the sanitary
sewage originating on or in connection with such premises under the following
terms and conditions:
   (1)   An application in writing shall be made therefor setting forth such
information as may be required by the terms of this chapter and by the
department of public works in the city.
   (2)   The applicant and all persons claiming to be owners or occupants of
the premises to be serviced by such sewer tap and connection shall specifically
agree that they will at all times be subject to and abide by the terms and
provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city, including the
zoning ordinance, building code and plumbing code, together with the reasonable
rules and regulations issued by the department of public works in the city
governing such sewer tap and connection, including the payment of the
established sewage disposal rates.
   (3)   The applicant shall pay a permit fee to the city in the amount of
$300.00 for each sewer tap for which application is made, in addition to the
cost of the service installation, at the time of making application for service
for each lot or part of lot to be serviced.
   (4)   The applicant and all persons claiming under or through him shall
further agree to and shall pay to the city quarterly and within 21 days after
the bill therefore is rendered by the city, a sewerage disposal fee based on
the amount of water consumed on such premises, as determined by the quarterly
reading of the water meter, such sewage disposal fee to be computed at the rate
of $50.20 per 1,000 cubic feet or fraction thereof, of water consumed, for all
bills rendered on or after the effective date of this section.
   (5)   No building, alteration or addition shall be permitted to be connected
to and serviced by the sewer herein authorized, unless such building is on land
adjacent to the corporate limits of the city and unless a special permit is
issued by the city for such sewer connection, and a permit fee is paid as
provided in subsection (3) of this section.
   (6)   The applicant and all persons claiming under or through him shall
further agree in writing that such applicant will, on demand of the city and
within six months after the time that facilities are available in the township
or other unit of government to the premises covered by such application for the
disposal of sanitary sewage originating thereon, discontinue the sewage
disposal service herein authorized and disconnect the sanitary sewer from the
city sewer.
   (7)   The applicant and all persons claiming under or through him shall
further agree in writing to submit the plans for any proposed building,
alteration or addition to be connected to the city sewer to the department of
building and safety in the city for its approval before any permit for sewer
tap is issued, and further agree that the department of building and safety be
allowed access to any of such buildings, as it may require from time to time
after construction is completed, to make inspections as to the quantity and
quality and sewage flow entering the sewer connection herein authorized.
   (8)   The city reserves the right to deny any application for sewer service
and facilities involving any property covered by this section, and further
reserves the right to decline to furnish a water supply to such premises and to
turn off the water supply if any of the charges for sewage disposal in this
section as set forth in this section, as well as the charges for the water
consumed on the premises, remain unpaid and delinquent for more than 60 days
after becoming due and payable.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 4, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 89-456, § 4, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 90-496,
6-19-90; Ord. No. 92-536, § 4, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 95-639, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 96-
679, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 97-706, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 98-726, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 99-
771, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 02-903, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 03-970, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 04-
1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 05-1046, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 06-1080 5-15-06; Ord. No.
07-1131, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 09-1230, 6-15-09; Ord.
No. 10-1273, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 11-1332, 6- 20-11; Ord. No. 12-1358, 6-12-12;
Ord. No. 13-1402, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 14-1427, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 15-1465, 5-19-
15; Ord. No. 16-1541, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 17-1580, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 18-1615, 6-
19-18; Ord. No. 19-1653, 6-18-19; Ord. No. 20-1685, 10-6-20; Ord. 21-1709, 6-
15-21; Ord. No. 22-1754, 6-15-22; Ord. No. 23-1790, 6-13-23; Ord. No. 24-1820,
6-11-24; Ord. No. 25-1841, 5-20-25)
Sec. 19-6. - Sewer disposal charge when water obtained from city.
   (a)   If the owner of premises situated outside, but which are abutting, the
corporate limits of the city receives the supply of water for such premises
from accessible city water mains, and the sanitary sewage from such premises is
not emptied directly into the city system but rather is emptied into the system
of an adjoining township or municipality and ultimately comes into the city
system for disposal, and if the cost for disposal of such sewage has not been
paid by such owner directly or indirectly to the city, the city shall collect
as a charge for such sewage disposal a sum based on the amount of water
consumed on such premises, as determined by the quarterly reading of the water
meter, such sewage disposal fee to be computed at the same rate per MCF and
with the same billing and equivalent meter charges as imposed on the residents
of the city.
   (b)   If such owner declines to pay the charge for sewage disposal, the
city, acting through the director of the water division, may discontinue and
cut off the supply of water being furnished to such owner.
   (c)   The department of public works is hereby authorized and directed to
issue a bill quarterly to every owner, as above described, for such sewage
disposal.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 5, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-7. - Service pipe specifications.
   All service pipe laid in the city shall be of not less than one inch
diameter, and all pipes of one-inch and two-inch diameter shall be of copper
tubing and of a quality to conform to the standards recommended by the United
States Bureau of Standards of the Department of Commerce for copper tubing for
water services, or any substitute approved by any government agency. All
service pipe over two-inch internal diameter shall be of cast iron and shall
conform to the specifications of the United States Bureau of Standards of the
Department of Commerce for cast iron pipe.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 6, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-8. - Prohibited connections, cross connections.
   In no case shall there be any connection between water pipes receiving their
supply from the city mains and pipes and pumps or tanks receiving their supply
from any other source. The use of such connection is prohibited whether or not
it is provided with one or more check valves.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 7, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-9. - Master plumber to make connections.
   No person shall make any attachment or connection with the pipes of the city
water supply system nor make any repairs, additions to or alterations of any
fixtures connected with the service pipes, unless registered as a master
plumber by the department of public works.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 8, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-10. - Suspension or revocation of master plumber's registration.
   The registration of any master plumber may at any time be suspended or
revoked by the director of public works for violation of any city rules,
regulations or ordinances. Plumbers must comply with such regulations as the
department of public works may adopt from time to time. No plumber shall allow
his name to be used by any other person for the purpose of doing work or
obtaining permits under his license.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 9, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-11. - Inspection of work.
   All work performed by plumbers under this chapter shall be subject to
inspection by the division of water supply, which has authority to order any
part of such work to be discontinued or changed in order that the same shall
comply with the regulations and requirements of the division of water supply.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 10, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-12. - Connection charges.
   (a)   The fees to be charged for water connection installations shall be
paid in advance to the city, and shall be in accordance with the following
schedule of service connection charges:
                                                                                                Large
                                                                                                Taps
                                                                                                (4" &
Size of Street Width 0'— Street Width 41' —65 Street Width 66' —85 Street Width 86' —11 above )
Service 40'                                                              0'                     (Tapping
                                                                                                Sleeve &
                                                                                                Valve
                                                                                                Only)
                                                                                                Large
                                                                                                Taps
                                                                                                (4" &
Size of Street Width 0'— Street Width 41' —65 Street Width 66' —85 Street Width 86' —11 above )
Service 40'                                                              0'                     (Tapping
                                                                                                Sleeve &
                                                                                                Valve
                                                                                                Only)
1"      $2,845             $3,930                 $4,050                 $4,200                 —
1 ½"   $3,225             $4,470                 $4,720                 $5,035                 —
2"      $4,475             $6,045                 $6,440                 $6,935                 —
4" x 4" —                —                    —                    —                    $6,100
S&V
4" x 6" —                —                    —                    —                    $6,235
S&V
 
4" x 8" —                —                    —                    —                    $6,300
S&V
4" x    —                —                    —                    —                    $6,645
12" S&V
6" x 6" —                —                    —                    —                    $6,515
S&V
6" x 8" —                —                    —                    —                    $6,625
S&V
6" x    —                —                    —                    —                    $7,015
12" S&V
8" x 8" —                —                    —                    —                    $7,215
S&V
8" x    —                —                    —                    —                    $7,925
12" S&V
12" S&V —                —                    —                    —                    $9,915
 
   (b)      (b)   1-inch, 1 ½-inch, and 2-inch taps. Taps will be measured from
the water main to the curb stop. The service will be installed from the water
main to the curb stop with a connection made to the service supplied by the
contractor for the structure at the same time
   (c)   Tapping sleeve and valves. Taps that utilize tapping sleeves and
valves will be tapped at the water main and will be available for the
contractor to connect to at that location.
   (d)   County and state road taps. Taps along all county and state roads
shall be completed by a contractor that shall be hired by the developer.
Tapping fees, engineering fees, restoration bonds, traffic control, and permits
along with all parts and materials will be the responsibility of the developer
and/or contractor. The following rates will apply to these taps:
      (1)   Tapping fee.
         a.   1" to 2" = $500.00.
         b.   3" and larger = $1,000.00.
      (2)   Inspection fee = $500.00.
      (3)   Restoration bond.
         a.   $1,000.00 (no pavement break).
         b.   $3,000.00 (with pavement break).
         c.   Unused restoration bonds will be refunded back to the developer
and/or contractor once final inspection is completed and the tap is accepted
and approved.
   (e)   The above listed rates shall be considered as the minimum price. When
the cost of making a service connection exceeds the minimum charge, a bill will
be rendered for the actual cost of labor and material, plus 25 percent, to
cover indirect costs and overhead. In no case shall the cost be less than the
minimum charge where such is established.
   (f)   All water connections in streets where it is necessary to break
pavement will be charged at the established rate plus:
      (1)   City streets ..... $ 1,445.00.
      (2)   State and county roads ..... $ 2,000.00.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 11, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 90-496, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 95-639, 7-5-
95; Ord. No. 96-679, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 99-771, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-
08; Ord. 21-1709, 6-15-21)
Sec. 19-13. - Repairs at expense of person receiving service; notice of
shutoff.
   Every person having service from the water supply system shall, at his own
cost and expense, keep in repair all service pipes, including private pipes
leading from the shutoff stop to the building or premises, and prevent all
waste of water from such pipes. If any such pipes be permitted to remain out of
repair, the division of water supply may, after two days' prior notice in
writing, shut off the water from such premises, and whenever the water is so
shut off, it shall not be permitted to be turned on again until such pipe have
been placed in proper repair. The notice herein provided for may be served by
personal service or by mailing to the owner or occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of the premises.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 12, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-14. - Repair of sewers and drains.
   (a)   [Notice to be given.] In all cases where private drains and sewers
shall be obstructed or damaged or shall cause the obstruction or damage to any
lateral or public sewer so as to produce, in the opinion of the city engineer,
a necessity for repair, the department of public works shall give notice to the
owners or parties in interest of the disrepair, and proceed as follows:
      (1)   The city shall make the repairs to the public or lateral sewers, or
public property damaged incidentally thereto, and shall be reimbursed for such
repairs in the manner provided below.
      (2)   If the owners or parties in interest of the private drains or
sewers fail to effect the necessary repairs to the private drains or sewers
within ten days of receipt of notice of disrepair, the city shall have the
right to enter on the premises of property connected with and serviced by the
private drains or sewers and cause the necessary repairs to be made. Such
expenses incurred for repairs shall be charged to the owners or parties in
interest of the properties connected with and serviced by such private drains
or sewers in a ratable proposition, and, if not paid, the same shall be
assessed against the premises connected with such drain or sewer as a special
assessment.
   (b)   Cost assessed to owners or parties in interest. A uniform cost for
sewer repair shall be established by the city engineer at the beginning of each
fiscal year. The uniform cost for sewer repair shall include the restoration of
the grounds after repair shall be required, including appropriate soil grading
and grass seeding where applicable, but the cost for such restoration shall be
excluded from the uniform cost calculation.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 12(a), 6-4-85; Ord. No. 09-1261, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 23-
1796, 9-12-23)
Sec. 19-14.5. - Payment for repairs; options.
   If the amount of the assessment shall be $250.00 or more, the property owner
shall have the option of paying such assessment in installments over a period
not to exceed five years, each installment to bear interest at a rate not to
exceed eight percent as determined by the city council, provided further, that
any annual installment not paid within 30 days shall be assessed against the
property as a special assessment in accordance with the provisions of chapter
15 of the Charter of the City of Dearborn. The provisions of this subsection
shall apply to residential, commercial and industrial property owners.
(Ord. No. 92-535, § 12(b), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 05-1045, 6-20-05)
Sec. 19-15. - Meters—Required.
   All connections with the water mains must be prepared for the use of water
through a meter. A suitable place shall be provided for the installation of
meters that will be agreeable to the division of water supply and that will
comply with the rules and regulations of the department of public works.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 13, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-16. - Same—May have single connection.
   Meters for terraces and apartment houses may have a single connection with
meter for all connecting houses, or separate connections to each.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 14, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-17. - Same—Meters purchased from city.
   (a)   The city will furnish the meters for all service connections at a cost
plus ten percent. The meter charge shall be paid at the time service
application is made and installed at the expense of the user. Such charges
shall be in lieu of a meter service charge. The control and ownership of all
water meters shall remain with the city at all times.
   (b)   More than one meter may be used for business property occupied by more
than one tenant; any additional meters shall be paid for by the property owner
and an agreement must be signed by the owner, holding the city harmless against
any damages incurred as a result of treating the property as an entirety,
should a shutoff be required to enforce the payment of rates.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 15, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-18. - Same—Removal; prohibition.
   All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a water meter from any
service connection without first receiving permission from the division of
water supply. Whenever a meter is removed by permission, it must be immediately
returned to the department under penalty of having the water shut off or the
plumber's registration canceled.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 16, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-19. - Same—Responsibility of owner.
   The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held
responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water,
and from injury of interference by any person. The owner of any premises where
a meter is installed shall be liable for the full replacement costs of any
five-eighths-inch, three-fourths-inch, one-inch, one and one-half-inch and two-
inch meter that has been damaged or lost. For meters larger than two inches,
the property owner shall be liable for applicable repair or replacement costs.
These charges will be applied to the water bill.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 17, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04)
Sec. 19-20. - Taking of water without permission.
   No person shall take water from any fire hydrant, valve, faucet, pipe or any
other opening connected with the water supply system, nor shall any person open
any such fire hydrant valve or faucet for the purpose of taking water, or for
any other purpose, unless such person shall first have made application for use
of water for such purpose and received permission from the fire department, or
unless such person is an employee of the city and is acting in the discharge of
his duties as such.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 18, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-21. - Lines for firefighting purposes.
   Fire lines in private property that are equipped with detector check meters
are to be used for firefighting purposes only. The quarterly water and sewage
billing for fire lines will be computed at the rate per MCF of water used, plus
the billing charge and equivalent meter charge based on the size of the water
service line instead of the size of the meter on that line except for
residential properties that do not exceed three stories in height where fire
lines are required. For those residential properties, the billing charge will
be computed based on the size of the back flow device on that line. If it is
found that the fire line is being used for any other purposes, without the
express permission of the water division, the owner of the premises shall be
subject to penalties provided for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 18, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 86-368, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 10-1263, 1-
5-10)
Sec. 19-22. - Supplying water to other premises prohibited.
   No person, whether owner or occupant, or in possession, charge or control of
any building, structure or premises, in which water service is introduced, or
to which waste is supplied through the water supply system, shall be allowed to
supply other persons or families or to supply any water from such building or
premises to a building, structure or premises other than the one for which such
water service is introduced, unless permitted to do so by the division of water
supply.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 19, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-23. - Service shutoff, turn on.
   Where the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall have
been shut off or stopped by or under the direction of the division of water
supply, or in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the water shall
not again be supplied to such building, structure or premises, or permitted to
be turned on therein, or thereto, unless a permit is first issued for that
purpose by the division.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 20, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08)
Sec. 19-24. - Severance of connection.
   (a)   If it shall be found that the water supply has been turned on or into
any such building, structure or premises, in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, the division of water supply shall have the authority to order
the severing of the service or supply pipes by and through which the water is
supplied to such building, structure or premises.
   (b)   Where service or supply pipes are severed, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, such severing or cutting off shall be done at the
water mains or as near thereto as practicable, and no water shall again be
supplied to such building, structure or premises, or be permitted to be turned
on therein or thereto, until the cost and expense of such severing, and also
any other unpaid rates that may be still outstanding, have been paid.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 20, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-25. - Right of entry; inspections; repairs.
   (a)   The officers of the division of water supply and any and every person
delegated or authorized by the director of water supply shall have free entry
and access to every part of any building, structure or premises being serviced
by the water supply system, whenever such entry or access is deemed necessary
or advisable. In case any person in possession, charge or control of any such
building, structure or premises, into which any such officer or person shall
desire entry or access, shall refuse to permit such entry or access, or shall
do or cause to be done any act or thing for the purpose of preventing such
entry or access, the division of water supply may turn off the service from
such building, structure or premises, until notice shall have been given the
division, in writing, that entry or access will be permitted or provided, and
until such entry or access has been accomplished.
   (b)   The division of water supply shall have the power and authority to
inspect and make an examination of all pipes and fixtures connected with the
city water system and shall have the power and authority to require any pipes
or fixtures to be repaired, removed, replaced or changed, where the same are
defective or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the
ordinances of the city or the rules and regulations of the division.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 21, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-26. - Obstruction to premises being serviced.
   No person shall in any manner obstruct, cause or permit to be obstructed,
access to any stop-cock, water meter, proportional, indicating or recording
device, Buffalo or shutoff box, or connection with any water main or service
pipe, by any means whatsoever, and if the owner or person in possession, charge
or control of such premises, after proper notifications, shall fail to remove
such obstruction, the division of water supply may withhold water service to
such building, structure or premises, until the obstruction shall be removed.
The division of water supply shall have the power to require that an outside
reading device be installed at the owner's expense if access to the water meter
is deemed hazardous to the representatives of the division of water supply.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 22, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-27. - Deductions or rebates prohibited.
   (a)   No deduction shall be made or rebate allowed to any consumer of water
by or on account of any leakage or alleged leakage in any water pipe, tank or
other apparatus or device, provided that the utility manager of the water and
sewer division, department of public works, may make an adjustment not to
exceed 50 percent of the amount of the leakage and for a period not to exceed
one quarterly billing, per calendar year. Such adjustments shall be made only
for the water portion of the bill, unless the consumer can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the utility manager that none of the water leakage entered the
sewer system. To become eligible for such adjustments, consumers must
demonstrate that the leak has been properly repaired.
   (b)   An adjustment in excess of 50 percent of the amount of the leakage
shall be at the discretion of the director of public works.
      (1)   The property owner must show the existence of extraordinary
circumstances not of the property owner's making or due to the failure of the
property owner to act.
         i.   "Extraordinary circumstances" shall not include ability to pay
but will include unusual circumstances or events that could not have been
avoided by reasonable action or behavior on the part of the water division
customer. Failure to observe an apparent defect or to mitigate such defect once
observed shall not constitute extraordinary circumstances.
      (2)   No further adjustment will be permitted.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 23, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 10-1278, 6-
21-10)
Sec. 19-28. - Rates, when payable.
   Water rates shall be paid quarterly. The following rates for water supply
and service shall be charged on all bills rendered on and after the effective
date of July 1, 2025.
   The rate for non-fireline accounts per MCF for water is $35.20 plus a
capacity charge of $18.72, per equivalent factor based on the meter size as
shown in the following schedule. The rate for fireline accounts per MCF for
water is $35.20, plus a capacity charge of $28.39 per equivalent factor based
on meter service size as shown in the following schedule.
THE RATE PER MCF FOR WATER IS $35.20 PLUS A CAPACITY CHARGE OF $18.72 PER
EQUIVALENT FACTOR FOR NON-FIRELINE ACCOUNTS. THE RATE PER MCF FOR WATER IS
$35.20 PLUS A CAPACITY CHARGE OF $28.39 PER EQUIVALENT FACTOR FOR FIRELINE
ACCOUNTS. THE RATE PER MCF FOR SEWER IS $50.20 PLUS A CAPACITY CHARGE OF $44.44
PER EQUIVALENT FACTOR BASED ON THE METER SIZES AS SHOWN IN THE FOLLOWING
SCHEDULE. These rates will be effective on all bills rendered on or after July
1, 2025.
Calculation of Quarterly Water Capacity Charge, Water Basic Service Charge and
Sewer Capacity Charges, Based on Meter Sizes
                                                                                   Quarterly
                                                               Minimum             Basic     Quarterly
Water                                                          Quarterly Quarterly Service   Basic
Meter Equivalent Quarterly Water Capacity Charge × Equivalent Water     Sewage    Charges   Service
Sizes            Factor                                        Basic     Capacity  Water and Charges
                                                               Service   Charge    Sewer     Water
                                                               Charge              Non-      Fireline
                                                                                   Fireline
                                                                                       Quarterly
                                                                   Minimum             Basic     Quarterly
Water                                                              Quarterly Quarterly Service   Basic
Meter     Equivalent Quarterly Water Capacity Charge × Equivalent Water     Sewage    Charges   Service
Sizes                Factor                                        Basic     Capacity  Water and Charges
                                                                   Service   Charge    Sewer     Water
                                                                   Charge              Non-      Fireline
                                                                                       Fireline
Meter                                                                                  Column C
Size      FACTOR     $18.72                                        $0.00     $44.44    + Column  $28.39
                                                                                       E
5/8 MAG   1          $18.72                                        $0.00     $44.44    $63.16    $28.39
3/4       1          $18.72                                        $0.00     $44.44    $63.16    $28.39
1         2          $37.44                                        $0.00     $88.88    $126.32   $56.78
1½       4          $74.88                                        $0.00     $177.76   $252.64   $113.56
2         7          $131.04                                       $0.00     $311.08   $442.12   $198.73
2 × 5/8  7          $131.04                                       $0.00     $ 311.08  $442.12   $198.73
3         16         $299.52                                       $0.00     $ 711.04  $1,010.56 $ 454.24
3 × ¾   16         $299.52                                       $0.00     $ 711.04  $         $ 454.24
                                                                                       1,010.56
4         25         $468.00                                       $0.00     $         $         $ 709.75
                                                                             1,111.00  1,579.00
4 × ¾   25         $468.00                                       $0.00     $         $         $ 709.75
                                                                             1,111.00  1,579.00
4 × 1    25         $468.00                                       $0.00     $         $         $ 709.75
                                                                             1,111.00  1,579.00
6         50         $936.00                                       $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             2,222.00  3,158.00  1,419.50
6 × 1    50         $936.00                                       $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             2,222.00  3,158.00  1,419.50
6 × 3 × 50         $936.00                                       $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             2,222.00  3,158.00  1,419.50
8         80         $ 1,497.60                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             3,555.20  5,052.80  2,271.20
8 × 2    80         $ 1,497.60                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             3,555.20  5,052.80  2,271.20
8 × 4    80         $ 1,497.60                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             3,555.20  5,052.80  2,271.20
8 × 4 × 80         $ 1,497.60                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             3,555.20  5,052.80  2,271.20
8 × 6 × 80         $ 1,497.60                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             3,555.20  5,052.80  2,271.20
10        115        $ 2,152.80                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             5,110.60  7,263.40  3,264.85
12        155        $ 2,901.60                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             6,888.20  9,789.80  4,400.45
16        285        $ 5,335.20                                    $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             12,665.40 18,000.60 8,091.15
24        600        $ 11,232.00                                   $0.00     $         $         $
                                                                             26,664.00 37,896.00 17,034.00
 
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 24, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 91-517, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 92-536, § 24,
7-21-92; Ord. No. 95-639, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 96-679, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 97-706, 6-
17-97; Ord. No. 98-726, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 99-771, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 00-822, 6-
20-00; Ord. No. 01-853, 6-28-01; Ord. No. 02-903, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 03-970, 6-
17-03; Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 05-1045, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 06-1080,
5-15-06; Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 09-
1230, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 10-1273, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 11-1332, 6-20-11; Ord. No.
12-1358, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 13-1402, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 14-1427, 5-20-14; Ord.
No. 15-1465, 5-14-15; Ord. No. 16-1541, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 17-1580, 5-23-17;
Ord. No. 18-1615, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 19-1653, 6-18-19; Ord. No. 20-1685, 10-6-
20; Ord. 21-1709, 6-15-21; Ord. No. 22-1754, 6-15-22; Ord. No. 23-1790, 6-13-
23; Ord. No. 24-1820, 6-11-24; Ord. No. 25-1841, 5-20-25)
Sec. 19-29. - Sewage treatment rates.
   (a)   Volume of flow. The charges for sewage treatment shall be based upon
water consumption, as indicated on the water bill and shall be billed
quarterly. Such rates shall be computed on the basis of $50.20 per MCF of water
used and a quarterly basic service charge of $44.44 per equivalent factors
based on meter size as shown in the schedule in section
19-28. These rates will be effective on all bills rendered on or after July 1,
2025.
   (b)   Industrial waste control (IWC) and high strength surcharge. In
addition to the aforementioned volume of flow rate of $50.20 per MCF, specific
industrial and commercial firms identified by the Great Lakes Water Authority,
and contributors of certain pollutants in concentrations which exceed normal
sewage, will be surcharged quarterly. The surcharge rates established and
adopted by the Great Lakes Water Authority shall be passed through to the
identified industrial and commercial firms with the same impact and effective
dates as adopted by the Great Lakes Water Authority.
   (c)   Industrial waste control charge. In addition to the aforementioned
volume of flow rate and the high strength surcharge, specific industrial and
commercial users identified by the Great Lakes Water Authority will also be
charged an industrial waste control charge.
   (d)   Nonresidential flow surcharge. For funding of the activities of the
industrial waste control section, a monthly charge shall be assessed. The
surcharge rates established and adopted by the Great Lakes Water Authority
shall be passed through with the same impact and effective dates as adopted by
the Great Lakes Water Authority.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 25, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 91-517, § 25, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 92-536,
§ 25, 7-21-93; Ord. No. 95-639, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 96-679, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 97-
706, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 98-726, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 99-771, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 00-
822, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 01-853, 6-28-01; Ord. No. 02-903, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 03-
970, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 05-1045, 6-20-05; Ord. No.
06-1080, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08; Ord.
No. 09-1230, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 10-1273, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 11-1332, 6-20-11; Ord.
No. 12-1358, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 13-1402, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 14-1427, 5-20-14;
Ord. No. 15-1465, 5-14-15; Ord. No. 16-1541, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 17-1580, 5-23-
17; Ord. No. 18-1615, 6- 19-18; Ord. No. 19-1653, 6-18-19; Ord. No. 20-1685,
10-6-20; Ord. 21-1709, passed 6-15-21; Ord. No. 22-1754, 6-15-22; Ord. No. 23-
1790, 6-13-23; Ord. No. 24-1820, 6-11-24; Ord. No. 25-1841, 5-20-25)
Sec. 19-30. - Delinquent bills, enforcement.
   (a)   All bills due under this chapter which have not been paid on or before
due date shall be declared delinquent. A penalty of ten percent shall be
charged on all delinquent water bills. The director of water supply may cancel
or waive the penalty only on water bills in the following instances:
      (1)   One penalty may be canceled in any one fiscal year on any one
account or premise to which water is supplied and metered, when it
affirmatively appears that payment of any bill has been made before the due
date to any agent authorized by the city to receive payment of such bill, but
which was not recorded as having been paid until after the due date.
      (2)   When it affirmatively appears that through faulty mail service or
other causes beyond the control of the consumer, a water bill was not received
by a consumer.
   (b)   If the water charges, together with unremitted penalty against any
premises, remain delinquent for a period of one month, the water supply to such
premises may be shut off and withheld until the payment of such delinquent
charges is made.
   (c)   For the purpose of collecting water rates, the director of public
works may, by rules and regulations, create as many districts in the city as he
may deem necessary.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 26, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 00-822, 6-20-00)
Sec. 19-31. - Exemption of sewage disposal charge.
   Upon proper showing to the division of water supply, exemption of the sewage
disposal charge will be made on water delivered through a metered line where
the entire amount of water delivered through such line is used for such
purpose, and in such a manner as to establish beyond a reasonable doubt the
fact that the water so taken does not enter the sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 26(a), 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-32. - Lien; assessment.
   (a)   All water and sewage charges shall be assessed against the premises to
which service is provided and shall be a lien upon the premises from and after
the date the water service is provided, in accordance with provisions of Act
No. 178 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 123.161 et seq.), as
amended.
   (b)   All such charges which become and remain delinquent for a period of
one month or more as of January 31 of each year shall be certified forthwith to
the city assessor by the director of water supply. The certificate shall set
forth a list of all water and sewage charges due and unpaid and all interest
and penalties as of January 31 of the prior year.
   (c)   The city assessor shall enter the amount of each such delinquent water
and sewage assessments, together with 25 percent transfer fee upon the general
city tax roll covering the premises upon which water and sewage charges have
accrued, and such charges shall be collected and such lien shall be enforced in
the same manner as provided for the collection of the general city taxes
assessed on such rolls and the enforcement of the lien therefor.
   (d)   Any residential property owner who is 65 years or older and who meets
the poverty threshold as defined and published by the Bureau of the Census may
elect to have delinquent water and sewage assessments, together with 25 percent
transfer fee, enforced as a lien upon the premises to which the service is
provided. However, tax foreclosure in accordance with state law will not be
prevented.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 27, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 10-1278, 6-21-10)
Sec. 19-33. - Service shutoff, turn-on charge.
   Whenever the water is turned off from any premises at the request of the
owner or because of a violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
city by the owner or occupant thereof, the same shall not be turned on again
until the owner has deposited with the division of water supply the sum of
$50.00 to cover the labor cost, and in cases where extraordinary labor is
required, such additional sum as will compensate for such additional labor.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 28, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-
16-08)
Sec. 19-34. - Meter reading; accounts.
   The division of water supply shall have charge of the reading of all meters
and shall keep a record of all meter readings. It shall keep accounts of the
charges for water furnished to all premises, whether upon a meter or flat rate,
and shall render bills for same. All water charges shall be collected by the
city treasurer. A service charge of $35.00 will be rendered on all final read
bills produced by the water division.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 29, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 12-1352, 3-6-12)
Sec. 19-35. - Rules and regulations.
   Subject to the approval of the mayor, the director of public works shall
from time to time establish all necessary rules and regulations in respect to
the use and operation of the water system of the city, in accordance with the
provisions of the charges and of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 85-326, § 30, 6-4-85)
Sec. 19-36. - Outside meter reading devices.
   (a)   Every building in the city, shall, to the extent possible, have an
automatic radio transmitted meter reading device or meter. The cost of
installing each automatic radio transmitted meter reading device or meter shall
be billed to the occupant or owner as shown on the records of the water
division. Any bill not paid upon installation of the device or meter, shall be
billed with the water bill. Any installation bill that remains unpaid shall be
assessed on the general city tax roll, together with a 25% transfer fee.
Installation of an automatic radio transmitted meter reading device or meter
shall be treated by the department of public works, water division, as a
capital improvement. Any resident or person refusing an automatic radion
transmitted reading device must allow the installation of an exterior and
accessible manual reading port for directly interrogating and obtaining the
meter reading and will be charged an additional $35.00 per quarter manual meter
reading fee, to be billed on their quarterly water bill.
   (b)   Any person who refuses the city, its water officers, or its
contractors, access to any premises for the purpose of installing, inspecting,
maintaining, reading, or replacing reading devices or meters, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. The property owner will be responsible for any charges
related to repair or replacement of any reading devices, or wiring connecting
the device to the meter, that becomes damaged or is missing. Additionally, a
violation of this section may result in an order from the department of public
works, water division, to discontinue water service to the subject premises.
   (c)   The requirements for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the
department of building and safety shall include the installation of an
automatic radio transmitted meter reading device or meter.
(Ord. No. 93-582, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 19-1670, 1-14-20)
Sec. 19-37. - Hydrant relocation.
   A $2,300.00 hydrant relocation service fee shall be required from any
property owner or contractor requesting the relocation of a city fire hydrant.
The relocation of a public fire hydrant can only be requested in the case of
remodeling an existing structure or new construction. Any relocation of a
public fire hydrant must be approved by the fire department, the engineering
division of the department of public works, and the water/sewerage division of
the department of public works, and meet all existing standards and
requirements of the city codes, city ordinances, and fire protection codes.
This fee is to be paid upon receipt of the application for relocation.
(Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08)
Sec. 19-38. - Hydrant thawing.
   Any person requesting thawing of a privately owned fire hydrant shall pay a
$500.00 fee.
(Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04)
Sec. 19-39. - Off-duty emergency calls.
   At the discretion of the water/sewerage division of the department of public
works, an additional fee of $100.00 shall be charged for all residential and
commercial after hours service calls made Monday through Saturday.
   At the discretion of the water/sewerage division of the department of public
works, an additional fee of $125.00 shall be charged for all residential and
commercial after-hours service calls made on Sundays and holidays.
(Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08)
Sec. 19-40. - Failure to appear for scheduled appointments.
   Persons who fail to appear for a scheduled appointment shall be charged a
fee of $25.00.
(Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04)
Sec. 19-41. - Service disconnections/reconnections of existing water service
lines.
   A $500.00 fee shall be charged for disconnecting five-eighths-inch to two-
inch service lines.
   A $650.00 fee shall be charged for disconnecting three-inch or larger
service lines.
   All disconnections requiring pavement removal shall include a pavement
replacement charge of $1,445.00 for city streets and/or $2,000.00 for state and
county roads.
   All reconnections shall be treated as new taps with related procedures and
charges.
(Ord. No. 04-1006, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 09-1230, 6-15-
09; Ord. No. 22-1755, 7-12-22)
Sec. 19-42. - Protection of landlord, notice of lease, and security deposit.
   (a)   If the owner of a premises which receives water services provided by
the city shall lease such premises to a tenant who is responsible under the
lease for the payment of the charges for water services accruing subsequent to
the filing of an affidavit by the property owner with the department of public
works, said affidavit to affirm the execution of such a lease containing a
provision regarding the tenant's responsibility for payment of the charges for
water and sewer services and to contain a notation of the expiration date of
the lease, then the charges for water and sewer services provided to such
premises shall not become a lien against the premises after the date such
affidavit is received by the department of public works. The property owner
shall give to the department of public works 20 days notice of any
cancellation, change in, or termination of the lease.
   (b)   Immediately after the filing of such affidavit, the department of
public works shall render no further service to the premises until it receives
from the tenant, or an individual or entity acting on behalf of the tenant, a
cash deposit or surety bond equivalent to eight times the then current
quarterly basic service and capacity charges for water and sewer that would be
applicable to each specific property. Any account that is the subject of an
executed affidavit will be turned off for non-payment whenever the account
status indicates a delinquent or past due balance.
   (c)   No deposit shall bear interest. Each deposit, or any remaining
balance, shall be returned to the person whom the city, in its discretion,
determines is entitled to the deposit when the water service is discontinued to
the particular premises. Water service to the premises shall not be reinstated
until any required deposit has been replenished in its original amount. Any
deposit which remains unclaimed for one year after notification or attempted
notification by the city shall revert to the city general fund.
(Ord. No. 14-1426, 5-20-14)
Sec. 19-43. - Establishment of Local Water System Advisory Council.
   (a)   Intent. Pursuant to the Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, being 1976
PA 399, MCL 325.1001 to 325.1023, the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, on June 14, 2018 promulgated new Regulation 325.10410(7), which
requires "each water supply that serves a population of 50,000 or more" to
create a Water System Advisory Council to, inter alia, coordinate public
awareness campaigns concerning lead in drinking water and to collaborate with
local community groups to ensure that residents have the opportunity to be
involved in efforts to educate the community about lead in drinking water.
   (b)   Establishment and operation of Water System Advisory Council. The
Dearborn Water System Advisory Council ("Advisory Council") is hereby
established. The Water System Advisory Council shall operate as follows:
      (1)   The Advisory Council shall consist of at least five members, one of
whom is appointed by the Dearborn City Council, and other four being appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by Dearborn City Council. To be eligible for
appointment to the Advisory Council, an individual shall have a demonstrated
interest in or knowledge about lead in drinking water and its effects. At least
one member must be a local resident who does not formally represent the
interests of any incorporated organization.
      (2)   The business that the Advisory Council may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting and held in compliance with the open meetings
act, 1976 PA 267, MCL 15.261, et.seq.
      (3)   The first meeting of the Advisory Council shall be convened by the
Mayor. At the first meeting, the Advisory Council shall elect from its members
a chairperson, secretary and other officers as it considers necessary or
appropriate. After the first meeting, the Advisory Council shall meet annually
at a date and time established by the Advisory Council.
      (4)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained
by the Advisory Council in the performance of an official function is subject
to the freedom of information act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231, et. seq.
      (5)   The Advisory Council shall do the following:
         a.   Develop plans for continuing public awareness about lead in
drinking water, even when the "action level", i.e., the concentration of lead
or copper in water as specified Michigan Administrative Rule 325.10604f(1)(c),
is not exceeded;
         b.   Review public awareness campaign materials provided by the
statewide drinking water advisory council to ensure that the needs and
interests of the community, considering the economic and cultural diversity of
its residents, are addressed;
         c.   Advise and consult with the city on the development of
appropriate plans for remediation and public education to be implemented if a
lead action level is exceeded;
         d.   Advise and consult with the city on efforts to replace private
lead service lines at locations where the owner declined lead service
replacement;
         e.   Assist in promoting transparency of all data and documents
related to lead in drinking water within the city water supply service area;
         f.   Collaborate with local community groups to ensure that residents
have the opportunity to be involved in efforts to educate the community about
lead in drinking water;
         g.   The Advisory Council may independently seek advice, direction and
assistance from the MDEQ or the statewide advisory council.
(Ord. 18-1633, 1-15-19; Ord. No. 19-1660, 9-10-19)
Secs. 19-44—19-55. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WATER
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 19-56—19-65. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTIONS
Sec. 19-66. - Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is to promote and protect the public health,
safety and welfare by the prevention and elimination of cross connections which
have been recognized as the cause of public health problems due to the hazard
caused to drinking water quality.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 2, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-67. - Scope.
   The provisions of this division shall control all matters concerning the
inspection, detection, prevention and elimination of cross connections in
certain new and existing commercial and residential facilities.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 3, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-68. - Construction.
   This division shall be legally construed in such manner as to best
effectuate its purpose. The provisions of this division shall be construed, if
possible, in such manner as to make such provisions consistent with each other
and likewise with all future ordinances of the city, and all amendments
thereto; provided, however, that where any inconsistency or conflict cannot be
avoided, then the most restrictive of such inconsistent or conflicting
provision shall control and prevail.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 4, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-69. - Enabling authority.
   This division is adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 5 of Act No.
399 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 325.1001 et seq., MSA 14.427(1)
et seq.), as amended, and Administrative Rules, Part 14, R325.11401—325.11407,
as amended.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 5, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-70. - Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Authority shall mean the health officer, director or cross connection
control official or their respective agents.
   Backflow shall mean water of questionable quality, wastes or other
contaminants flowing into a public water supply due to a reversal of flow.
   Cross connection shall mean a connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which a backflow could occur.
   Cross connection control official shall mean the legally designated person
whose duty it is to perform periodic inspections of premises within the city
for detection of cross connections.
   Eminent hazards shall mean, in the judgment of the authority, there is a
violation or a condition which may cause a violation of this division at a
public water supply connection requiring immediate action to prevent
endangering the health of the people.
   Nuisance shall mean the maintenance of a condition or activity upon private
property or publicly owned property which endangers the public health or safety
and includes all conditions and activities which violate state and local health
statutes and ordinances.
   Owner shall mean any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof.
      (2)   Shall have charge, care, possession or control of any premises,
dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.
   Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this division and of rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
   Pipings shall mean water conveying water pipes, appurtenances, and related
or connected devices, equipment or facilities.
   Plans and specifications shall mean drawings, data and true description or
representation of an entire waterworks system or parts thereof as it exists or
is to be constructed, and a statement on how a waterworks system is to be
operated.
   Potable water shall mean water free from impurities present in amounts
sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its
bacteriological and chemical qualities shall conform to the requirements of the
Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, being Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1976 (MCL 325.1001 et seq.), as amended.
   Premises shall mean a tract of land including any buildings or structures
thereon.
   Safe air gap shall mean the minimum distance of a water inlet or opening
above the maximum highwater level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or
container to which public water is furnished which shall be at least two times
the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; which shall not be less than one
inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
   Seal shall mean a device installed by the authority so as to prevent the use
of piping, equipment facilities or appurtenances which would be a violation of
this division.
   Secondary water supply shall mean a water supply system maintained in
addition to a public water supply system, including but not limited to water
systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of the
Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, being Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1976 (MCL 325.1001 et seq.), as amended, or water from a public
water supply which in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any
possible contaminant or stored in other than an approved storage facility.
   Submerged inlet shall mean a water pipe or extension thereto from a public
water supply system terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which
may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant which is
unprotected against backflow.
   Water utility shall mean a governmental unit, municipal or private
corporation, association, partnership or individual engaged in furnishing water
to the public for household or drinking purposes.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 6.1-6.19, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 20-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-71. - Application to new, existing buildings.
   The requirements of this division shall pertain to both existing and newly
constructed buildings.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 20, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-72. - Conflict of laws.
   Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to nullify any provision
of the plumbing code of the city or any other statute or legally adopted
ordinance or code of the city. In any case where a provision of this division
is found to be in conflict with a provision of any state statute or any other
legally adopted ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the people shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 26, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-73. - Conflicts of interest.
   (a)   The cross connection control official shall refrain from any
transaction which may directly or indirectly result in the following:
      (1)   The hiring for employment of the cross connection control operator
by an owner, occupant or lessee of premises subject to this division, for the
purpose of making repairs or alterations, as required by the provisions of this
division.
      (2)   The referral by the cross connection control official of any person
for employment by an owner, occupant or lessee of premises subject to this
division for the purpose of making repairs or alterations, as required by the
provisions of this division.
      (3)   The gaining of a financial interest by the cross connection control
official in any transaction involving an owner, occupant or lessee of premises
subject to this division; such financial interest including, but not limited
to, any known financial interest, direct or indirect, gained by the cross
connection control official’s spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
brother or sister or spouse of any of them.
   (b)   Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall render the
business relationship between the cross connection control official and the
city voidable at the option of the mayor or city council.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 21, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 20-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-74. - Enforcement.
   The authority is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of
this division and to make inspections of all properties served by the public
water supply where cross connections with the public water supply system are
deemed possible.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 7.1, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-75. - Entry onto premises.
   The authority shall seek consent from the owners, lessees, or occupants in
charge of the premises being served for a connection to the public water supply
system of the city before entering the premises for the purpose of inspecting
the piping system or systems thereof for cross connection. Should entry be
refused, the authority shall seek a court order authorizing such entry to the
premises.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 7.2, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 20-1869, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-76. - Disclosure of information; presumption.
   On request by the authority, the owner, lessee or occupant of any premises
shall furnish any pertinent information, including plans and specifications,
regarding the piping system on such premises. The refusal of such information
shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 7.3, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-77. - Notice of violation.
   (a)   If the authority has reason to believe that there is a violation of
the provisions of this division, a notice of violation may be issued to the
violator or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises in which the
violation is located. A person who is issued a notice of violation shall have
the number of days specified in the notice of violations to correct and
eliminate the violation; however, the violator shall in no instance be given
greater than 60 days to correct or eliminate the violation, unless specifically
approved otherwise by the director.
   (b)   Notice of violations issued by the authority shall:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   Include a statement of the violations and the remedial action
required.
      (3)   Specify the number of days within which correction or elimination
of the violation must occur.
      (4)   Indicate that a plumbing permit be secured for the plumbing portion
of the necessary corrections.
      (5)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, or occupant as the case may
require.
   (c)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner,
lessee, or occupant, if a copy thereof is personally served; if a copy thereof
is sent by registered or certified mail; if a copy thereof is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the premises affected by the notice; or if
service of such notice is made by any method authorized or required under the
laws of this state.
   (d)   Due to the danger of contamination of the public water supply, if the
noted violation is not corrected and/or eliminated within the time allotted in
subsections (a) and (b), the violation shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be
abated in accordance with chapter 13 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 7.4, 7.5, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 09-1236, 9-8-09)
Sec. 19-78. - General authority to discontinue service.
   The authority is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service
to premises where such premises have failed to correct and eliminate any
connection in violation of this division and to seal any piping arrangement,
devices, equipment, facilities or appurtenances. Further precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate the danger of contamination of the public water
supply is authorized and may be undertaken by the authority. Water service to
such premises shall not be restored until the cross connections have been
eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. In addition,
violators shall be subject to further penalty, as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 8, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-79. - Imminent hazards.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the authority shall
have the power to declare an imminent hazard and thereupon discontinue water
service to the premises by sealing any piping arrangements, devices, equipment,
facilities or appurtenances. Water service to such premises shall not be
restored until the cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this division. In addition, violators shall be subject to
further penalty, as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 9, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-80. - Administrative hearing—Authority.
   (a)   A person who is issued a notice of violation under this division, may,
within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, petition for an
administrative hearing at which the person may indicate why it is believed that
there is no violation of this division. The request for the administrative
hearing shall not act as a stay of actions taken by the authority.
   (b)   The privilege to request an administrative hearing shall also exist
where discontinuance of the water supply has previously been made due to a
declared imminent hazard.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 10.1, 10.2, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-81. - Same—Review panel.
   There is hereby created an administrative review panel composed of the
corporation counsel, the president of the city council and the director of the
department of public works. In the absence or inability of any of the
aforementioned parties to be present at a meeting of the panel, the deputy or
any other designated individual may serve or, in the case of the council
president, another council member designated by the council president.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 10.3, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-82. - Same—Hearing.
   Upon receipt of a written petition for an administrative hearing, the
administrative review panel shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice
of violation should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall commence not
later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 10.4, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-83. - Same—Action by panel.
   After such hearing, the administrative review panel shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings. The order of the panel shall
be served on the petitioner in accordance with the provisions set forth in
section
19-77 for service of a notice of violation.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 10.5, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-84. - Premises subject to division.
   Any premises which is provided water service by a public or private water
supply system and which has or is proposed to have any of the following
systems, is subject to this division:
      (1)   A secondary water supply.
      (2)   A water treatment system.
      (3)   A boiler, water or steam.
      (4)   A commercial or industrial process or equipment which uses water
including, but not limited to, plating tanks, water-cooled equipment, product
washing equipment and air conditioning units.
      (5)   A sewage liquid waste or solid waste treatment or process system.
      (6)   A lawn irrigation system.
      (7)   A location which supplies potable water for mobile units for
cleaning or transport.
      (8)   A temporary water service.
      (9)   A wet fire protection system.
      (10)   Any other possible source of backflow.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 11, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 20-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-85. - Determination of premises subject to division.
   (a)   The authority is hereby authorized to conduct an initial survey to
identify all premises subject to this division.
   (b)   The authority shall classify each premises according to degree of
hazard to the potable water system and shall initiate inspections based on the
health hazard potential.
   (c)   Upon completion of the initial inspection, the authority shall issue
either a certificate of compliance or a notice of violations, in accordance
with section
19-74.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 12.1—12.3, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-86. - Periodic inspections.
   (a)   The authority shall periodically inspect all premises and facilities
subject to this division. The frequency of inspections and reinspections shall
be based on the potential health hazards and shall be established or modified
by the authority. The interval for periodic reinspections shall be established
within the range of three months to five years.
   (b)   Upon completion of a periodic inspection, the authority shall
acknowledge compliance or issue or a notice of violation, in accordance with
section
19-74.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 12.4, 12.5, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 20-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-87. - New, expanded or altered piping systems.
   (a)   The owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises at which new piping
systems will be installed or existing piping systems will be expanded or
altered shall submit the following to the director:
      (1)   A completely filled out application for review of plans and
specifications, as provided by the director.
      (2)   Two complete sets of plans and specifications of the piping,
devices, and of the equipment and buildings used in connection therewith.
      (3)   Any further information or documentation to satisfy the director
that the piping and equipment shall be installed and operated within the
limitations and prohibitions specified in this division. No work shall be
initiated until necessary permits have been obtained from the department of
property maintenance & development services.
   (b)   No new facility or expanded facility completed pursuant to a plumbing
permit shall be occupied or the water system utilized until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the authority.
   (c)   The owner, lessee or occupant or person responsible for the new,
expanded or altered piping system, devices, equipment or facility shall notify
the authority when the work is completed and ready for final inspection, which
inspection shall be made promptly after such notification.
   (d)   Upon completion of the inspection of new, expanded, or altered piping,
the authority shall issue a certificate of compliance or a notice of violation
in accordance with section
19-74.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 13, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 20-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-88. - Certificate of compliance.
   (a)   A certificate of compliance with this division shall be issued by the
authority upon completion and approval of all inspections of new premises, upon
completion and approval of a periodic inspection of existing premises, and upon
approval of new expanded or altered piping in existing premises.
   (b)   Tests of protective devices may be required by the authority before
issuing a certificate of compliance.
   (c)   Failure to operate successfully under tests within the limitations and
requirements of this division shall constitute sufficient grounds for ordering
changes in the piping arrangements, equipment, facilities or appurtenances
before a certificate of compliance is issued.
   (d)   Failure to file a testing form or proof of scheduled testing within
the limitations and requirements of this division will result in a designation
of the customer account as out of compliance with this code. A $100.00
administrative fee, per device, will be assessed on the customer's water bill
each billing cycle until the account is in compliance with this code. If a
passing test form is submitted within the first billing cycle after the fee is
assessed, the $100.000 will be removed.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 14, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 08-1170, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 2020-1689,
10-20-20)
Sec. 19-89. - Prohibitions of cross connections.
   (a)   A cross connection between a public water system and other systems or
equipment is prohibited.
   (b)   A cross connection shall not be made between a public water supply
system and a secondary water supply.
   (c)   A cross connection shall not be made by submerged inlet.
   (d)   A cross connection shall not be made between a public water supply and
piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical contaminant.
   (e)   A cross connection shall not be made between a public water supply
system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 15.1—15.5, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-90. - Color coding of piping.
   (a)   In every instance where most piping systems exist, all exposed piping
carrying potable water shall be uniformly painted a distinguishing bright blue
color and so maintained that each pipe may be readily traced in its entirety by
such color. All lines that carry secondary water shall be painted brown. In
instances where these colors conflict with established systems of painting in a
particular establishment, the director may allow the use of other colors of
equal brightness and distinction, provided that the alternative color code is
submitted to and accepted by the director prior to painting of the pipe. Any
such color code shall be posted on the premises at locations approved by the
authority.
   (b)   Color coding requirements will be deemed to have been met if three-
inch bands of blue or brown paint are used at intervals of not more than 25
feet and at points where exposed piping passes through walls, floors or roofs.
The bands shall be applied to the piping on both sides of the walls and both
above and below the floor or roof.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 15.9, 15.10, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-91. - Alternative identification of piping.
   Where maintenance of color coding is impossible, the director may permit use
of a permanently attached durable sign or tag of acceptable design on each
piece of pipe in each line not to exceed 25 feet between signs or tags, and at
each valve. The following are acceptable designs:
      (1)   Secondary water may be indicated by use of a durable tag in the
shape of a four-inch equilateral triangle bearing the legend "water unsafe" in
letters not less than 7/16 inch in height.
      (2)   Potable water may be indicated by use of a durable circular tag of
three-inch diameter bearing the legend "safe water" in letters not less than
one-half inch in height.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 15.12, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-92. - Identification of secondary water.
   All openings from which secondary water may be obtained shall have at all
times a sign prominently posted within two feet of the opening, bearing the
following warning: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING. Such sign shall be at least eight
inches by ten inches in size, prominently lettered in contrasting colors, with
no letters less than one inch in height. Signs are to be furnished and
maintained by the owner of the secondary supply and must be of materials and
design acceptable to the director.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 15.13, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-93. - Protection of water supply.
   (a)   Any water-using equipment, apparatus, or device, shall have its water
supply protected against contamination by methods acceptable to the authority.
   (b)   Water piping used to convey potable water shall not be submerged in
nonpotable water or other liquid.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 15.14, 15.15, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-94. - Minimum residual water pressure.
   Under conditions of flow attained through simultaneous use of fixtures,
there shall be a residual pressure of not less than eight pounds per square
inch measured on the pressure side of the wide open faucet or valve supplying
the highest fixture in the building, except that flushometer valves shall
require a minimum pressure of 15 pounds per square inch on the supply side of
the valve when in operation.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 15.16, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-95. - Disinfection of piping system.
   The authority shall require, when necessary, that the potable water system
or any part thereof installed or repaired, be disinfected in accordance with
the following methods before it is placed in operation:
      (1)   The system or part thereof, shall be thoroughly flushed and then be
filled with a solution containing 100 parts per million of available chlorine
and allowed to stand two hours before flushing and returning to service.
      (2)   In the case of potable water filters or similar devices, the dosage
shall be determined by the authority.
      (3)   When directed by the authority, samples shall be collected and
analyzed to determine the effectiveness of the disinfection.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 15.17, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-96. - Backflow prevention devices—Required.
   (a)   A water utility is hereby prohibited from installing and/or
maintaining a water service connection to a person's premises where a cross
connection or secondary water supply is maintained, contrary to the provisions
of this division, unless the public potable water supply is protected against
backflow by installing an approved backflow prevention device at the service
connection.
   (b)   When the authority finds that there is a cross connection or a
secondary water supply on the premises; that the owner, lessee or occupant is
operating the piping system in a manner that could adversely effect the piping
system; when it is determined that there are frequent changes to the piping and
related equipment; or when it is determined that there is undue risk because of
complexity of the piping system, the authority shall require the owner, at the
owner's expense, to:
      (1)   Install an approved backflow prevention device at each service
connection to his premises.
      (2)   Test such device annually or more often when deemed necessary.
      (3)   Properly repair and maintain such device or devices and keep
adequate records of each test and subsequent maintenance and repair, including
materials or replacement parts.
   (c)   No connection shall be made to the service line between the meter and
the backflow prevention device except for the meter bypass line connection. If
a bypass around the backflow prevention device is installed, a singular
backflow device shall be installed on the bypass. If the service is unmetered,
the backflow prevention device shall be installed near the property line
upstream from the first outlet or branch connection.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 15.6—15.8, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-97. - Same—Approval, design.
   Each device intended for prevention of backflow shall be approved by the
authority. The design, maintenance and testing procedures, installation
requirements, other features of the device and evidence of effectiveness may be
required by the authority prior to acceptance. The authority may accept devices
approved by the state department of public health or meeting the requirements
of the American Society of Sanitary Engineering or of other professional or
testing organizations.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.1, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-98. - Same—Location.
   The backflow prevention device shall be located in a well-drained room or
space of sufficient size to permit a person to have convenient access for
inspection, testing and repair purposes. Installation of the device below grade
or in a meter pit is not acceptable.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.2, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-99. - Same—Maintenance.
   All devices installed in a potable water system for protection against
backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the owner, occupant
or lessee. The authority may inspect such installed devices and, if found to be
defective or inoperative, shall require the repair or replacement thereof. No
device shall be removed from use or relocated, or other device substituted,
without the approval of the authority.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.3, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-100. - Same—Acceptable devices.
   Only the devices indicated below are acceptable for protection against
backflow:
      (1)   An approved air gap at the customer service for protection of the
public water system.
      (2)   An air gap on the premise piping system only when specifically
authorized by the authority.
      (3)   A reduced pressure principle backflow preventor for all backflow
protection conditions, except at a service to a waste treatment plant.
      (4)   A double check valve assembly for an automatic fire sprinkler
system using an anti-freeze solution approved by the authority; and for the
following specified use:
         a.   A low pressure boiler not subject to chemical treatment.
         b.   A closed recirculating system used for heating and cooling not
subject to chemical treatment.
         c.   A water softener of the automatically regenerative type.
      (5)   A barometric loop for a water connection not subject to back
pressure.
      (6)   A vacuum breaker for water connections not subject to back
pressure, such as standard plumbing fixtures, lavatory sinks, lawn irrigation
systems, and those submerged inlets specifically authorized by the authority.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.4, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-101. - Vacuum breakers.
   (a)   Any atmospheric type vacuum breaker shall be installed on the
discharge side of the last control valve and, on open vessels, shall be at
least six inches above the flood level rim of the device; or at a distance
equal to the critical level, plus such safety factor as may be specified for
any given vacuum breaker by the authority. For closed vessels the top of the
device shall be treated as the flood level rim, but, in addition, a check valve
shall be installed on the discharge side of the vacuum breaker.
   (b)   Pressure type vacuum breakers may be installed so that they are
continuously subject to static line pressure. Pressure vacuum breakers shall be
installed a minimum of 12 inches above the equipment or piping served,
whichever is higher.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 16.5, 16.6, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-102. - Check valves.
   All required check valves, including those which are spring loaded, shall be
installed so that the force of gravity will assist in closing and holding the
disc or clapper on the seat. No check valve shall be installed in the vertical
position on down feed supply piping. Vertical lift check valves shall be
installed only in the vertical position on up feed supply piping. Horizontal
lift check valves shall only be installed in the horizontal position. If
horizontal swing check valves are installed in vertical piping, the direction
of normal flow shall be up, and there shall be external evidence of a hinge pin
to establish the type of check valve.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.7, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-103. - Air gaps.
   Safe air gap shall be maintained between the water supply inlet and the
maximum overflow level of any fixture, tank, or container. Safe air gaps shall
be determined as follows:
      (1)   Circular openings. Circular water supply inlet openings shall have
an air gap equivalent to twice the diameter of the orifice; but not less than
one inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
      (2)   Other openings. For water supply openings other than circular, the
air gap shall be 2¼ times the square root of the area of the opening.
      (3)   Equations. Or in equation form: G = 2d for circular openings, G = 2
- ¼ square root A for other openings, where G = the air gap, D = the diameter
and A = the area.
      (4)   Exceptions. On openings greater than four-inch diameter or of
equivalent area, if the opening is other than circular, the authority shall be
consulted for minimum air gaps.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.8, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-104. - Installation at spill line, openings.
   Air gaps and vacuum breakers shall be installed above the spill line of the
fixture or device; or positive spill openings to the outside of the flush tank,
device or apparatus shall be provided if the apparatus, tank or device is
equipped with overflows which might become blocked, fouled or otherwise
stopped.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.9, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-105. - Installation of reduced principle preventor.
   A reduced principal backflow preventor shall be installed above grade or at
an elevation not subject to flooding, inside a heated structure to prevent
freezing, in a horizontal position, and otherwise in accord with the
manufacturer's instruction.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 16.10, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-106. - Lawn sprinkler systems.
   (a)   Lawn sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a pressure vacuum
breaker or RPZ on the inlet side of all control valves.
   (b)   If a lawn sprinkling system is installed so different areas sprinkled
are each controlled by a valve on the discharge side of the main control valve
on the main distribution branch to the entire lawn sprinkling system, the
system shall be protected by one of the following methods:
      (1)   An acceptable pressure vacuum breaker may be installed on the inlet
side of the main control valve.
      (2)   A reduced pressure principle backflow preventor may be installed on
the main distribution branch to the sprinkler system in close proximity to the
main control valve.
      (3)   An acceptable pressure type vacuum breaker may be installed between
the main control valve and the zone control valves.
      (4)   If it is proposed to protect the water supply to a zone sprinkling
system, the installation method must comply with Michigan Plumbing Code section
608.16.5.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 16.11, 16.12, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-107. - Fire protection systems.
   (a)   If siamese, standpipe or other types of fittings are provided for
connection of fire hoses to the fire protection system, and such fire
protection system is normally supplied through the service and the main water
distribution pipe of the premises, a check valve and a control valve of the
outside screw and yoke pattern shall be installed in each branch to the fire
protection system at its connection with the main water distribution pipe.
   (b)   If, however, any fire protection system with fittings as described in
subsection (a) of this section, is located within 1,000 feet of any river,
canal or other body of water, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device shall be installed in each branch of the fire protection system at its
connection with the main water distribution pipe.
   (c)   A fire protection system with fittings as described in subsections (a)
and (b) of this section which is within 1,000 feet of a river, canal or other
body of water and which has a separate water service connection for fire
protection purposes only, shall have that service connection protected by a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (d)   Every water service line supplying only fire protection devices shall
be equipped with a double check valve assembly, except that a detector check
valve, if used, may be considered one of the checks of the required assembly.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 16.13—16.16, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-108. - Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
   (a)   Where necessary to provide an automatic fire sprinkler system using
antifreeze solutions to serve an unheated area, only antifreeze approved by the
authority may be used. Such systems shall have not more than 20 heads and shall
have at all times prominently posted, within two feet of the fill location, a
warning sign at least eight inches by ten inches in size, having letters of one
inch in height, bearing the following statement: "USE ONLY MATERIALS AUTHORIZED
BY THE CITY OF DEARBORN."
   (b)   Signs are to be furnished and maintained by the owner and must be of
materials and design acceptable to the director.
   (c)   In the supply line to each antifreeze system, there shall be a RPZ
installed in the supply piping.
   (d)   When requested in writing by an owner, occupant of lessee, the
authority may permit use of antifreeze solutions not approved by the authority,
provided a reduced pressure principle backflow preventor is installed at the
connection to the potable water system.
(Ord. No. 81-12, §§ 16.17-16.22, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-109. - Testing and sampling.
   (a)   The authority is hereby authorized to conduct, cause to be conducted,
or to require an owner, occupant or lessee to have conducted any test or tests
of any new or existing piping arrangement, devices, equipment, facility or
appurtenances, the retention of which the authority has reason to believe may
result in contamination of potable water, or when the authority has reason to
believe that there is evidence that cross connections do not meet the
limitations prescribed in this division, or at a prescribed frequency to insure
proper functioning of protective devices. A full written record of test
conditions, test methods and of test results obtained shall be maintained by
the persons conducting such tests.
   (b)   Effective January 1, 2018, backflow assembly testing must be performed
by a licensed plumber certified in accordance to ASSE Standard 5110.
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or lessee of the
operation tested to provide, at his expense, reasonable and necessary openings
in the piping system, appurtenances, equipment or facilities and safe and easy
access thereto, to permit technically valid measurements and samples to be
taken. All new piping equipment or facilities which provide potential for cross
connection may be required by the authority to provide adequate openings in the
piping system, appurtenances, equipment or facilities, and safe and easy access
thereto to permit technically valid measurements and samples to be taken.
   (d)   The authority is hereby authorized to sample, or cause to be sampled,
water or other fluid flowing in, or having potential for flowing in, any piping
system subject to this division.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 17, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Sec. 19-110. - Inspection fees.
   (a)   A fee shall be paid by owner, occupant or lessee subsequent to any
inspection or periodic reinspection of premises by the authority. The fee shall
be $7.00 for each complete or partial unit of time the authority is upon the
premises. Each unit of time shall consist of 15 minutes. A minimum fee
equivalent to two units of time shall be charged for each inspection or
periodic reinspection.
   (b)   The inspection fee shall be paid within 30 days from the date that the
billing for such fee is made by the city to the owner, occupant or lessee. If
the amount is not paid to the city within such time period, the amount due
shall be assessed against such property as a special assessment, in accordance
with the provisions of sections
15.5 and
15.10 of chapter 15 of the city charter.
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 18, 1-20-81)
Sec. 19-111. - Annual report.
   The city shall make an annual report of the status of its cross connections
control program to the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and
Energy (EGLE). The annual report shall be made on a form provided by the
Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy (EGLE).
(Ord. No. 81-12, § 19, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Secs. 19-112.   Residential cross connection control.
   (a)   Under the Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, the Department of
Environment, Great Lakes and Energy (EGLE) institutes rules to protect drinking
water and to prevent cross connections that may contaminate public drinking
water systems. All communities are required to enforce mandatory backflow
assembly testing for ALL assemblies, which now includes the addition of
residential properties to our current commercial and industrial facilities.
   (b)   The city will be divided into five districts geographically,
correlating with water billing zones, and each residence shall have an initial
exterior inspections. The district boundaries may be evaluated and modified
after all residences receive an initial inspection. The cross connection
officials, field agents and meter service techs shall perform periodic
inspections.
   (c)   All testable backflow assemblies must be tested every one to five
years by a licensed plumber that is ASSE certified in backflow testing. If any
assemblies fail testing, they must be repaired or replaced by a licensed
plumber, and re-tested within thirty (30) days. All new installations,
relocations, and replacements shall require a plumbing permit. Refer to
sections 6.4–6.9 of the Cross Connection Control Program for a list of approved
testers and the testing notification and compliance procedure. When a copy of
the assembly testing/compliance notification is requested for a C of O, or sale
of a property, this does not change the testing cycle frequency or due date.
(Ord. No. 2020-1689, 10-20-20)
Secs. 19-113-19-120.   Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY
Sec. 19-121. - Declaration.
   The mayor, or in the mayor's absence or direction, the director of public
works, shall declare a water supply emergency whenever it is determined by such
person that the depletion of water supply, reduction in water pressure, or
other loss or threat of loss of water flow, purity or capacity endangers the
health, safety or welfare of the city or any part of the city.
(Ord. No. 89-458, § 2, 7-5-89)
Sec. 19-122. - Announcement.
   A water emergency declared under this division shall be publicly announced
by television, radio, newspaper or any means or combination of means.
(Ord. No. 89-458, § 3, 7-5-89)
Sec. 19-123. - Prohibited acts.
   During a water supply emergency declared under this division, it shall be
unlawful for any person to utilize water from the city water supply system for
any type of outdoor use other than responding to a fire emergency. The
prohibition shall remain in effect 24 hours per day, seven days per week until
the water supply emergency is declared ended by the mayor, or in the mayor's
absence, the director of public works. The mayor or director of public works
may provide for a more limited prohibition when it is determined that such a
limited prohibition will be sufficient to protect the capacity of the water
supply system. The terms of such a limited prohibition shall be made a part of
the emergency declaration. The director of public works may provide exceptions
to the prohibition of this section where necessary to prevent imminent
financial loss to a water user.
(Ord. No. 89-458, § 4, 7-5-89)
Secs. 19-124—19-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE AND PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes:
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-1131, adopted June 18, 2007, amended Art. III in its
entirety, in effect deleting Art. III as being superseded and enacting a new
Art. III to read as set out herein. Former Art. III pertained to similar
subject matter. For a complete history of former Art. III see the Code
Comparative Table.
Sec. 19-141. - Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is the protection of the environment, and
of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the
regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or
discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the
jurisdiction of the City of Dearborn and enabling the City of Dearborn to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq), and the General
Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 C.F.R. Part 403.
   (b)   The objectives of this article are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of people or
of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving
waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with
the system;
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or
sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and
      (4)   To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the
wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory
activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or
replacement of the system.
   (c)   This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the
Detroit and City of Dearborn wastewater collection and treatment system through
the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the
enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-142. - Authority.
   By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the City of Dearborn
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act,
as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq; the 1963 Constitution of the State
of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being M.C.L. 323.1 et seq;
M.S.A. 3.521 et seq; the Charter of the City of Dearborn; the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City
of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan
Case No. 77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the
board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or
private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this article
shall apply to every user contributing, causing to be contributed, or
discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and
treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-143. - Definitions.
   (a)   For purposes of this article and unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section:
   Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
   Authorized representative of industrial user means:
      (1)   Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting
the reports required by this article is a corporation, who is either (a) the
president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge
of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar
policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or (b) the manager of
one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more
than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
$25,000,000.00 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute
documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with
corporate procedures; or
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this article is a partnership or sole
proprietorship respectively. [See section
19-145.]
   Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion
(CN) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc,
copper, cadmium, mercury, nickel and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677,
or other method designated as a Standard Method or approved under 40 CFR 136.
   Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or
other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user which can or do
lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being
introduced into the ecosystem, including but are not limited to the Detroit
sewer system. BMP's include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology
modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of
products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping,
maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical and
economic considerations.
   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation or organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of
mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L)) as measured by standard
methods.
   Board means the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
   Bypass means the intentional diversion of a waste stream from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.17.]
   Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats
any hazardous or non-hazardous industrial waste received from off-site by
tanker truck, trailer, roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of
shipment including:
      (1)   A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from
off-site, and
      (2)   A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well
as industrial waste received from off-site.
   City means the City of Dearborn, Michigan, or the city council of the City
of Dearborn or its authorized representatives or employees, unless otherwise
specified.
   Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an
industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to
those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and
effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater.
   Compatible pollutant means pollutants which can be effectively removed by
the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW
residuals and the receiving stream.
   Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained
at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional
basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the
average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24
hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. [See 40 C.F.R. §
403.]
   Confidential information means the information which would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the industrial user. [See section
19-150.]
   Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has
been officially designated as such by the State of Michigan under the
provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a).]
   Cooling water means the non-contact water discharged from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the
exchange of heat.
   Days mean consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of
time prescribed or allowed by this article.
   Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and
authorized employees of the department.
   Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of Michigan.
   Director means the Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, or
the director's designee.
   Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes,
or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.
   Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works.
   Environmental Protection Agency or administrator or EPA administrator means
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the
authorized representatives or employees of the EPA.
   Facility means a location, which contributes, causes or permits wastewater
to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of
business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private,
commercial or charitable.
   Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats,
waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral
origin that's extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods.
   Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the
flow rate of the waste stream.
   Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the
stream at the time of sampling.
   Indirect discharge or discharge means the discharge or the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(b), (c), or (d).
   Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater
to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of
business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private,
commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family
residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste
characteristics.
   Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form industry,
manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources.
   Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the
Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal
Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries
Act.
   May means permissive.
   National Categorical Pretreatment Standard means any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial
users.
   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a
permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   New source means:
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the instruction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317
(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (a) the building,
structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site where no other
source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) the production or wastewater
generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source should be considered; or
      (2)   Construction on a site where an existing source is located
resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of paragraphs (i)(b) or (i)(c) of this definition but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or
      (3)   Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or
operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part assembly, or installation
of facilities or equipment; or (2) significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be
used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and
contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this section.
   Pass through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.
pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated
by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity.
Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.
   Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into
water.
   Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or
impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of
water.
   Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or
alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local
law, rules and regulations.
   Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements
related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on
an industrial user. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r).]
   Pretreatment standards means all National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the
specific prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or
specific limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the
discharge prohibitions specified in section
19-145 of this Code.
   Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity.
   Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by
33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in
33 U.S.C. § 1362, including:
      (1)   Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling,
or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature;
      (2)   Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater
to a POTW treatment plant; or
      (3)   The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.
   POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater.
   Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a
contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a
specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest
concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured
using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant.
   Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and
precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or
more pollutants in the waste stream being sampled. Representative samples shall
be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
   Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable
to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources
including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and
discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial
consumption.
   Shall means mandatory.
   Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for
the same parameter;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC
= 1.4 for BOD, TSS, Fats, Oil and Grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority;
      (5)   Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the
scheduled date;
      (6)   Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring
reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due
date;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations which the department
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
   Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who:
      (1)   Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling
water; or
      (2)   Has discharges subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards; or
      (3)   Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant
limitations of this article; or
      (4)   Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33
U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and State laws or regulations, that
are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this
article as determined by the department; or
      (5)   Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or
disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute
or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to,
leachate or runoff; or
      (6)   Is found by the City of Detroit or the City of Dearborn to have a
reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge,
the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW.
   Slug means any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
   Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended.
   Standard methods mean methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, "Guidelines
for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory
procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water
Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set
forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two references are in disagreement
regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods
given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed.
   State means the State of Michigan.
   Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   Suspended solids (total) mean the total suspended matter which floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is
removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods.
   Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the
PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single
sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being
treated as zero.
   Total Phenolic Compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results
for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-
3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-
nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l.
   Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register
promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other
federal or state laws, rules and regulations.
   Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary
manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in
compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy
the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to
persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited
purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of
waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into
the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary
thereto.
   Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this article or with National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control
of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or
permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.
   Wastewater or waste stream means the liquid and water-carried industrial or
domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or
permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, storm
water, and cooling water.
   Wastewater discharge permits mean permits issued by the department in
accordance with section
19-147 of this Code.
   Waters of the state mean groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other
watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering
this state in the form of the Great Lakes.
   (b)   For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the
meanings designated by this section:
      (1)   BMR — Baseline monitoring report
      (2)   BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand
      (3)   C.F.R. — Code of Federal Regulations
      (4)   EPA — Environmental Protection Agency
      (5)   FOG — Fats, oil or grease
      (6)   l — liter
      (7)   MDEQ — MI. Department of Environmental Quality
      (8)   mg — milligrams
      (9)   mg/l — milligrams per liter
      (10)   NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      (11)   POTW — Publicly owned treatment works
      (12)   RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §
6901 et seq.
      (13)   SIC — Standard Industrial Classification
      (14)   SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq
      (15)   TSS — Total suspended solids
      (16)   U.S.C. — United States Code
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-144. - Delegation of authority.
   The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as
the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce
the provisions of this article on behalf of the City of Dearborn. The City of
Dearborn has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the
City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets
for the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this
article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform
the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and
federal law.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-145. - Discharge prohibitions.
   (a)   General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge
prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment standards or to any other federal,
state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall
be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW:
      (1)   Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or
quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to
persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which
create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to,
waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140°F or 60°C using
the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21; or
      (2)   Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities,
which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to,
grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; or
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than
11.5 units, or
      (4)   Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting
oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient
concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants
to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or
animals; or
      (5)   Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by
interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume
within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient
to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; or
      (6)   Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or
any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be
unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and
reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause
the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines
or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria, guidelines,
or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act,
the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used; or
      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the
Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court
for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit; or
      (8)   Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater
being discharged; or
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which
exceeds 150°F or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment
plant to rise above 104°F (40°C); or
      (10)   Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; or
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance
with applicable federal or state regulations; or
      (12)   Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause
interference with or pass through the POTW; or
      (13)   Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or
a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to
cause interference with the POTW.
   (b)   Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following limitations:
      (1)   Compatible pollutants. See appendix C.
      (2)   Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of:
   mg/l
   Arsenic (As) ..... 1.0
   Cadmium (Cd) ..... See Appendix C
   Chromium (Cr) ..... 25.00
   Copper (Cu) ..... 2.5
   Cyanide (CN)(Available) ..... 1.00
   Iron (Fe) ..... 1,000.0
   Lead (Pb) ..... 1.0
   Nickel (Ni) ..... 5.0
   Silver (Ag) ..... 1.0
   Zinc (Zn) ..... 7.3
   Total Phenolic Compounds ..... 1.0
   or see appendix B.
   All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period
representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Part 136.
         (i)   The limitation for total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not
be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the
quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is
appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or
more samples indicate detectable levels of Total PCB, the user shall be
required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this
demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the Total PCB
concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in
accordance with section [56-3-66.1(d)].
         (ii)   The limitation of Mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg)
shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1,
and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level
is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or
more samples indicate detectable levels of Mercury, the user shall be required
to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section, this demonstration
may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is
below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section
[56-3-66.1(d)].
   All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period
representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Part 136.
      (3)   Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this
ordinance (June 28, 2007), the department shall notify all industrial user's
operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to
submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of this
article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or non-
compliance with these limitations, and, in the event of noncompliance, include
the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated
limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the
effective date of this ordinance. An industrial user who does not demonstrate
compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an
administrative consent order. The department shall include appropriate
monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that
relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon
a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve
compliance with this provision.
   (c)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. All users shall comply
with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R.
Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated
by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements,
provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable
pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this article, then the more
stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers
shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. Part 403
and as established by the department. The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section
are delineated in appendix A.
      (1)   Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the presence of
pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall
be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are
not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit.
      (2)   Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The
department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for
authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and
procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when
the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for
which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such
pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the
prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted.
Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user
desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department,
consistent with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this article. Any
credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification
or revocation as specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the
department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the
industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants
removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the
board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits
shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this
section.
      (3)   New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria
shall install, maintain in operating condition, and 'start-up' all pollution
control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before
beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90
days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
      (4)   Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical
pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit
of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations
expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in
accordance with sections 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4)
and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317
(d) and of this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the
equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from
which the equivalent limitations were derived.
      (5)   Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of
categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the
final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission
under Section 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial
users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently
discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit
to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing this information have already been
submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the
requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be
requirement to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement
of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become
industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains
the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-5). In such report, new
sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the
source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources
shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)
(4) and (5).
   (d)   Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use
of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed
by the City of Dearborn, the City of Detroit or the State of Michigan.
   (e)   Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled
into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the
requirements of this article including, but not limited to, permits,
inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from
hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the
benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload
such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for
unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto.
The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges,
fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be
discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval
issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in section
19-147 of this Code. The department may establish specific limitations for
sludge from municipally owned or operated potw treatment plants which are
different than the specific limitations in this article.
   (f)   Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste
treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into
the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any
authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized
waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which
treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless
such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the Department to require
further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has
submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the
department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further
authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. An
industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files
an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to
the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information of support thereof: 
      (1)   The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type of
wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as delineated in
appendix A, shall be so designated;
      (2)   The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be
present in the wastewater;
      (3)   At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for
the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application
is made in subsection (f)(1) of this section;
      (4)   A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which
addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or
collected by the facility's treatment process(es);
      (5)   The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or
treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental
agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall
provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department; and
      (6)   Other information requested by the department including, but not
limited to, information required by subsection
19-147(c)(1) through (18) of this Code, or by rules adopted by the board.
   The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be
deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit
and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained
in section [56-3-61.1 of this Code], will be deemed approved for discharge into
the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all
applicable provisions contained in section
19-147 of this Code regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as
control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to
report at selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1)
through (6) of this section.
   All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which,
at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the
wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed
at any time by the department.
   (g)   Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the
department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited.
   The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from
maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities
through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting
requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with
the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180
days after its enactment.
   If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge,
response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from
the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater.
Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in section
19-147 of this Code, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board.
   (h)   Right of revision. The City of Detroit and the City of Dearborn
reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the board,
additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
POTW. Ninety days after adoption by the board and approval of the City of
Dearborn, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations.
   (i)   Accidental discharges. 
      (1)   Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved
spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this article, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the
department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be
implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges.
Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be
implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost
or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill
prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users
shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of
this article [November 19, 1986]. New significant industrial users shall submit
such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging.
   For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the
approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or
substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or
waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are
in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a
concentration of five percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution
or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55
gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser
quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW.
   The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant
changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in
the contact person, or substance inventory.
      (2)   At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate
whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges,
as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all
significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30
days of notification by the department.
   (j)   Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by
this article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a
discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state
or the City of Dearborn laws, rules regulations or permit requirements, or
which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the
industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection
(1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its
control center and notify the department of the discharge. The notification
shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the
type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited
pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to
abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the
discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user
to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the department, the
industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include
additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss,
damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to
person or property.
   (k)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees
whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or
prohibited discharge.
   (l)   Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes
damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes the department to violate
its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss,
damage, penalty or fine incurred by the department because of said violation or
discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user
of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such
damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's NPDES permit and
the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall
include written documentation which substantiates the determination of
proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed
costs shall constitute a violation of this article. Such charge shall be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this
article, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in
equity.
   (m)   Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into
the City of Dearborn Collection System, shall notify the department in writing
of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must
comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p).
   (n)   Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined
in section [56-3-58.1(a)(2) of this Code], may designate a duly authorized
representative of the individual designated in subsection
19-143(a)(2)(i) or (ii) where:
      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in
subsection
19-143(a)(2)(i) or (ii);
      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company; and
      (3)   The written authorization is submitted to the department.
   (o)   Pollution prevention. The department shall encourage and support
industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs that
are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels
required by this article. The department may require an industrial user to
implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement
response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-146. - Fees.
   (a)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board
shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance,
improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board
action.
   (b)   The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating,
maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste control and
pretreatment programs; and
      (2)   User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity
of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge
handling and disposal; and
      (3)   Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including,
but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and
transcriptions; and
      (4)   Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the
requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-147. - Wastewater discharge permits.
   (a)   Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW
any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not
comply with the discharge prohibitions of section
19-145 of this Code. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to
discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit
Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
      (1)   All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the
effective date of this article, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Significant industrial
users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are
not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all
information specified in subsection (c) and, where applicable, any additional
information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring
report requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b).
      (2)   All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application
must include all information specified in subsection (c) and, where applicable,
any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized
by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW.
      (3)   Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than
sanitary or non-contact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval
from the department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to the
commencement of the discharge.
   (b)   Permit application and reapplication. The department may require any
user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the
same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a
significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a
user's facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with
the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department.
Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the
duty to obtain a permit as required by this article.
      (1)   A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an earlier date is specified or
required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit
application which includes all the information specified in subsections (c) and
(g).
      (2)   A separate permit application shall be required for each separate
facility.
      (3)   Existing permittees shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of
90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the
department.
   (c)   Application or reapplication information. In support of an application
or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
      (1)   Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer
identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility;
      (2)   Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial
user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and
legally;
      (3)   All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the
Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended;
      (4)   Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for
each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall
include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in
subsection
19-145(a) and (b) of this Code, those pollutants limited by National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard regulations for applicable industries and any
toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated
in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum
and average concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. For
industries subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each
categorical process waste stream. Combined waste streams proposed to be
regulated by the combined waste stream formula shall also be identified.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40
C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the
administrator;
      (5)   A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As
pertains to subsection (c)(4), identify which pollutants are associated with
each process;
      (6)   Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (c)
(4), a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the
manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection
(c)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for
reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity;
      (7)   A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each
process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the
week;
      (8)   Denote: (i) The average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates
including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; (ii) each national
categorical process waste stream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary
water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW;
and (iii) each combined waste stream;
      (9)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by
the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW;
also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national
categorical process waste stream and which connections receive storm water,
sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined
waste stream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information
furnished in subsection (c)(8);
      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits
under the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements only;
      (11)   A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this
article and the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial
user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be
reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate,
certified by a qualified professional;
      (12)   Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental
discharges in accordance with the requirements of subsection
19-145(i) of this Code;
      (13)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system
for each production process;
      (14)   A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which
identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or
continuous process type;
      (15)   If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water,
the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage
and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes
from each source;
      (16)   If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance
procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this article and the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required
operation and maintenance procedures;
      (17)   Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization
assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source
reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate
the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and
      (18)   Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and
process a wastewater discharge permit.
   (d)   Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the department shall
review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing
regarding any of the following:
      (1)   The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant
industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit;
      (2)   The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant
industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge
permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6);
      (3)   The application is incomplete or the information only partially
satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 or by the
department, and that additional information and data are required which shall
be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified
regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is
unacceptable;
      (4)   The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge
permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination
and the basis of the determination.
   The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user,
which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to
the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this
article. If the department determines that an industrial user is required to
have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data
furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail.
The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the
industrial user's review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of
mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the
procedures contained in section
19-153 of this Code, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal
regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of any
contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one
facility location shall be included in each permit.
   (e)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate
all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and
user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or the City of
Dearborn without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the
following:
      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or
characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to
the numeric limits enumerated in section
19-145 of this Code, or the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards;
      (2)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (3)   Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user;
      (4)   Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams are to
be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW;
      (5)   Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules;
      (6)   Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the
containment of spills or slug discharges;
      (7)   Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application;
      (8)   Additional reporting requirements:
         a.   All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by
the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department,
indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred
to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this
article. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at
six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department.
Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the
facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit.
         b.   Permittees not subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the
requirements of subsections (e)(8)(d) and (e). The report shall show the
concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the
permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with
subsection (e)(9) and (11).
         c.   Permittees subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals
specified by federal regulations and by the department. A compliance report
shall be submitted to the department no later than 90 days following the final
compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than
90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d). A report on continued
compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule
established by the department and incorporated into the industrial users
discharge permit and in accordance with subsections (e)(8)(d) and (e). The
reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the department or on an
alternate form approved by the department, and shall indicate the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process
which are limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or which
there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the
department in accordance with subsections (e)(9) and (11). The report shall
include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined
waste stream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial
information has been furnished to the department, provided there have been no
changes to the elements composing the combined waste stream.
         d.   Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling
performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and
analysis of pollutants contained therein, and for significant industrial users
subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related
flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as
prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R.
Part 403, or by the department, but no less than is necessary to access and
assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part
136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the
administrator.
   If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required
by the department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The report shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance
practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to
bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards.
         e.   This report, and those required under subsection
19-145(c)(5) and [56-3-61.1(e)(8)(b) and (c)] of this Code, shall include the
following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this
document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision,
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of
the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." Said
certification shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative, as
defined in subsection
19-143(a)(2) of this Code. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a
different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation
of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized
representative definition must be submitted to the department prior to, or
together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
         f.   If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the department within 24 hours of the time said user becomes,
or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall
repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should have
become, aware of the violation.
      (9)   In the event the director determines that an industrial user is
discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause
problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority
to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent
the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more
restrictive than established in this article, the department shall provide
written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against
pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit;
      (10)   Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and
      (11)   Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with
this article.
   (f)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period.
Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for
under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more
than five years nor less than one year. The existing permit for significant
industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit re-issuance to
the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as
final.
   (g)   Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as
limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in [section
56-3-59.1 of this Code] are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for
a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or
operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent.
It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply
for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change;
      (2)   Change(s) in the department's NPDES permit;
      (3)   Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court
order;
      (4)   Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control
authority;
      (5)   An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing
permit;
      (6)   A change of conditions within the POTW;
      (7)   A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the
industrial user;
      (8)   Amendments to, or promulgation of, National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and those
delineated in Appendix A of this article. Permittees shall request an
application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within 90
days after the promulgation of a new or revised National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard to which the industrial user shall be subject.
Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that
information related to the newly promulgated or amended National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted
need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information
continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the department may
initiate this action;
      (9)   Changes in the monitoring location. See section
19-148 of this Code;
      (10)   Typographical errors or omissions in permits;
      (11)   The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based
on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or
      (12)   The user may request a modification of the permit. When initiated
by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change
in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user
has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the
department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with
the procedures contained in section
19-153 of this Code, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance.
   (h)   Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued
to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different
person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed
operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and
providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall
be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at
least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits,
which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the
change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or
sale. If is has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change takes
place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit.
Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any
existing permit which the department allows to be retained.
   (i)   Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly
notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a
modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change.
Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of
this article.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-148. - Monitoring facilities.
   (a)   Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at
their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate
monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by
the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct
such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with
discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this article.
In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified
in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be
identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative
sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise
determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided
within 90 days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial
user shall provide the department with:
      (1)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by
the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the
POTW:
      (2)   A flow schematic showing: (i) which connections receive each
national categorical process waste stream, (ii) which connections receive storm
water, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii) which lines handle each
combined waste stream. This report shall be certified by a professional
engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring
facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install
such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the
department for any costs incurred therein.
   (b)   The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's
premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user,
the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the
industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from
other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring
facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon
public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable
local construction standards and specifications. See subsection
19-147(g).
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-149. - Inspection, sampling and record-keeping.
   (a)   For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other
applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal laws and
regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other
premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized
representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes
of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities.
   (b)   Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and
completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the
industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or
the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing,
and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the
inspection and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be
prevented or delayed from, carry-out its inspection or sampling duties due to
the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe
or participate in the inspection or sampling activity.
   (c)   While performing work on private property, employees or authorized
representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security
and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the
industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department
shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's
option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial
user. Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from
viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may
take photographs of facilities subject to this article which shall be
maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with section
19-150 of this Code.
   (d)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the
industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security
personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from
the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
   (e)   Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge
in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require
such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent
analysis.
   (f)   Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from
monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n).
Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This
period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial
user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or
when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA.
   (g)   Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish
information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users
shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable
times, and allow the department to copy such records.
   (h)   In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of
such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly
furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee
or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the
user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises
for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared
samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling
unless proven invalid.
   (i)   In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described
herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is
obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part
136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more
times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in subsection
19-145(b) of this Code, or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge
permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall
provided a written report to the department within 14 days, which describes the
cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which
future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times
the limitation in the future.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-150. - Confidential information.
   (a)   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs,
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
   When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential
must be clearly marked 'confidential'. When requested by the person furnishing
the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose
trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as
confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related
to this article, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, and to the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment
programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential
by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been
determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential
information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a
request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other
governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The
department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such
confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of
the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use
sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the
industrial user's confidentiality claim.
   The department shall determine whether the information requested to be
treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential
information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in
writing. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (b)   Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by
applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with
the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's
authorized representative during normal business hours.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-151. - Statutes, laws and regulations.
   The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 C.F.R. Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference
herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this
article to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted,
established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or
organization of government other than the City of Dearborn shall be construed
to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as
amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this article.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-152. - Enforcement.
   (a)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any user to:
      (1)   Fail to comply and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents
and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge;
      (2)   Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's
operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time
frames provided in subsection
19-147(g)(1) of this Code;
      (3)   Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste
discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
      (4)   Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any
monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or
securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant
to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the
facility is promptly provided to the department;
      (5)   Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the
department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers;
      (6)   Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial
user's wastewater discharge permit;
      (7)   Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of
this article including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder.
Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits
issued prior to the effective date of this article shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of this article, and such permits shall remain
in effect and be enforceable under this article until a superseding permit is
effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal
regulations, regardless of compliance schedules.
   (b)   Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
where the requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met.
      (1)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or
other relevant evidence, that:
         a.   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause
(s) of the upset;
         b.   At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
         c.   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days:
            (i)   A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
            (ii)   The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue, and
            (iii)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof;
      (3)   The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (c)   Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a
violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for
essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system.
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of
this section.
      (1)   Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a
bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten days in advance.
      (2)   Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit
oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should
have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within
five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (3)   Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and
the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless:
         a.   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage.
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
         c.   The industrial user properly notified the department as described
in subsection (c)(2).
      (4)   Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (c)
(3), the department may approve an anticipated bypass.
   (d)   Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined
in subsection
19-145(b) of this Code during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the
daily maximum non-detect limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may
develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of
its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also
require development of a BMP as part of the department's enforcement response.
Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiative, or BMPs
shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit.
Industrial users shall provide at six-month intervals, analytical results and
certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution
prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial
user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement.
   (e)   Emergency suspensions and orders. The department may order suspension
of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge
permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to
stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause
the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person
notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or
the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event the department provides informal notification under
this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24
hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any
suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or
the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify
the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and
the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the
industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or his
designated representative, within ten days of such action. The industrial user
shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within 15 days of
the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of
the non-complying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service.
   (f)   Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened
discharge as specified in subsection (e), whenever the department has reason to
believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, the
department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation
upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue
appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved
enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of
violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement
response.
   (g)   Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds
to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its
wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any
prohibition of this article, the department, may initiate appropriate
administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or flagrant
violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy
such violation as soon as possible.
      (1)   a.   Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates
this article, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to
cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an
enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at
least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date,
time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative
of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for
achieving compliance with this article. Nothing contained herein shall require
the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to
prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth
in subsection (2). If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user
and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into
a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of
such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious
efforts to comply with this article and any procedures, requirements, and
agreements hereunder.
         b.   Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon
a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or
schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of
violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement,
administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall
adhere to the following conditions:
            (i)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities,
or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment
requirements and standards, including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing construction, and completing construction;
            (ii)   No single increment referred to in subsection (i) of this
section shall exceed nine months;
            (iii)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress
report to the department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established
schedule; and
            (iv)   Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in
the industrial user being found in violation of this article.
         c.   Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial
user, who violates or continues to violate this article or a duly issued
permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or
other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other
requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the
violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional
self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste
minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction,
and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at
the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is
the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order.
      (2)   Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial user,
who violates this article or allows such violation to occur, to show cause
before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A
notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place
of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why
the action is to be taken, the propose enforcement action, and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt
requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any
agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative.
         a.   Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the
show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may:
            (i)   In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
            (ii)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director
for action thereon.
         b.   Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this
article, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.
      (3)   Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the
hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing any of
the following actions:
         a.   Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or
requirement of this article, or applicable local, state or federal law or
regulation;
         b.   Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment
equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment
be accomplished within a specified time period;
         c.   Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity
as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time period;
         d.   Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity
determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a
compliance date;
         e.   Control of discharge quantities;
         f.   Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection,
monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the
department during compliance efforts;
         g.   Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not
limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following
a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and
maintenance practices have been employed; and/or
         h.   A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the
evidence that a violation either of this article or of a duly issued permit did
not occur.
      (4)   Public notification of significant noncompliance. The department
shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit
the list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months.
All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided
with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and
allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy.
   (h)   Legal actions. 
      (1)   Criminal action: Any user, who violates any provision of this
article including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges
imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant
thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge
permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device required under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each
violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more that 90 days, or by both.
The department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution
of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this article.
      (2)   Civil action: Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to
believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its
wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any
requirement of this article, the director may commence a civil action to compel
compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from
discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The
department or board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The
commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor
prohibits the department, director, board, or City of Detroit from commencing
action in Federal Court for discharges believed to be in violation of this
article, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the
City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In
addition, the City of Detroit may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement
activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this
article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
      (3)   All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of
competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-153. - Reconsideration and appeal.
   Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest
actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its
construction, application and enforcement of this article. The procedures
contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to
construction, application, and enforcement of this article.
   (a)   Selection of reconsideration or of appeal. 
      (1)   Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are
expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be
requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater
discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action,
determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department, by
the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements
or enforces the provisions of this article.
      (2)   An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee,
authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger, who is
adversely affected (i) by a permit issued as final by the department, or (ii)
by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or
after a hearing for reconsideration.
      (3)   Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a request
for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative,
and received at the department's general offices within 20 days from the date
of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A
request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a
brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request.
      (4)   A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either
by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department.
Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the
time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action,
determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized
representative, is final and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed
waived.
   (b)   Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper
request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the
time and place for a hearing.
      (1)   A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings
officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the
department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a
recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except
for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both
parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection
(c).
      (2)   Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a
request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in
writing that the request has been rejected.
      (3)   Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing
shall be conduct neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing
of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the
hearing may be continued for a reasonable time.
      (4)   The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation
and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present
their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being
reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence.
The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the
hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court
reporter.
      (5)   Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer
shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation to the
director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by
certified mail.
      (6)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to waters of this
state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this
section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the
hearing for reconsideration.
   (c)   Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request
for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding
the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to
section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition:
      (1)   Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the
department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for
reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this article.
      (2)   Where a request either is not filed within the time period
contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination
or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is
final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or
improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and
shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected.
      (3)   The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings
officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the
hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the
action, determination, or decision of the department.
      (4)   The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be
submitted to the board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      (5)   In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may
appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (6)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this
state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall
stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Sec. 19-154. - Savings.
   (a)   All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing,
acquired or incurred at the time this article take effect are saved and may be
consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced.
   (b)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision,
paragraph, word, section of this article, the remaining provisions, paragraphs,
words, sections, and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full
force and effect.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Appendix A
   Aluminum forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 467
   Asbestos manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 427
   Battery manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 461
   Builder's paper and board mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 431
   Canned and preserved fruits/vegetables ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 407
   Canned and preserved seafood proc. ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 408
   Carbon black manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 458
   Cement manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 411
   Centralized waste treatment ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 437
   Coal mining ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 434
   Coil coating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 465
   Copper forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 465
   Dairy products processing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 405
   Electrical and electronic components I & II ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 469
   Electroplating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 413
   Explosives manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 457
   Feed lots ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 412
   Ferroalloy manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 424
   Fertilizer manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 418
   Glass manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 426
   Grain mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 406
   Gum and wood chemical mfg. ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 454
   Hospital ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 460
   Ink formulating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 447
   Inorganic chemicals manufacture (I & III) ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 415
   Iron and steel ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 420
   Landfills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 445
   Leather tanning and finishing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 425
   Meat products ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 432
   Metal finishing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 433
   Metal molding and casting ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 464
   Metal products and machinery ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 438
   Mineral mining and processing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 436
   Nonferrous metals forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 471
   Nonferrous metals mfg. I ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 421
   Nonferrous metals mfg. II ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 421
   Ore mining and dressing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 440
   Organic chemicals, plastics, & synthetic fibers ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 414
   Paint formulating ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 446
   Paving and roofing material ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 443
   Pesticide chemicals ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 455
   Petroleum refining ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 419
   Pharmaceutical ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 439
   Phosphate manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 422
   Photographic ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 459
   Plastics molding and forming ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 463
   Porcelain enameling ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 466
   Pulp, paper, and paperboard ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 430 & 431
   Rubber manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 428
   Soap and detergent mfg. ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 417
   Steam electric ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 423
   Sugar processing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 409
   Textile mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 410
   Timber products ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 429
   Transportation equipment cleaning ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 442
   Waste combusters ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 444
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Appendix B
   An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation
specified in [section 56-3-59.1(b)(2)], to substitute specific limitations for
each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the total
phenols limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l,
shall be applied in lieu of the Total Phenols Limitation, upon election;
      2-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l
      4-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l
      4-Chloro-3-methylphenol ..... 1.0 mg/l
      2, 4-Dichlorophenol ..... 5.5 mg/l
      2, 4-Dinitrophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l
      4-Methylphenol ..... 5.0 mg/l
      4-Nitrophenol ..... 15.0 mg/l
      Phenol ..... 14.0 mg/l
   Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to
incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be
responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters.
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Appendix C
   Interim discharge limitations. No user shall discharge wastewater containing
any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant
discharge limitations:
      (1)   Compatible pollutants: 
         a.   Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than
1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour
period.
         b.   Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than
7,500 mg/l.
         c.   Any Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in concentrations greater
than 7,500 mg/l.
         d.   Any Phosphorus (P) in concentration greater than 250 mg/l.
   Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected
over an operating period representative of a User's discharge, and in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 146.
      (2)   Non-compatible pollutants. 
   Cadmium (Cd) ..... 1.0 mg/l
(Ord. No. 07-1131, 6-18-07)
Secs. 19-155—19-165. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNSPOUT CONNECTIONS[3] 
Footnotes:
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-894, adopted Apr. 16, 2002, enacted new §§ 19-
155—19-157. At the discretion of the editor said sections have been renumbered
as §§
19-166—19-168, to better fit the format of the Code.
Sec. 19-166. - Disconnection.
   Downspouts, eaves troughs and roof drains for the collection of stormwater
that are connected to any city sewer shall be disconnected from the city sewer
and properly sealed from the city sewer.
(Ord. No. 02-894, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 03-940, 4-15-03)
Sec. 19-167. - Duty to disconnect.
   It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or occupant to disconnect or
cause the disconnection of downspouts, eaves troughs and roof drains and
properly seal the sewer connection on the property so owned, leased or occupied
within the time frame set forth in section 19-168. Failure to do so shall be
deemed a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 02-894, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 03-940, 4-15-03)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-940, adopted Apr. 15, 2003, deleted § 19-168 in its
entirety. Former § 19-168 pertained to time for disconnection and derived from
Ord. No. 02-894, adopted Apr. 16, 2002.
Secs. 19-168—19-189. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 19-190.   Purpose; intent.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this article are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm
water discharges by any user.
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-191. - Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
   Authorized Enforcement Agency. Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this article.
   Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
   Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics ay cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in section 19-196 of this article.
   Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not
limited to any conveyances that allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps,
or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Storm Water
Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
   Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm
water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water
discharge permit. Means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   Non-storm water discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   Storm drainage system. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   Storm water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   Storm Water Management Plan. A document which describes the Best Management
Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems,
and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-192. - Applicability.
   This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
the city.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-193. - Responsibility for administration.
   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated
in writing by the Director of the Department of Public Works to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city or
agency.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-194. - Compatibility with other regulations.
   This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-195. - Ultimate responsibility.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-196. - Discharge prohibitions.
   (a)   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain,
or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water,
springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
      (2)   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges
specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health
and safety.
      (3)   Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity
requires a verbal notification to the city prior to the time of the test.
      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
   (b)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
      (4)   Improper connections in violation of this article must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city.
      (5)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of
the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations
are to be documented and provided to the city.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-197.   Watercourse protection.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-198. - Industrial or construction activity discharges.
   Submission of NOI to the city.
      (1)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
      (2)   The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required
to have an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) to the city at the
same time the operator submits the original Notice of Intent to the EPA as
applicable.
      (3)   The copy of the Notice of Intent may be delivered to the city
either in person or by mailing it to:
      Notice of Intent to Discharge Storm Water
      Department of Public Works
      2951 Greenfield
      Dearborn, Michigan 48126
      (4)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that
is discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the Notice of Intent to do so to the city.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-199. - Compliance monitoring.
   (a)   Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The city shall be permitted
to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article.
      (1)   If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
city.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this article.
A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
   (b)   Search warrants. If the city has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-200. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices.
   The city will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that
is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with
all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a storm water management plan (SWMP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-201. - Notification of spills.
   (a)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response
for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release
of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the
city in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city within seven business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
years.
   (b)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-202. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties.
   (a)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any
person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article
may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In
the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or
public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private
property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary
to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to
seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section
19-205.
   (b)   Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting
the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution
whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of
the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged
violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the
city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a warning notice.
   (c)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the alleged violator;
         b.   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
         c.   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
         d.   A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
         e.   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
         f.   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed
to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within seven days of service
of notice of violation; and
         g.   A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator. Such notice may require without limitation:
            1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
            2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
            3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall
cease and desist;
            4.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
            5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
            6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (d)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,
and remedies authorized by this article, the city may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
   (e)   Suspension Of MS4 access.
      (1)   Emergency cease and desist orders.
         a.   When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that
the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the city may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the violator to:
            1.   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
            2.   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
         b.   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the city may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including
immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other
municipal utility services. The city may allow the person to recommence its
discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this article. A person that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the city within three days of receipt of the emergency order.
Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
      (2)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
      (3)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city.
   (f)   Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the
remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to
cure the violations described therein within three days, or such greater period
as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the
actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $500.00
(depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains
unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (g)   Criminal prosecution. Any person that has violated or continues to
violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a
fine of $1,000.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of
time not to exceed 93 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-203. - Appeal of notice of violation.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the city. The notice of appeal must be received within seven days from the date
of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city council or
its designee shall take place within 21 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal. The decision of the city council or its designee shall be
final.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-204. - Enforcement measures after appeal.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within three
days of the decision of the city council or its designee upholding the decision
of the city then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-205. - Cost of abatement of the violation.
   (a)   Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within seven days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the city council or by the expiration
of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be
paid in not more than three equal payments. Interest at the rate of 7% per
annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 30th day following
discovery of the violation.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-206. - Violations deemed a public nuisance.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
Sec. 19-207. - Remedies not exclusive.
   The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover all
attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of
this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(Ord. No. 18-1630, 9-25-18)
ARTICLE VI. STORMWATER SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
Sec. 19-208.   Statement of purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-
stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal storm
sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this
article are:
   (a)   To regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater discharge from a
private property into a municipal storm sewer, enclosed or open conveyance
systems.
   (b)   To establish legal authority to implement permitting and delegation of
monitoring and maintenance responsibilities necessary to ensure compliance with
this article.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-209.   Definitions.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Authorized Enforcement Agency. The Director, and their authorized
representatives, which shall specifically include the City Engineer, all
inspectors and code enforcement, and any other individual designated by the
Mayor of the City of Dearborn to enforce this article. Where applicable the
terms may also mean the director of the Michigan Department of Environment,
Great Lakes, and Energy or his/her designated official, and/or the United
States EPA Administrator or his/her designated official.
   Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   City. The City of Dearborn.
   Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   County. The County of Wayne.
   Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres
or more requiring an issued permit and small construction activities impacting
one to five acres of land deemed to operate under a national permit. Such
activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
   Director. The Director of the Department of Public Works and Facilities.
   MS4. A municipal separate storm sewer system.
   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit. A permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
or by the State of Michigan under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342
(b) and codified in the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act Protection at MCL 324.101 et seq., that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States or State of Michigan, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
   Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
   Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   Storm sewer system or storm drainage system. A publicly owned facility by
which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to,
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
   Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
   Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-210.   Applicability.
   This article shall apply to post-construction storm water runoff from new
development and redevelopment projects that disturb one or more acres,
including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of
development, and that discharge to the city’s MS4, including projects where the
city is the developer.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-211.   Right of entry.
   The Director, or other authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection of stormwater BMPs in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Refusal of reasonable access to
the Director and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency to any
part of the premises is a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-212.   Enforcement, responsibility for administration.
   This Article shall be enforceable by the Director, or other enforcement
agency authorized by this Code.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-213.   Minimum standards.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-214.   Suspension of storm sewer system access.
   (a)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Director or other authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice,
suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer system or the waters of the United
States or this state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or
waters of the United States or this state, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (b)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this article may have
their storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The Director will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its storm sewer system access. The violator may
petition the Director for reconsideration and hearing.
   (c)   Violation. A person violates this article if the person reinstates
storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the Director or other authorized enforcement
agency.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-215.   Industrial or construction activity discharges.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Director prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-216.   Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by adapting and following the following requirements of the current
Wayne County stormwater ordinance, stormwater administrative rules and
stormwater standards manual.
   Site plans for proposed development or redevelopment will be reviewed in
accordance with the city’s current zoning ordinance, to ensure plans meet the
current Wayne County post-construction runoff control design standards. The
city and designee will adopt requirements set out in the current Wayne County
Stormwater Ordinance, stormwater administrative rules and stormwater standards
manual, here forth referred to as the Wayne County Stormwater Ordinance with
the following exceptions:
   (a) The storm water flood control and post-construction storm water runoff
controls program will apply to all private and public
developments or redevelopments exceeding one acre. It will also apply to
construction of a new public or private road where no road existed previously.
It will not apply to resurfacing projects where 50% of the pavement and parking
lot base is not disturbed. It will not apply to full depth reconstruction of
existing public roads. Where the control program applies and the proposed
discharge connects to a City of Dearborn sewer, the peak flow rate of storm
water runoff leaving the site must not exceed 0.50 cubic feet per second (cfs)/
acre of property.
   Site plans for proposed development or redevelopment will be reviewed by the
City of Dearborn to ensure plans meet the current post-construction runoff
control design standards. The property owner upon completion of construction
must enter into a binding long-term maintenance agreement with the City, at
their own expense, to document, routinely monitor and maintain the stormwater
quantity and quality BMP's so they continue to operate as designed. The
agreement shall be set up that if the property owner should be determined to be
non-responsive to notice of maintenance action required that the City may enter
the property to perform the maintenance required. This long-term maintenance
agreement shall be recorded with the Wayne County Register of Deeds and subject
to transfer to the new owner upon sale of the property.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-217.   Watercourse protection.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-218.   Enforcement.
   (a)   Notice of violation. Whenever the Director or their designee finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this article, the City of Dearborn may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance condition monitoring, and measuring;
      (2)   The performance maintenance work in order to get BMPs functioning
as designed;
      (3)   Payment of a fine to cover reimbursement of direct plus
administrative costs.
   (b)   Abatement of a violation. If abatement of a violation and/or
restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said
notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the City of
Dearborn or its designee at the violator’s expense.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-219.   Appeal of notice of violation.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or
order issued pursuant to this article may appeal same to the Director. A person
wishing to appeal pursuant to this article must file a written statement of the
grounds for appeal and the relief requested. Such appeal shall be filed with
the Director within 30 days of the date of the notice of violation. The appeal
shall be decided by the Director without hearing, based on review of the
written statement, any supporting documents or materials submitted by the
appellant, and any other papers, materials, and documents associated with the
decision, ruling, interpretation, notice, or order being appealed. The decision
of the Director shall be final.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this article, the Director or their designee may impose alternative
compensatory actions upon a violator; including, but not limited to storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, and creek cleanup.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. § 19-220.   Enforcement measures after appeal.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days
of the decision of the City of Dearborn upholding its decision, then
representatives of the city or its designees shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the City of Dearborn or its designee to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-221.   Cost of the abatement of the violation.
   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within ten days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the City of Dearborn or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a
special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the rate of 5% per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning
on the first day following discovery of the violation.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-222.   Injunctive relief.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the City of Dearborn
may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person
to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-223.   Violations deemed a public nuisance.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense. The City of Dearborn may also simultaneously or
alternatively initiate a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-224.   Violation and penalty.
   (a)   Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a civil
infraction punishable by a fine of $2,500.00.
   (b)   The City of Dearborn may recover all attorney’s fees; court costs; and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including condition
monitoring and maintenance expenses.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-225.   Remedies not exclusive.
   The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. § 19-226.   Severability.
   The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or its application to
any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Sec. 19-227.   Conflict with code of ordinances.
   When a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision
of the city’s Code of Ordinances, Zoning Ordinance, or other local provision or
regulation, the provision of this article shall be deemed to prevail.
(Ord. No. 22-1771, 9-13-22)
Chapter 20
TRANSITION FOLLOWING AN ELECTION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures to help
prepare a newly elected mayor, council member, or clerk for their duties and
responsibilities prior to formally assuming their offices.
(Ord. No. 25-1835, 1-28-25)
Sec. 20-2.   Transition period.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the "transition period" referenced herein
shall mean the period from the day after the election canvass has been
certified by the board of state canvassers until twelve noon on January first
of the year immediately following the election.
(Ord. No. 25-1835, 1-28-25)
Sec. 20-3.   Transition officer.
   The “transition officer” shall be the chief of staff.
   The transition officer shall notify current and incoming elected officials
of such designation and shall provide the transition officer's name and contact
information to all incoming city elected officials.
   The transition officer shall, within ten (10) days from the start of the
transition period, set orientation and hold an information meeting for the
mayor-elect, council members-elect, and clerk-elect. The transition officer
shall notify current elected officials that the orientation process has been
initiated.
(Ord. No. 25-1835, 1-28-25)
Sec. 20-4.   Establishment of the offices-elect.
   During the transition period there is hereby established an office of the
mayor-elect (one (1)), council members-elect (seven (7)), and clerk-elect (one
(1)). The offices-elect shall be afforded equal office space in the city’s main
administrative building to work and carry out its function at no cost. The
scheduling of briefings with department directors and others as deemed
appropriate shall be through the current mayor or their chief of staff.
(Ord. No. 25-1835, 1-28-25)
Sec. 20-5.   Public information for newly elected officials.
   The mayor-elect, council members-elect, and clerk-elect shall be provided
the following information, including, but not limited to:
   (a)   A list of appointed city positions, including:
   (1)   The budget for the appointed positions and associated details and the
contact information for each incumbent serving in an appointed position; and
   (2)   Identification of appointed positions subject to the advice and
consent of the city council.
   (b)   Contact information for the current mayor, city council members, clerk
and each department director;
   (c)   Conflict of interest and ethics rules applicable to elected officials;
   (d)   The most up-to-date and complete copies of the following:
   (1)   City budget and tax rates;
   (2)   City annual comprehensive financial report;
   (3)   City actuarial reports for:
      a.   The policemen’s and firemen’s retirement system (“Chapter 21”);
      b.   The City of Dearborn retirement system (“Chapter 22”);
      c.   The police and fire revised retirement system (“Chapter 23”);
      d.   The post-employment healthcare fund; and
      e.   The Municipal Employees’ Retirement System of Michigan (“MERS”) for
police and fire.
   (e)   The most up-to-date and complete list of all city boards and
commissions, a list of current board and commission members on each public
body, the duration of each members appointment, and a list of those members who
are appointed by the mayor and city council.
   (f)   Any other public information reasonably requested by the mayor-elect,
council members-elect, and/or clerk-elect.
(Ord. No. 25-1835, 1-28-25)
Sec. 20-6.   Non-interference.
   The offices of the mayor-elect, council members-elect, and clerk-elect shall
not interfere directly or indirectly with the conduct of any city department.
This provision does not preclude the offices-elect from making requests in
writing to the mayor or their chief of staff, council office, or clerk’s
office.
(Ord. No. 25-1835, 1-28-25)
 
A. - Cablevision Industries
   ORDINANCE NO. 97-697
   AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO CABLEVISION INDUSTRIES, LIMITED
PARTNERSHIP TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF
DEARBORN, MICHIGAN
   THE CITY OF DEARBORN ORDAINS:
   I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Section 1.1. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Dearborn
Telecommunications Systems Franchise Ordinance for Cablevision Industries,
Limited Partnership.
   Section 1.2. The City of Dearborn grants Cablevision Industries, Limited
Partnership, hereafter called CVI, a non-exclusive Franchise to construct,
operate and maintain a Cable System within the corporate boundaries of the City
of Dearborn for a term of twenty (20) years from the date of execution of this
Franchise agreement.
   Section 1.3. Any Franchise and the rights, privileges, authority, and
responsibilities established shall take effect and be in force from the date of
execution of this Franchise agreement only if within 30 days after the date of
the granting of the Franchise, CVI files with the Mayor of the City of Dearborn
its acceptance of the Franchise terms, all required construction bonds and
insurance certificates, and pays to the City Clerk all reasonable costs
incurred by the City in preparing, considering and awarding this Franchise,
including legal, engineering, technical, publication and other expenses, said
costs not to exceed $2,700.00. If CVI fails to timely comply with this section,
it shall acquire no, franchise, rights, privileges, or authority whatsoever.
   Section 1.4. This Franchise is subject to all of the provisions of the
Dearborn Telecommunications Systems Regulatory Ordinance.
   Section 1.5. Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions of terms
shall apply throughout this Ordinance:
      a)   City shall mean the City of Dearborn.
      b)   Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Dearborn.
      c)   Customer is any person who contracts with CVI for, or is in any
manner provided with Cable System Service.
      d)   Department of Communications shall mean the City of Dearborn
Department of Communications.
      e)   Franchise is a non-exclusive, limited authorization awarded by
ordinance for the construction, maintenance and operation of a Cable System on,
under, over or across the public ways of the City and/or to transact local
cable television business therein.
      f)   Gross Revenues means all of the revenue, as determined in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, received by CVI from the
provision of Cable Service within the City, including, but not limited to,
barters, installation fees, subscriber fees, pay or premium television fees,
equipment leases and sales, advertising, leased channel revenues, production
charges and all other revenues.
      g)   Person shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership or any
other entity.
      h)   Cable Service means the one-way transmission to customers of (i)
video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and customer interaction,
if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or
other programming service. The definition of Cable Service contained in section
602 of the Cable Act is incorporated by reference. Specifically excluded are
common carrier or other non-cable television telecommunications services and
any leasing of system capacity to users who provide Telecommunications Services
directly or indirectly to Customers. Residential Cable Service is specifically
allowed.
      i)   Cable System shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple customers within a community and
used to provide Cable Service pursuant to and in accordance with this
Franchise, including all network facilities such as cables, conduits, access
manholes, rights-of-way, equipment, devices and appurtenances to be used by CVI
to make the Cable System network fully operational. The definition of Cable
System contained in Section 602 of the Cable Act is incorporated by reference.
Specifically excluded are non-cable television Telecommunications Systems and
any leasing of system capacity or fibers to users who provide
Telecommunications Services directly or indirectly to customers.
   Section 1.6. No installation of any Cable System facility shall be performed
or conducted in the City unless plans therefor shall have been first submitted
to the City Engineer and a construction permit issued therefor. Within eighteen
(18) months after the date CVI accepts the terms of this Franchise, CVI shall
use its best efforts to complete the construction and upgrade of the Cable
System. CVI shall have the ability to perform lateral construction in order to
provide Cable Service to additional buildings any time during the term of this
Franchise. In the event CVI is unable to complete construction within said
eighteen (18) months, then the Mayor or his designee, shall have the right to
extend said date for additional six (6) month periods.
   Section 1.7. That CVI will pay to the City of Dearborn the sum of $1,000.00
per day as liquidated damages for each day in which the upgrade of the cable
system remains incomplete and/or does not meet FCC technical standards for the
delivery of Cable Service, within 24 months after the acceptance of this
agreement. For good cause beyond the control of CVI, the City Council may, but
need not, in the Council's sole and exclusive discretion, give full or partial
relief to CVI from imposition of this damages provision.
   II. - FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENTS
   Section 2.1. Payments due the City under the terms of this subsection shall
be paid quarterly on or before the last day of January, April, July and October
of each year for the preceding calendar year.
   Section 2.2. CVI will pay five percent (5%) of all system Gross Revenues to
the City of Dearborn as a franchise fee.
   Section 2.3. The City shall be furnished a certificate with each payment
reflecting the computations for the period covered by the payment. Any payment
shall bear interest at the prime rate as set by the Federal Reserve plus one
(1) percent after the due date.
   Section 2.4. Franchise fees shall be in addition to any other tax, charge,
fee, or payment due the City by CVI which are imposed on all businesses
operating in the City. In the event that the franchise fee is itemized as a
separate charge on customer bills, the exact text and location on the bills and
any other materials or audio or video messages shall be submitted to the City
for prior review and comment by the City.
   Section 2.5. The rights, privileges and franchise granted hereby are not
exclusive and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the City
from granting any like or similar rights, privileges and franchise to any other
person within all of the City; provided, however, any such franchise shall not
be on terms or conditions more respect to the following requirements:
— Service area
— Franchise fees
— Insurance, performance bonds and similar instruments
— Access channels and support
— Reports and related record keeping
— Liquidated damages
— Support for institutional uses, or its equivalent
   In addition, CVI agrees to automatically increase the City's franchise fee
percentage to the highest franchise fee percentage that it pays to any other
community, township, county, city or rural area within Wayne, Oakland, Macomb
or Wastenaw counties, where it renews or signs a new Cable Television
franchise. CVI shall notify the City within 10 days of any such occurrence. CVI
shall immediately pay to the City the amount, in excess of any payments agreed
to herein, of any grant, or economic benefit equal on a per capita basis to any
payment, grant or economic benefit in excess of a percentage franchise fee that
it gives, makes or pays to any other community, township, county, city or rural
area within Wayne, Oakland, Macomb or Wastenaw counties, where it renews or
signs a new Cable Television franchise. For the purpose of this sub-section,
CVI shall include any parent, subsidiary or affiliate company or any other
entity directly or indirectly 50% or more owned or controlled by it, a parent,
a subsidiary or an affiliate.
   Section 2.6. Not less than annually, CVI shall provide the City with an
opinion as to the accuracy of the franchise fee payments paid within the
preceding twelve (12) months. Said certifications shall be prepared internally
by CVI in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards as
established by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The City
reserves the right, upon reasonable notice to CVI, to audit all books and
records of CVI. In the event that CVI is found to have not been in compliance
with the terms of this franchise, CVI will pay 100% of the cost of the audit or
review. In any event, the City shall not be responsible for any internal or
external CVI costs associated with compliance with this subsection. Any
consultants shall be hired at the sole discretion of the City. For the purpose
of this section, any underpayment of franchise fees amounting to more than 3%
of the total due shall be deemed to be not in compliance.
   III. - NEW DEVELOPMENTS
   Section 3.1. The City may amend this Ordinance from time to time, to allow
CVI to innovate and implement new services and expansion of its Cable System or
to impose any terms allowed by law or mandated by State or Federal law which
are applied uniformly to all Cable Systems.
   Section 3.2. If, during the term of this franchise, any change in Local,
State or Federal laws, statutes, rules or regulations have the effect of
expanding the rights of the City in any way, then the City shall have the right
to amend the terms of this franchise to include any rights allowed by law.
   Section 3.3. In addition to those matters required in this Franchise, CVI
shall make the following express acknowledgments:
      (1)   Except for actions seeking equitable relief or specific
performance, CVI shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any
loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any of the lawful provisions or
requirements of this Ordinance or because of the enforcement thereof by City,
unless caused by the gross negligence or willful or intentional misconduct of
the City or its agents, employees or representatives.
      (2)   CVI expressly acknowledges that on accepting a Franchise it did so
relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority
of the City.
      (3)   By acceptance of a Franchise, CVI acknowledges that it has not been
induced to enter into a Franchise by any understanding or promise or other
statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of City or by any ether
third person concerning any term or condition of this Franchise not expressed
in this Ordinance.
      (4)   CVI further acknowledges by the acceptance of this Franchise that
it has carefully read the terms and conditions herein, and is willing to and
does accept all of the risks of the meanings of such terms and conditions.
   Section 3.4. CVI shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of
the State and Federal government or any administrative agency. However, if any
such State or Federal law or regulation shall require CVI to perform any
service, or shall permit CVI to perform any service, or shall prohibit CVI from
performing any service, in conflict with the terms of this Franchise or of any
law or regulation of the City then as soon as possible, CVI shall notify the
City of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law
and the laws and regulations of the City or the Franchise.
   Section 3.5. If any provision of this Franchise is held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal or State
law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court to
be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law, rule
or regulation, said provision may be considered a separate, distinct and
independent part of the Franchise, and such holding shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of all other provisions. In the event that such
law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or
otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or
modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules or regulations, said
provision shall return to full force and effect and shall be binding on the
parties.
   Section 3.6. If a material provision of this Franchise is affected by action
of a court, it may be modified to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to
carry out the full intent and purpose of this Franchise provided the intent and
purpose of the Franchise is not in contravention of any law, regulation or
order of a court.
   Section 3.7. CVI agrees not to unreasonably oppose intervention by the City
in any suit or proceeding related to this Ordinance to which CVI is a party.
CVI agrees to abide by all provisions of this Ordinance and its Franchise and
further agrees that it shall not make any claim against the City that the
provisions of this Ordinance or Franchise are unreasonable or arbitrary as of
the date of the adoption of this ordinance or franchise.
   Section 3.8. The City reserves the right to regulate all Customer rates,
lease rates and any other charges imposed by CVI on its Customers within the
City in the absence of preemptive state or federal regulations.
   Section 3.9. CVI agrees to limit late payment penalty fees it charges its
customers to $3.00, to be imposed no earlier than 40 days after the
presentation of an invoice and adequate notice of late fee, or actual
collection costs, whichever is greater.
   IV. - CABLE TELEVISION
   Section 4.1. CVI is specifically prohibited from recommending a particular
manufacturer, sales or service establishment, or engaging in the sale, service,
rental, leasing of television receivers, radio receivers, or television or
radio receiver related parts and accessories anywhere in Wayne, Oakland, or
Macomb counties. Such owner or operator shall prohibit its officers, agents,
and employees from violating the terms of this section whether in the
performance of Cable System duties or otherwise. Nothing in this section shall
inhibit CVI's ability to sell remote control units or other Cable System
accessories.
   Section 4.2. CVI shall at all times comply with the privacy provisions of
applicable Local, Sate and Federal law.
   Section 4.3. It shall be unlawful for CVI to install any monitoring device,
polling device or reverse (upstream) transmission device without the written
consent of the Customer.
   Section 4.4. CVI will upgrade, operate and maintain its Cable System with a
capacity of at least 750 MHz, passing all dwelling units within the City, with
a system-wide average of no more than 1500 homes per node, with further future
capability to divide the nodes into sub-nodes of no more than 500 homes,
utilizing 1 GHz taps, with a minimum of 2 fibers to each sub-node and a minimum
of 2 fibers to each node, and a minimum capacity of 78 channels of analog Cable
Service to reach all dwellings in the City of Dearborn. Channels shall be
cablecast in stereo in all cases where the originating signal is stereo. The
requirement for stereo may be waived at the discretion of the City.
   Section 4.5. That connections to the Cable System will be voluntary only and
will be by coaxial cables or state-of-the-art equipment into the home. That CVI
will provide, upon request of the customer, a source A- source B (cable or
antenna) switch at cost as determined by the FCC. That CVI will provide upon
request of the customer, a remote control converter capable of receiving those
services to which a Customer subscribes at a rate as determined by the FCC. The
City reserves the right to regulate, on a cost basis, the rates charged to
CVI's customers for these devices in the absence of applicable FCC rules or
regulation.
   Section 4.6. CVI will not interrupt the transmission of cable television
signals on the Cable System except for necessary maintenance or emergencies.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Dearborn Department of Communications,
customer charges shall abate in the event that service to a customer is
interrupted for more than twenty-four hours. Interruption of service shall
include reception of less quality than FCC specifications on a single channel.
Except that: degradation, due to natural phenomena, of basic service satellite
signals shall not be considered an interruption of service for purposes of this
section only.
   Section 4.7. CVI will maintain at least one local office in Dearborn which
will handle expeditiously complaints, service request and subscriber billing
payments for the Dearborn cable television system.
   Section 4.8. CVI will provide, upon request and at cost as determined by the
FCC, a parental control device which allows parents to "lock out" selected
television programming. Such lock out shall be provided through remote
electronic means, such as converter programming, whenever possible. The City
reserves the right to regulate, on a cost basis, the rates charged to CVI's
customers for these devices in the absence of applicable FCC rules or
regulation.
   Section 4.9. CVI will continue to provide free full basic service, including
converters and remotes as needed on activated outlets, to all municipal and
school buildings within the City limits of Dearborn. In addition, CVI will wire
at no charge any new or newly designated municipal and school buildings,
including the installation of up to five (5) internal cable outlets in each
building, and provide free full basic service to them at no charge.
   Section 4.10. CVI shall continue to provide an override capability which
permits the Mayor or his designee to remotely or locally override all audio and
visual signals on all cable television channels simultaneously or individually,
by use of either a computer with a modem or by use of a standard touch tone
telephone.
   Section 4.11. CVI will, upon request of the Department of Communications and
at no cost, provide the most recent proof-of-performance test conducted by CVI
to show that the system conforms to FCC standards. The City reserves the right
to hire an independent consulting firm to verify the results. If such
verification shows that the system does not meet FCC standards, then CVI will
pay 100% of the cost of the consulting firm.
   Section 4.12. The Dearborn Department of Communications shall periodically
review the allocation of channels for local access and may increase the number
of, reallocate, place on a shared basis or discontinue local access channels
and usage under the conditions of this section.
   CVI shall provide six (6) channels to the City for Public Educational and
Government (hereinafter "PEG") access purposes. The City shall, in its sole
discretion, be responsible for allocation of the PEG access channels to the
individual users. Channel locations shall be by mutual agreement of the City
and CVI.
   Wherever the specially designated PEG access channels are in use for non-
automated, non-repetitive, locally produced programming, twelve (12) hours per
day for twelve (12) consecutive weeks and there is a demand for use of an
additional channel, CVI shall make such a channel available within sixty (60)
days of a written request from the City for an additional PEG access channel.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, CVI shall not be obligated to provide
more than eight (8) PEG channels in the analog spectrum.
   In the event the eight (8) PEG access channels are fully programmed and the
City believes that demand exists for an additional PEG access channel or
channels, the City shall submit a written request to CVI. Such request shall
describe (1) the existing usage of the PEG channels and (2) describe the
programming that cannot be accommodated on the existing PEG access channels.
The City and CVI shall thereafter negotiate in good faith to accommodate the
reasonable needs of the City for additional PEG channels, taking into account
the disruption to existing customer viewing patterns, the cost to CVI and such
other points as may then be relevant.
   Allocation of digital spectrum for PEG access use will be determined by
mutual agreement between CVI and the City at any time after the digital
spectrum is activated by CVI. Allocations will be based on reasonable specific
need, taking into account the disruption to existing customer viewing patterns,
the cost to CVI and such other points as may then be relevant.
   Section 4.13. CVI reserves the right to treat capital and construction costs
specified under section 4 of this agreement as external costs as defined by the
FCC or Federal law.
   Section 4.14. CVI will provide at no cost, four dark single mode fibers
terminated and tested at the Wayne County RESA facility and a Dearborn Public
Schools facility to be designated by the Dearborn Public Schools. Any future
relocation of these fibers will be at the expense of the Dearborn Public
Schools.
   Section 4.15. CVI agrees to cooperate with other holders of
Telecommunications Systems Franchises and, when ordered by the City, shall
allow the interconnecting of such systems to facilitate the sharing of PEG
access video programming for transmission over Public, Educational or
Governmental Access Channels (PEG). The Franchise holders shall share equally
the cost of such interconnections.
   Section 4.16. CVI shall immediately provide facilities and staff for the
insertion of local access video tape or live video programs on any PEG access
channel, at any time so designated by the program owner or provider, for
distribution on the Dearborn Cable system, pursuant to the rules and
regulations adopted under section 4.26 of this agreement. The local program
insertion facilities shall be located within the Public Access facilities of
CVI.
   Section 4.17. CVI shall provide, as soon as technically feasible, facilities
and staff for the regional cablecast of any local access video tape or live
video programs on CVI affiliated Cable Systems within the State of Michigan
upon the approval or request of the producer or owner of such program and under
reasonable conditions of CVI and the rules and regulations of the affected
Cable System, at any time so designated by the program owner or provider,
pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted under section 4.26 of this
agreement.
   Section 4.18. CVI shall maintain one basic text generator as needed for each
PEG access channel at such locations as designated by the City.
   Section 4.19. CVI shall, as part of the Cable System upgrade, provide two
dark single mode fiber optic cables terminated and tested between each Dearborn
Public School building, as designated by the Dearborn Public Schools, including
Vista Maria upon the approval of the affected municipality and/or cable system,
and the CVI Cable System headend. Specific fiber optic cable routing and
splicing needs of the Dearborn Public Schools will be taken into consideration
at the time of installation, termination and splicing.
   Section 4.20. CVI shall, as part of the Cable System upgrade, provide four
dark single mode fiber optic cables terminated and tested between one City
building, designated by the City, and the Cable System headend. The fiber optic
cables shall be spliced per City instructions. Specific fiber optic cable
routing and splicing needs of the City will be taken into consideration at the
time of installation, termination and splicing.
   Section 4.21. CVI shall maintain the existing Institutional cable network
for use by the City and Dearborn Public Schools until such time as the City and
Dearborn Public Schools have developed adequate alternative capacity utilizing
the newly installed fiber optic cables provided under this agreement.
   Section 4.22. CVI shall provide access to satellite dishes capable of
receiving signals from C-band and Ku-band satellites for the City and Dearborn
Public Schools, during normal business hours. The City acknowledges CVI's
willingness to provide reasonable, no charge access to these facilities,
however CVI reserves the right to charge for or deny access to same upon
reasonable notice to the City of Dearborn Public Schools.
   Section 4.23. CVI shall cooperate, at the request of the City, with Cable
Systems in adjoining cities to provide interconnection to the Dearborn Cable
System for the purpose of delivering Dearborn local video tape or live video
programs to be cablecast on PEG access channels upon the approval of the
affected Cable System.
   Section 4.24. CVI shall, as part of the Cable System upgrade, permanently
install and maintain remote control video cameras, modulators, audio mixers,
video switchers and associated equipment in the Dearborn City Council Chambers
so as to allow for live cablecast and video taping of meetings and events by
the City. CVI will assume the cost of such equipment and installation up to
$50,000.00 and agrees to maintain such equipment throughout the term of this
agreement.
   Section 4.25. Within 90 days of the effective date of this franchise, CVI
will contribute the sum of $200,000.00 to the City for its use in upgrading,
maintaining, or operating City production facilities.
   CVI will also commit to spending not less than $200,000.00 to upgrade its
studio facilities at 15200 Mercantile Drive. This upgrade will, in part, be
designed to more fully provide facilities for public access users. This studio
upgrade will be commended immediately after the completion of the system
upgrade discussed in section 4.4, but in no event later than 2 years after the
effective date of this franchise.
   Section 4.26. The City and CVI will develop and mutually agree on rules and
regulations for the PEG use and operation of the Studios. The existing PEG
Access rules and obligations will remain in effect until adoption of new rules
by the City and the Council under this section.
   Section 4.27. CVI agrees to an annual capital equipment purchase of
equipment for the purpose of maintaining and upgrading the equipment in the PEG
access area of its Studios and in the City production facilities. For both the
PEG access facility and the City production facilities, CVI will assume the
cost of such equipment and installation up to $5,000.00 in year three of this
agreement and will increase the commitment to $12,500.00 per year beginning in
year five and annually thereafter throughout the term of this agreement, for a
total commitment of $10,000.00 per year in years three and four, and $25,000.00
in year five throughout the term of this agreement. Any unexpended balances
will accrue to the following year and forward. Equipment specifications for the
PEG access facility shall be created through consultation and mutual agreement
of the City and CVI. Equipment for the City production facilities shall be
specified by the City.
   Section 4.28. CVI agrees to support Public access use of the facility which
may be supported by user fees assessed on PEG facility users under rules and
regulations adopted under section 4.26 of this franchise. CVI shall provide
staff for training and certification of local community producers wishing to
utilize the PEG access areas of the Studios.
   Section 4.29. Nothing in this agreement shall prevent CVI or require CVI to
rent all, or part, of the Studios to any party (client) at their sole
discretion except as provided for in the rules and regulations adopted under
section 4.26 of this franchise. Rates charged to clients are at the party's
sole discretion.
   Section 4.30. The City acknowledges CVI's long standing commitment to
quality local origination programming for and about the Dearborn area and its
continuing strong commitment to local origination programming in the future.
   V. - LIABILITY
   Section 5.1. CVI shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless the
City, its officers, agents, employees, departments and boards from any and all
claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action demands, judgments, decrees,
proceedings, and expenses of any nature (including without limitation
reasonable attorneys fees) arising out of, or resulting from the acts or
omission of CVI, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors or
assignees, unless such claims are caused by the gross negligence or intentional
or willful misconduct of the City.
   The City agrees to notify CVI of any suit brought upon the City related to
CVI's operation of the Cable System within 60 days of such legal action.
   CVI may exert control over any litigation or settlements related to this
section and the City agrees to provide reasonable cooperation to CVI.
   Section 5.2. CVI shall carry worker's compensation insurance with statutory
limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of no less than One
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) which shall cover all operations to be
performed for construction, maintenance and operation of the Cable System.
   Section 5.3. CVI shall carry comprehensive general liability, including
completed operations, independent contractors, and contractual liability
coverage, and comprehensive automobile liability insurance with bodily injury
limits of not less than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) per person
and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence which shall cover all
operations. CVI shall also carry property damage liability insurance with
limits of not less than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00).
   Section 5.4. CVI shall furnish certificates of such insurance to the City,
on an annual basis. The certificates shall be approved by the Corporation
Counsel of the City, shall list the City as an additional insured, and shall
provide that the insurance shall not be canceled or materially changed unless
thirty (30) days prior written notice shall be given to the City for approval.
   VI. - GENERAL CAPABILITY
   Section 6.1. In furtherance of the general policy that the services provided
be innovative and modern, CVI, in the exercise of its reasonable business
judgment, will actively pursue a continuous policy of incorporating new
technical developments into the system to reflect the "State of the Art." City
may waive this requirement at its discretion.
   In addition, subject to the provisions of this section, the City may amend
the franchise so as to require CVI to upgrade the Cable System to incorporate
up to and including the State of the Art (SA Option).
   The City may not initiate the SA Option, or issue any order, at a time when
CVI is subject to effective competition for Cable Service as defined by State
or Federal law. Effective competition is deemed to not be present in the
absence of any definition by State or Federal law.
   In order to initiate the SA Option, the City shall first commence a review
of the Cable System. The City may initiate the SA Option at any time after year
9 (nine) and before year 15 (fifteen) of this agreement.
   The review shall, at a minimum, take into account the following:
         i.   characteristics of the existing system;
         ii.   the State of the Art;
         iii.   the additional benefits provided to customers by the State of
the Art;
         iv.   the marketplace demand for the State of the Art, taking into
account any associated rate increases;
         v.   any additional factors deemed relevant by the City or CVI.
   If, after providing for appropriate public comment, the City determines to
exercise the SA Option, it may order CVI to implement up to and including the
State of the Art (The Order). The Order shall be in writing and shall set forth
the basis for the City's decision, including a reasonable period of time for
CVI to implement the Order. The franchise shall be amended accordingly. If
however, CVI is not willing to comply with The Order, CVI may, within 60 days
after The Order, appeal The Order to any court of competent jurisdiction, which
will stay the order pending final decision of the Court. If the Court finds
that CVI has demonstrated the City's order is not supported by a preponderance
of the evidence based on the records of the proceeding above, the Court shall
grant appropriate relief.
   In the event that the City issues The Order, CVI may notify the City
pursuant to Section 626 of the Cable Act that it wishes to commence proceedings
to renew the Franchise. Such notice shall be deemed to shorten the term of the
Franchise such that the Franchise will expire thirty-six (36) months from the
date of the Grantee's notice. The Grantee shall not be deemed to be in
violation of The Order or of the Franchise if such renewal proceedings are
commenced.
   The State of the Art shall mean equipment and/or facilities that:
   A.   are readily available with reasonable delivery schedules from two or
more sources of supply;
   B.   have the capability to perform the intended functions demonstrated
within systems with similar characteristics (including, but not limited to
population, density, subscriber penetration, etc.) under actual operating
conditions for purposes other than test or experimentation; and
   C.   can be implemented in a manner which has a reasonable likelihood of
generating a reasonable return on the Grantee's investment when measured over
the then remaining term of the franchise.
   Section 6.2. In the event that the City or Dearborn Public Schools wishes to
utilize any Cable Services of the Cable System beyond those provided for at not
cost by this franchise, CVI agrees to provide those Cable Services, to the
extent not prohibited by external contract, to the City or Dearborn Public
Schools at the lowest rate that it charges any of its commercial or residential
customers for comparable Cable Services.
   Section 6.3. At the time of approval of new construction of any part of the
Cable System, if CVI installs conduit in the public right of way within the
City, then CVI shall, at the same time, install one (1) one and one-quarter-
inch conduit for the use of the City, provided, however that such use shall be
limited to the City's exclusive, internal telecommunications use and shall not
be sold, assigned, or transferred to or by third parties. This section does not
apply to existing facilities.
   Section 6.4. In the event of an officially declared emergency or other
urgent community need, CVI shall, upon request of the City, make available its
facilities to the City for the duration of the emergency at no charge.
   Section 6.5. It shall be unlawful for CVI to charge any fee for the
disconnection of service.
   VII. - CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY
   Section 7.1. The poles, wires, and appurtenances of CVI's system shall be
located, erected, and maintained upon existing utility facilities wherever
reasonable and feasible. CVI shall use underground equipment in all cases where
all other utilities are required to use underground equipment and in all cases
where City Ordinance requires underground installation. CVI recognizes that the
City may designate additional areas for underground service at any time. CVI
shall be required to relocate its equipment to underground at no cost to the
City, as directed by the City, so long as all other utilities in the same area
which are required to make similar relocations do so at their own expense. The
City shall waive this requirement to allow for the installation of equipment or
pedestals that must be located above ground for valid technical reasons or if
other utilities are allowed to place similar equipment above ground in the same
affected area.
   Section 7.2. CVI shall be allowed, at its own expense and subject to state
and local codes and appropriate regulation, to set its own poles, anchors,
guys, and similar facilities within public rights-of-way within the City when
necessary and upon the securing of permits from the City.
   Section 7.3. All facilities erected by CVI within the City shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public rights-
of-ways and public places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and
convenience of adjoining property owners.
   Section 7.4. In case of disturbance or damage to any street, sidewalk,
alley, public way, street sign or other public property, CVI shall at its own
expense promptly and in a manner acceptable to the City, replace, repair, and
otherwise restore such property to a condition as good as that prevailing prior
to said disturbance or damage.
   Section 7.5. CVI shall act diligently and without delay to repair,
regardless of time of day, any safety hazard that occurs involving CVI's
equipment and plant.
   Section 7.6. If, at any time during the term of this Franchise, the City
shall properly elect to undertake public building or construction, altering the
grade, alignment, or location of any street, sidewalk, alley, or public way CVI
promptly shall, upon reasonable written notice from the City, remove and
relocate its facilities at CVI's expense in a manner reasonably acceptable to
the City; provided, however, if any utility is compensated for such removal or
relocation, then CVI shall be similarly compensated. The City shall use its
best efforts to find CVI a suitable relocation for its facilities. In the event
of emergency, the City may sever, disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy
facilities of CVI using its best efforts to notify CVI prior to performing such
work whenever practicable. Repairs to CVI's equipment and facilities shall be
done at CVI's expense.
   Section 7.7. CVI shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain industry standards and services for preventing failures and
accidents which would cause damage, injuries, or nuisance to the public.
   Section 7.8. Prior to the installation of any portion of the Cable System,
CVI is responsible for obtaining all applicable permits, licenses,
authorizations and approvals required for construction and operation of the
Cable System from the City, Wayne County, State of Michigan and any other
parties with jurisdiction over such matters.
   Section 7.9. CVI agrees to remove any existing unused outside plant that has
no future identifiable use at any time it is so requested by the City.
   VIII. - TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
   Section 8.1. CVI will provide and maintain a back-up generator power supply
with power failure alarm at the headend which will automatically provide
continuous headend operation; and will provide battery back-up on all outside
plant power supplies and equipment, for 2 hours of uninterrupted operation in
the event of commercial power failure.
   Section 8.2. That the Cable System will pass by Dearborn homes along the
present utility poles (or in some places underground) without disturbing the
buildings and without any interference to present television and radio
reception. In case of any disturbance, at any time during the life of the
franchise, by Cable System work of the buildings, property, pavement or other
surfacing, it will at its own cost and expense, repair or restore the
buildings, property or land surface, including trees and planting, disturbed or
damaged by construction, installation or maintenance of the Cable System to a
condition as good as that prevailing before said work.
   Section 8.3. CVI will provide qualified technicians on a 24 hour/seven day
call basis with a 4 hour minimum response time commencing with day one turn-on
of the upgraded system for all institutional, governmental and public school
users and uses.
   Section 8.4. CVI shall construct, install and maintain its Cable System in a
manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances,
construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission or state agency. Upon
request by the City, CVI shall provide to the City written reports of CVI's
performance tests conducted pursuant to such State or Federal standards and
requirements.
   Section 8.5. CVI shall at all times comply with the National Electrical
Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards) as adopted by the City; National
Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); applicable Federal,
State and Local regulations; and other applicable codes and Ordinances of the
City.
   Section 8.6. In any event, the Cable System shall not endanger or interfere
with the safety of persons or property within the City or other areas where CVI
may have equipment located.
   Section 8.7. All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or
occurring during construction of the Cable System shall comply with the
standards of the Federal and State Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
   Section 8.8. Construction, installation and maintenance of the Cable System
shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close
coordination with public and private utilities serving the City following
accepted industry construction procedures and practices.
   Section 8.9. All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations
shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering and
aesthetic consideration.
   Section 8.10. The City may require CVI to develop an adequate preventive
maintenance policy addressing local needs in keeping with industry standards,
Federal and State laws and regulations and shall file it with the Department of
Communications for approval.
   Section 8.11. The City may require CVI to develop an adequate customer
service policy addressing local needs, in keeping with industry standards,
Federal and State laws and regulations, including but not limited to universal
service requirements except as provided in this agreement, anti-redlining
requirements and repair and maintenance standards and shall file it with the
Department of Communications for approval.
   Section 8.12. Upon the request of the City, CVI will adopt customer service
standards to be approved by the City and the Federal Customer Service standards
adopted by the Federal Communications Commission are incorporated by reference.
If there is any difference between the FCC standards and the standards adopted
by the City or included in this franchise, the more stringent standards shall
apply.
   Section 8.13. CVI shall at all times belong to the Miss Dig Program or other
underground locating service acceptable to the City.
   IX. - MAPS, RECORDS AND REPORTS
   Section 9.1. CVI shall submit, within thirty days of filing, a copy of all
complaints and all pleadings filed by such owner or operator in every suit or
action arising from operation of any Dearborn system to the Dearborn Department
of Communications.
   Section 9.2. All billing, revenue, service and complaint records of CVI
shall be maintained by CVI for no less than five years after the year of the
origin and shall, where necessary to ascertain CVI's compliance with the
franchise and other pertinent provisions of State, Federal or Local laws or FCC
rules, be made available to the City for inspection at a place within the City
for such time as the City shall request.
   Section 9.3. CVI shall provide to the City, prior to start of construction,
engineering plans for the upgrade of the Cable System for approval by the
appropriate City departments related to issuance of building permits and to
review in comparison to agreed-upon specifications.
   Section 9.4. CVI shall submit to the City such other information or reports
either electronically or in such other form and at such times as the City may
reasonably request, where necessary to ascertain CVI's compliance with the
franchise and other pertinent provisions of State, Federal or Local laws or FCC
rules.
   Section 9.5. Subject to Federal, State and Local laws and regulations, CVI
shall keep open books and records. The City shall have the right to inspect at
any time during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans,
performance test results and other like materials of CVI which relate to the
operation of the Cable System, where necessary to ascertain CVI'S compliance
with the franchise and other pertinent provisions of State, Federal or Local
laws or FCC rules. All requested books or records, or copies thereof, shall be
provided to the City at the Department of Communications within a reasonable
time and location after the initial request.
   Section 9.6. CVI shall allow the City to make inspections of any of CVI's
facilities and equipment at any time upon receiving prior written notice.
   Section 9.7. CVI will permit and allow the City, or any designee, to inspect
all records, reports, and documents of every kind during normal business hours,
where necessary to ascertain CVI's compliance with the franchise and other
pertinent provisions of State, Federal or Local laws or FCC rules.
   Section 9.8. All records and reports required under this section, except as
otherwise provided, to be provided to the City shall be available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office during normal hours allowed by State and
Federal law.
   Section 9.9. The refusal, failure, or neglect of CVI to file any of the
records or reports required to be provided to the City under this sections
shall be deemed a material breach of this Franchise, and shall subject CVI to
all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the
City.
   Section 9.10. Any material false or misleading statement or representation
knowingly made by CVI in any report shall be deemed a material breach of this
Franchise, and shall subject CVI to all penalties and remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the City.
   X. - TRANSFER OF RIGHTS
   Section 10.1. Neither the Franchise nor any rights or obligations of CVI
pursuant to this Franchise or the Ordinance nor any of CVI's controlling
interest in the Cable System shall be assigned, transferred, sold, leased or
sublet in any manner, to any Person, without the prior consent of the Council.
The grant or waiver of any said consents shall not render unnecessary any
subsequent consent or consents, nor shall the grant of any said consent
constitute a waiver of any other rights of the City.
   Section 10.2. In the event of a transfer, CVI shall have the responsibility:
      (1)   To show to the reasonable satisfaction of the City whether the
proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferees"),
which, in the case of a corporation, shall include all persons having a legal
or equitable interest in twenty (20%) percent or more of its voting stock, or
any of the proposed transferee's principals:
   (a)   has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral
turpitude (including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation to any
Federal or State agency, violation of any securities law), or is presently
under an indictment, investigation, or complaint charging such acts;
   (b)   has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction;
   (c)   has pending any legal claim, law suit or administrative proceeding
arising out of or involving a Cable System.
      (2)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the City the
financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current
financial data ford the proposed transferee and such other data as the City may
request.
      (3)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that the
financial standing of the proposed transferee is such that the proposed
transferee shall be able to maintain and operate the Cable System for the
remaining term of the Franchise.
      (4)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that the
technical qualifications of the proposed transferee is such that the proposed
transferee shall be able to improve, maintain and operate the Cable system for
the remaining term of the Franchise.
   Section 10.3. Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in a form
and containing conditions approved by the Council, that it will assume and be
bound by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of this Franchise and all
applicable Federal, State and Local laws and further, that the transferee shall
be primarily liable and obligated under said documents.
   Section 10.4. Nothing in any approval by the City of an authorization of any
transfer or assignment of any ownership interest shall be construed to waive or
release any rights of the City in and to the streets, public ways and public
places of the City, or as a release of any of the City's police powers, or as
an exercise of eminent domain.
   Section 10.5. The occurrence of any event which constitutes either an act of
bankruptcy by CVI as defined in the Federal Bankruptcy Act; or placement of CVI
into receivership shall be deemed an unauthorized transfer and assignment under
the provisions of this subsection and shall:
      (1)   Be deemed a material breach and default of this Franchise; and
      (2)   Subject CVI to all penalties and remedies prescribed in this
Franchise and to all other remedies, legal and equitable, which are available
to the City.
   Section 10.6. The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may,
at the option of the City, terminate this Franchise. CVI shall notify the City
of any occurrence which constitutes an unauthorized transfer and within twenty-
four (24) hours of knowledge of such occurrence or of when CVI should have had
knowledge of such occurrence. From and after any notification of an
unauthorized occurrence, CVI shall not make, execute or enter into any deed,
deed of trust, mortgage, conditional sales contract or any loan, pledge, sale,
pole agreement or any other agreement or hypothecation concerning any of the
facilities or property, real or personal, of CVI without the written approval
of the City, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld and expeditiously
considered.
   Section 10.7. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such prior
consent of the City shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any
person controlling, controlled by or under the same common control as CVI.
   XI. - CONSTRUCTION AND PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
   Section 11.1. To secure the City and to guarantee the construction,
operation and maintenance of the telecommunications system that it will post
with the City a performance bond in the sum of $500,000.00 within 60 days of
execution of the franchise agreement for the term of this agreement. Such bond
shall be a guaranty bond for construction, operation and maintenance of the
system; removal of the system if necessary; and for the repair of any cable
system damage to public or private property. The Council may make a claim
against all or part of the guaranty bond to ensure the performance of any
repair or work which shall not be satisfactorily performed or complete by CVI
after sixty days notice to it.
   XII. - TERMINATION
   Section 12.1. In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or
pertaining to the City, the City reserves as an additional and as a separate
and distinct remedy the right to terminate this Franchise and all rights and
privileges of CVI thereunder in any of the following events or for any of the
following reasons:
   (a)   CVI fails after thirty (30) days prior written notice to comply with
any of the provisions of this Franchise or has, by act or omission, violated
any term of condition provided, however, that such period shall be extended for
a period of time as may be reasonably necessary to correct such non-compliance
or violation at the discretion of the Department of Communications; or
   (b)   CVI becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is
adjudged a bankrupt; or
   (c)   CVI attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or
relations with the City under this Franchise.
   Section 12.2. No termination shall be effective unless or until the Council
shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause and reason for the
termination and the effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted
without thirty (30) days prior notice to CVI and an opportunity for CVI to be
heard on the proposed resolution.
   Section 12.3. Upon the expiration, non-renewal or termination of this
Franchise, CVI shall have the option to, without expense to the City and within
such time as the City may reasonably require, remove its Cable System and
restore the premises hereby authorized to be used and occupied to a condition
reasonably satisfactory to the City, or to abandon said Cable System. In the
event CVI chooses to abandon said Cable System, the City, after thirty (30)
days prior written notice, shall be allowed to take over said Cable System
located within the public ways of the City, as property of the City, without
compensation, and in no event shall CVI have any claim for damages against the
City on account of the taking over of said Cable System, nor shall CVI have any
obligation to the City or any third party for the abandonment of said Cable
System, except for reasonable costs of removal of the Cable System.
   XIII. - ACCEPTANCE OF AGREEMENT AND INCORPORATION OF ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE
   Section 13.1. Upon execution of this Franchise by CVI, CVI agrees to be
bound by all of its terms and conditions. In addition, CVI specifically agrees
that this Ordinance of the City is incorporated by reference and made a part of
the permit of Franchise.
   Section 13.2. CVI will not set up or allege against the City any inaction or
nonenforcement of a right, on one or repeated occasions, as the waiver of the
surrender or any City right or privilege.
   Section 13.3. CVI and the City agree to waive any and all past, present and
future claims against each other arising out of the previous Franchise
agreement between the parties.
   XIV. - SEVERABILITY
   Section 14.1. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word
of this Franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction by action of CVI, such portion shall be deemed
a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not
render invalid or terminate this Franchise.
   Section 14.2. The headings incorporated by this Ordinance are for
organizational purposes only and shall not be deemed part of the Franchise
granted to CVI.
   XV. - TAMPERING WITH TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
   Section 15.1. A person who willfully or maliciously damages, or causes to be
damaged, any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of either party, or
who commits any act with intent to cause damage to any fiber, wire, cable,
conduit, apparatus or equipment of either party, or who taps, tampers with, or
connects any fiber or wire or device to a fiber, wire, cable, conduit or
equipment of either party with intent to obtain a signal or impulse therefrom
without authorization, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant of Section 3.4
of the Telecommunications Systems Regulatory Ordinance.
   Section 15.2. This section shall not prevent CVI from removing,
disconnecting or otherwise rendering inoperable any of its apparatus or
equipment attached or in any way connected to such person's facilities, if done
for reasonable cause including, but not limited to theft of operator's service
(s).
   Section 15.3. The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this
section are in addition to any penalties and remedies for theft, fraud or
destruction of property provided by State, Local or Federal law.
   XVI. - NOTICES
   Section 16.1. All notices shall be in writing, and shall be deemed delivered
to the addressee thereof two (2) days after deposit at a main or branch United
States Post Office, and shall be certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, postage prepaid or sent by overnight delivery or telefacsimile,
properly addressed to the parties, respectively, as follows:
   For notices and communications to CVI:
   CVI, Dearborn
   15200 Mercantile Drive
   Dearborn, MI 48120
   With a copy to:
   Time Warner, Corp.
   14525 Farmington Road
   Livonia, MI 48154
   For notices and communications to the City:
   City of Dearborn
   13615 Michigan Avenue
   Dearborn, Michigan 48126
   Attn.: City Clerk
   With a copy to:
   City of Dearborn
   Communications Department
   16087 Michigan Ave.
   Dearborn, MI 48126
   Attn.: Director
   By notice complying with the foregoing requirements of this section, each
party shall have the right to change the address or addressee or both for all
future notices and communications to such party, but no notice of a change of
address shall be effective until actually received.
   XVII. - AMENDMENTS
   Section 17.1. This Franchise may be amended only by written Agreement of
both parties.
   XVIII. - FORCE MAJEURE
   Section 18.1. If by reason of a Force Majeure either party is unable in
whole or in part to carry out its obligations hereunder, that party shall not
be deemed to be in violation or default during the continuance of such
inability.
   Section 18.2. The term Force Majeure means an act of God, acts of public
enemies, orders of any kind of a government of the United States of America or
the State of Michigan or political subdivisions; riots, epidemics, fires,
landslides, tornadoes, partial or entire failure of utilities or any other
cause or event not reasonably within the control of the disabled party.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Franchise as of the date
first above written.
CITY OF DEARBORN   CVI
Date:              Date:
By: ____________   By: ____________
Its: ____________  Its: ____________
Witness: ____________
Date: ____________
Ordinance
Legal Dept. Approved: ____________
Date: ____________
 
   AUTHENTICATION
   This is to certify that the undersigned do hereby authenticate the foregoing
Ordinance adopted on February 18, 1997 and published on February 27, 1997,
effective the day following publication.
 
  /s/ Michael A. Guido
  Mayor
  
  /s/ Duane Wydendorf
  City Clerk
  
 
B. - Ameritech New Media, Inc.
   ORDINANCE NO. 99-798
   AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO AMERITECH NEW MEDIA, INC., TO
CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF DEARBORN,
MICHIGAN.
   THE CITY OF DEARBORN ORDAINS:
   I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Section 1.1. Definitions. The definitions contained in the Dearborn City
Cable Ordinance are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth. In
addition, for the purposes of this Franchise, the following words, terms,
phrases, and their derivations will have the meanings given herein. When
consistent with the context in which they are used, words used in the present
tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular
number; and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"will" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is not
mandatory and is merely permissive.
      a.   Authorized Area means the entire area from time to time within the
corporate limits of City, excluding, however, all areas that are within such
limits solely due to agreements executed under the authority of Michigan Act
425 of 1984 unless such agreements expressly reference Cable Services, Cable
Systems or the Cable Television Business.
      b.   Building Director means the Director of Building and Safety or his
or her designee.
      c.   Cable Ordinance means Ordinance Chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances,
City of Dearborn.
      d.   Cable Services means only
         (1)   the one-way transmission to all subscribers of (i) Video
Programming, or (ii) other programming services, by which is meant information
which Franchisee makes available to all subscribers generally, such as digital
cable radio service or information services; the definition of Cable Service
contained in Section 602 of the Cable Act is incorporated herein by reference.
         (2)   subscriber interaction, if any, which is used for the selection
or use of such Video Programming or other programming services.
      e.   Cable System, Cable Communications System, Cable Television System,
CATV, or Broadband Communications Network means a system, consisting of a set
of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and
control equipment that is designed and used solely to provide Cable Services,
which includes Video Programming to multiple subscribers within the Authorized
Area, but such terms do not include (i) a facility that serves only to re-
transmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
(ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right of way,
(iii) a facility of a common or private carrier which is subject in whole or in
part to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, except that such a facility will be considered a Cable System to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of Video Programming directly
to subscribers, except if the extent of such use is solely to provide
Interactive On-Demand Services.
      f.   Cable Television Business means the provision by Franchisee of Cable
Services solely by means of the Cable System.
      g.   City means the City of Dearborn, a Michigan municipal corporation.
      h.   EAS [means] a designated channel which will be used for emergency
broadcasts of both audio and video.
      i.   Effective Date means the date that the cable franchise is fully
executed by the parties.
      j.   Event of Default means the occurrence, at any time during the term
of the Franchise of a failure of payment of franchise fees; breach or violation
of any of the materials, terms, covenants, representations or warranties;
failure to pay, or cause to be paid any governmentally imposed taxes;
dissolution or termination of a Franchisee or general partner of Franchisee;
Franchisee files voluntary petition in bankruptcy.
      k.   FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or its Successor.
      l.   Federal Cable Act means of the Communications Act of 1934 and Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.
      m.   Franchise or Franchise Agreement or Agreement means this document.
      n.   Franchisee means Ameritech New Media, Inc., a Delaware corporation
or its successors and assigns.
      o.   Gross Revenues or Gross Annual Revenues means all revenue derived
from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services. This term
includes copyright fees but does not include any other sales, excise or other
fees or taxes collected by Franchisee on behalf of any state, City or other
governmental unit, and will be net of bad debt, refunds to subscribers,
advertising revenues and home shopping revenues.
      p.   Interactive On-Demand Services means services providing video
programming to subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-
point basis, but does not include services providing video programming
prescheduled by the programming provider.
      q.   Municipal Charter means City's charter.
      r.   Municipal Code means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dearborn.
      s.   Normal Business Hours means those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to service customers. In all cases,
"normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per
week and/or some weekend hours.
      t.   Normal Operating Conditions means those service conditions which are
within the control of Franchisee, including, but not limited to special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular and peak seasonal
demands and maintenance or upgrade of the Cable System. Those conditions which
are not within the control of Franchisee include without limitation, power
outages, telephone network outages, natural disasters, civil disturbances, and
extreme weather conditions.
      u.   PEG Channels means public, educational and government channels, in
either analog or digital format, placed on the basic tier of service, available
twenty-four (24) hours a day to subscribers at no cost to the City or Users.
      v.   Public Ways and Public Rights-of-Way means all dedicated public
rights-of-way, streets, highways, and alleys. "Public Ways" and "Public Rights-
of-Way" will not include property of City which is not a dedicated public
right-of-way, street, highway, or alley.
      w.   School Systems means the Dearborn Public Schools and Dearborn
Heights D-7 School Districts.
      x.   Service Interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or
more cable channels, affecting one or more cable subscribers.
      y.   Term means the 20-year period commencing on the Effective Date.
      z.   User means a person authorized to use a PEG Channel, and will
include City and programmers. If several persons share the operation of a
channel each person is a separate User.
      aa.   Video Programming means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
   II. - GRANT OF FRANCHISE
   Section 2.1. 
      a.   Permission/Franchise. Subject to all these terms and conditions, the
Michigan Constitution, Section 309(a) of Public Act 216 of 1995, the Municipal
Charter, the Municipal Code, and the Federal Cable Act, City grants Franchisee
permission during the Term to erect, construct, install and maintain a Cable
System in, over, under, along and across the Public Ways in the Authorized Area
and to transact a Cable Television Business in such area.
      b.   Additional Services. This Franchise may be amended by mutual
agreement to allow the provision of such additional services not already
authorized by this Franchise or Cable Ordinance as may be agreed to by
Franchisee and City, or permission for the provision of additional services may
be granted by a separate document.
      c.   No Priority. This Franchise does not establish any priority for the
use of the streets and Public Ways by Franchisee or by any present or future
franchisees or other permit holders.
      d.   Easements and Rights-of-Way. The parties acknowledge and agree that
the purpose of the Franchise is to authorize Franchisee to construct, maintain
and operate a Cable System and offer Cable Service in, along, among, upon,
across, above, over, or under the Public Ways within City. To the extent
allowed by applicable state and federal law, this Franchise Agreement
authorizes the construction of the Cable System over Public Ways, and through
easements, within the Authorized Area and which have been dedicated for
compatible uses, subject to the requirements in the balance of this Section and
this Franchise Agreement. In using all Public Ways and easements. Franchisee
will comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations of general
applicability governing the construction, installation, operation, and
maintenance of a Cable System.
      e.   Authority Not Exclusive. The Franchise and the grant of authority
for use of streets, sidewalks, easements, and rights-of-way as conferred in
this Section 1 are nonexclusive. Franchisee will respect the rights and
property of City and other authorized users of streets, sidewalks, easements
and rights-of-way, and property owners. Except as otherwise required by
applicable law, disputes between Franchisee and parties other than City over
the use, pursuant to this Agreement, of the streets, sidewalks, easements and
other rights-of-way will first be submitted to City for resolution.
      f.   No Burden on Public Rights-of-way. Franchisee will not erect,
install, construct, repair, replace, or maintain its Cable System in such a
fashion as to unduly burden the present or future use of the streets or Public
Rights-of-Way.
      g.   Relocation of the Cable System. Upon thirty (30) days request,
Franchisee will, at its own cost and expense, protect, support, disconnect,
relocate or remove from the streets or Public Rights-of-Way any portion of the
Cable System when reasonably required to do so by City due to street or other
public excavation, construction, repair, grading, regrading; traffic
conditions; the installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power or signal
lines, trackways or tracks; municipally owned facilities; or the vacation,
construction or relocation of streets or any other type of structure; or other
improvements by the City or another public agency or any other type of
improvement which the City reasonably deems necessary for the public health,
safety or welfare. City may temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate any of
the Franchisee's facilities which have not been disconnected, removed, or
relocated within a reasonable period of time after a request from City and
Franchisee will reimburse City its entire expense including a reasonable cost
of overhead.
      h.   Weather. Underground installations are allowed upon Franchisee
obtaining appropriate permits, including insuring that weather conditions allow
proper restoration of disturbed areas in a timely manner.
      i.   Restoration of Property. Franchisee will restore at its sole cost
and expense, within ten (10) working days, or such additional time as specified
by the Building Director, in accordance with the Municipal Code and standards
established by the Building Director any portion of the streets or Public
Rights-of-Way that is in any way disturbed by the construction, operation,
maintenance or repair of the Cable System to as good or better condition than
existed previously. In addition, Franchisee will at its sole cost and expense,
restore and replace any other property, real or personal, including home,
commercial sprinkler and municipal sprinkler systems, disturbed, damaged or in
any way injured by or on account of Franchisee or by its acts or omissions, to
the same condition as such property was in immediately prior to the
disturbance, damage or injury. In the event that Franchisee and its contractors
and subcontractors fail to make such repair within the time specified by City,
City is entitled to complete the repair and Franchisee will pay the costs of
City for such repair.
      j.   Barriers. While any portion of the streets or Public Rights-of-Way
are open, Franchisee will maintain reasonable barriers, lights at night and
other warnings to the users of the streets or Public Ways in compliance with
applicable government regulations requiring and pertaining to such barriers.
      k.   Traffic Control. For all work in the Public Rights-of-Way which may
disturb the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic Franchisee will
employ roadway closure or partial closure practices, as delineated in the
Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and standards which may be
established by the Building Director.
      l.   Minimum Interference. The Cable System will be erected and
maintained by Franchisee so as to cause the minimum interference with the use
of the Public-Rights-of-Way and with the rights or reasonable convenience of
property owners.
      m.   Map Accuracy. The City does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps
showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In
Public Rights-of-Way, where necessary, the location will be verified by
excavation.
      n.   Construction—General. Franchisee will meet or exceed all the
construction and service requirements set out in this Franchise and those set
out in the Municipal Code.
      o.   Construction Schedule. Franchisee will complete its construction of
the Cable System and have Cable Services available to all residents who desire
service within 24 to 30 months of the effective date of this Agreement.
      p.   Construction Bond. 
   Unless otherwise provided for in the Franchise Agreement:
         (1)   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the
franchise agreement, and prior to the commencement of any construction work by
the franchisee, the franchisee, at its sole expense, will file with the City a
performance and surety bond, in favor of the City. The performance and surety
bond will be in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The bond
will assure the City of recovery of any actual damages, losses, costs and
expenses sustained or suffered by the City as a result of the failure of the
franchisee to satisfactorily and timely complete and activate its cable system
throughout the City, pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement. This
bond will be maintained by the franchisee until the system is 75 percent
complete as determined by the council. The performance and surety bond will be
issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the state and acceptable
to the City and in a form approved by the City attorney.
         (2)   The City may, upon completion of construction, waive or reduce
the requirement of the franchisee to maintain the bond. However, the City may
require a performance bond to be posted by the franchisee for any construction
subsequent to the completion of the initial service areas, in a reasonable
amount and upon such terms as determined by the council not exceeding $10,000.
         (3)   The construction bond will contain the following endorsement:
"It is understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety,
nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety, until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the City of Dearborn, by registered mail, of a written notice
of such intent to cancel or not to renew."
      q.   Emergency Notification. Franchisee will provide the Mayor's office
with a twenty-four (24) hour emergency telephone number.
      r.   Right of Inspection. City will have the right to inspect all
construction or installation work and to make such tests as it deems necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of the Franchise, Municipal Code, or other
pertinent provisions of law.
      s.   Notice of Construction—Residents. Franchisee will provide advance
notice, appropriate to the circumstances, prior to entry whenever desiring to
enter or cross any private property within City or work in abutting Public
Rights-of-Way. By way of example, Franchisee will provide at least forty-eight
(48) hour advance notice to affected property owners (such as by door hanger)
prior to construction or reconstruction requiring entry on private property or
work in the Public Rights-of-Way abutting such private property. During
maintenance work, installation work, and outage repair, Franchisee will attempt
to notify affected residences (such as by knocking and, if no answer, leaving a
door hanger) prior to entering private property. Work performed in an emergency
in easements and Public Rights-of-Way to repair system outages is exempted from
this section.
      t.   Removal of Obsolete Facilities/Cooperation. When Franchisee opens a
trench, accesses a conduit or boring, or is working on aerial locations, it
will remove all of Franchisee's facilities that are both obsolete and inactive
from such locations.
      u.   Joint Use by City. Franchisee will permit without charge the joint
use of excess height, space and capacity in Franchisee-owned poles, located in
the Public Rights-of-Way by the City, provided that no such use is in
competition with Franchisee.
      v.   Underground Street Crossing. Whenever Franchisee must place the
Cable System or other facilities beneath the traveled or paved portion of the
Public Rights-of-Way, Franchisee will do so by means acceptable to the Building
Department. Directional boring will be done wherever possible so that the
excavations necessary for it are not in the paved portion of the right-of-way.
      w.   Temporary Relocation. Upon 30 business days notice, Franchisee will
either temporarily raise or lower its wires or other equipment upon the request
of any person, including without limitation, a person holding a building moving
permit issued by City. Franchisee may charge a reasonable rate for this
service, not to exceed its actual costs with an advance deposit of the
estimated cost.
      x.   Pavement Cut Coordination. Franchisee will coordinate its
construction program and all other work in the Public Rights-of-Way with City's
program for street construction, rebuilding, resurfacing, and repair.
      y.   Vacated Streets. If by action of the City Council a Public Right-of-
Way is vacated, eliminated, discontinued or closed, where appropriate, City
will act to ensure, that all rights of Franchisee under this Franchise to
continue to use same will continue unaffected, such as by providing for
easements from the affected property owners for Franchisee to continue to use
the former public Right-of-Way. If such continued use is not provided for,
Franchisee will at its expense promptly remove its Cable System from the former
Public Way.
      z.   As-Builts/Location of Facilities. Franchisee will keep accurate,
complete, and current maps and records of the Cable System and its facilities
and will provide copies to City as set forth below. Such maps and records will
be available for inspection by the public at the offices of City.
         (1)   Franchisee will furnish two complete sets of "as-built" maps and
records to City and Franchisee will provide City copies of any new or revised
"as-built" or comparable drawings as and if they are generated for portions of
Franchisee's facilities and Cable System located within City (and in no event
later than thirty (30) days after construction of any portion of the System).
Upon request by City, Franchisee as soon as possible (but no more than 7
business day from the request) will inform City of any changes from such maps
and records previously supplied and will mark up maps provided by City so as to
show the location of the Cable System.
         (2)   The "as built" maps will include at a minimum all system and
facility routings and the location of appurtenant structures, such as nodes,
amplifiers, power supplies and system monitor test points, and will be drawn to
scale and provided to the Building Director and City Engineer.
         (3)   Upon request Franchisee will provide City with a computer file
which accurately displays Franchisee's "as built" Cable System. If changed,
this file will be updated and will be provided at no cost to City and become
the property of City if compatible with the City's system. Franchisee will
provide City with reasonable information about Franchisee's computer program
which generates the file and its implementation so as to aid City in converting
and incorporating the files into a layer in the Geographical Informational
System City's uses.
      aa.   Miss Dig. Franchisee will participate in and be a member of the
"Miss Dig" utility notification program provided for by Michigan Compiled Law
Annotated § 460.701(ff) or subsequent statute.
      bb.   Discontinuance and Removal of the Cable System. Upon the
revocation, termination, or expiration of this Franchise, absent renewal of the
Franchise Franchisee either:
         (a)   By mutual agreement of City and Franchisee; or
         (b)   By Franchisee's acquiescence or failure to challenge same; or
         (c)   By a final order of a court which Franchisee either does not
appeal or from which there is no further right of appeal then Franchisee will
immediately discontinue the provision of Cable Services and all rights of
Franchisee to use the Public Rights-of-Way will cease.
   Franchisee, at the direction of City, will remove its aboveground Cable
System except that Franchisee may abandon its facilities in place with City's
consent. Franchisee will also restore any property, public or private, to the
condition in which it existed prior the installation, erection, or construction
of its Cable System, including any improvements made to such property
subsequent to the construction of its Cable System.
   III. - FRANCHISE FEES
   Section 3.1. 
      a.   Franchise Fees. From and after the Effective Date of this Agreement
and throughout the full Term of the Franchise, Franchisee will pay to City a
franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of annual Gross Revenues.
         (1)   Payments will be made within forty-five (45) days of the end of
each calendar quarter for Gross Revenues received during such calendar quarter.
         (2)   The payment for the fourth calendar quarter in a year will be
accompanied by an annual statement set forth on Exhibit C.
         (3)   City may audit Franchisee to verify the accuracy of franchise
fees paid City. All records reasonably necessary for such audit will be made
available by Franchisee at a location within 25 miles of the City. Any
additional amount due verified by Franchisee and City will be paid within 30
days of City's submitting an invoice for such sum, and if such sum will exceed
5% of the total franchise fee which the audit determines should have been paid
for any calendar year, Franchisee will pay City's reasonable cost of such
audit.
   IV. - CONSTRUCTION OF CABLE SYSTEM
   Section 4.1. 
      a.   Construction Schedule. Construction of the Cable System and
provision of service will be in accordance with the construction schedule and
cable system description which are attached to this Franchise Agreement as
Exhibit A. Franchisee will give City Engineer written notice within a
reasonable time before the commencement of construction, but in no event may
notice be given less than seven days before such commencement. Throughout the
construction period Franchisee will give the Mayor and City Engineer a weekly
schedule of construction areas and planned street disturbances.
      b.   Maintenance. Franchisee will maintain all wires, conduits, cables
and other real and personal property and facilities owned by Franchisee and
used in the operation of the Cable System in good condition, order and repair.
      c.   Compliance with Law. Franchisee will comply with all applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations governing the construction,
installation, operation and maintenance of a Cable System. Such laws and
regulations will include, without limitation, the requirements of Section 621
(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Cable Act.
      d.   Other Construction Concerns. In addition to the above requirements:
         (1)   Codes. Franchisee will comply with the provisions of the
National Electrical Safety Code of the National Bureau of Standards, the
National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the
Bell Telephone System's code of Pole Line Construction, as such codes are in
force as of the time of installation or other work.
         (2)   Parallel Installation. All cables and wires or other work will
be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric utility wires
whenever possible.
         (3)   Engineering and Safety. Multiple cable configurations will be in
parallel arrangement and bundled in accordance with engineering and safety
considerations.
         (4)   Installation Above and Below Ground. Except where otherwise
provided by applicable law in areas where all telephone and electric utilities'
and other cable operators' facilities are above ground at the time of the
installation of Franchisee's Cable System, Franchisee may install its
facilities above ground. In areas where all telephone and electric utilities'
and other cable operators' facilities are underground. Franchisee will install
its facilities underground. If City gives the same notice to Franchisee to all
telephone and electric utilities and to all other cable operators in City
requesting that aboveground facilities be moved underground. Franchisee will at
its expense comply with all such reasonable requests by City to Franchisee.
City will coordinate among Franchisee, telephone and electric utilities, other
cable operators and/or users of Public Ways to ensure that relocation is done
in the most economical and appropriate manner possible.
         (5)   Identification of Franchisee's Cable. Throughout the Term,
Franchisee will arrange to identify its cable drops (by color code, stamping,
engraving, tags stickers or other appropriate method to be selected by
Franchisee in its sole discretion) so as to distinguish Franchisee's cable from
that of all other cable operator(s) in the Authorized Area.
      e.   General Density Requirement. During the Term of the Franchise,
Grantee shall be required to make service available to areas that have a
density of thirty-five (35) homes per linear cable mile continuous of existing
plant, or fractional equivalent, as measured from the extremity of the system
nearest to the area to be served to the farthest dwelling unit in the area to
be served.
      f.   Annexed Areas. In areas subsequently annexed, Grantee shall provide
service to the annexed area unless the following occurs or is present:
         (1)   The annexed area is already served by a cable operator; or
         (2)   The annexed area does not meet 35 homes per linear mile minimum
density requirement.
      g.   Cost-Sharing Arrangements in Less Dense Areas. Notwithstanding the
foregoing density requirements, Grantee agrees that, in areas with fewer homes
per linear mile than specified above, Grantee shall make available a cost-
sharing arrangement with potential customers.
         (1)   Formula. In such a cost sharing arrangement, Grantee's per-home
share will be the result of dividing the per-mile cost of the entire project by
35. The customer's share will be the result of dividing the per-mile cost of
the entire project by the number of serviceable homes per mile in the project
and subtracting Grantee's share.
         (2)   Installment Payments. In such a cost-sharing arrangement,
Grantee will permit customer payment schedules for such installation to be paid
in equal amounts over a three months period, excluding, however, any deposit
that Grantee may require up front.
      g.   Installation Costs. Franchisee will build its Cable System so that
it is capable of providing service to all residences located along Public Ways
and public institutions located within the Authorized Area. Franchisee will
install its Cable System at then-prevailing installation charges except as
provided below:
         (1)   Drops Exceeding 150 Feet. Where the drop to the customer's home
is more than 150 feet in length, in addition to the prevailing installation
charge, Franchisee may charge the customer the actual difference between
Franchisee's cost of installing a 150-foot drop and the cost of installing the
longer drop required by the customer.
         (2)   Authorized Area Extensions. In any areas adjacent to the
Authorized Area which are annexed by City during the Term, where the residence
of a customer requesting service is more than 500 feet from the existing Cable
System (where aboveground installation is permitted) or 250 feet of distance
from the existing Cable System (where underground installation is required),
service will be provided if the customer requesting service (or persons, on a
pro rata basis) contribute the actual cost of material and labor for the
portion of construction that is beyond the then-applicable distances described
above.
      h.   Ownership of Installed Cable. Franchisee will own all cable
installed by Franchisee within the Authorized Area; provided, however, that, if
a similar requirement is imposed upon (by law, ordinance or regulation) all
other cable operator(s) within the Authorized Area, Franchisee agrees that its
customers will own all cable installed by Franchisee inside the customers'
dwellings plus such further length of cable extending beyond the dwellings'
exteriors as is required by law.
      i.   Liquidated Damages. It is understood that it is impractical at this
time to reasonably ascertain the total extent of damages which may be incurred
as a result of a failure by Franchisee to complete construction within the time
periods set forth above. Such impracticality arises out of the difficulty of
establishing a cost for future damages suffered by the public and other factors
which are incapable of measurement in precise monetary terms. Therefore,
Franchisee offers and agrees to compensate City in the amount up to One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) per day for each calendar day of nonexcusable delays in
completing construction of the Cable System in accordance with the schedule set
forth above. In no event may liquidated damages exceed $10,000 during the term
of the Franchise.
         (1)   City agrees to waive such liquidated damages in the event that a
failure to meet the construction schedule arises out of acts of God, labor
stoppages, strikes, judicial orders, new FCC regulations, earthquake,
lightening, flood, fire, explosion, riots or civil disturbances, or other
causes not foreseeable and beyond the control of Franchisee.
         (2)   Such liquidated damages will be assessed using the same
procedure as is set forth in Section 15(d).
      j.   State of Art. Franchisee will use reasonable efforts to continue to
keep the Cable System at a high quality level where technically and
economically feasible.
      k.   Emergencies. City may reasonably remove or damage portions of the
Cable System in the case of fire, disaster, or other emergencies. In such event
neither the City nor any agent, contractor or employee acting reasonably will
be liable to the Franchisee for any damages caused to the Franchisee or the
Cable System, such as for, or in connection with, protecting, breaking through,
moving, removal, altering, tearing down, or relocating any part of the Cable
System.
      l.   Emergency Alert System. Franchisee without charge will install as a
part of its Cable System, and will operate throughout the Term, an Emergency
Alert System (EAS) (or successor to that system) in accordance with all
requirements imposed from time to time by the FCC, including, without
limitation, the requirements that cable television systems transmit a visual
EAS message on at least one channel (47 C.F.R. § 11.51(g)(3)) and that cable
systems also provide video interruption and audio EAS message on all channels,
with the audio message further stating which channel is carrying the visual
message (47 C.F.R. § 11.51(g)(2)). In establishing Franchisee's EAS system
pursuant to this Section, Franchisee will:
         (1)   Designate a channel (which may be the government channel) which
will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video;
         (2)   Inform customers of the designated emergency channel at least
weekly on at least one channel (which may be the government channel) of the
multi-channel system;
         (3)   Test the emergency override system not less than once every
three months;
         (4)   Maintain all channel text crawl capability able to be activated
remotely by security measures deemed mutually agreeable by City and Franchisee;
         (5)   Cooperate with City on the use and operation of the emergency
alert override system; and
         (6)   Maintain the capacity to permit City in time of emergency the
ability to inform viewers on all channels (such as by text crawl) to which
channel to tune to receive emergency information in a manner which does not
conflict with Federal EAS regulations.
      m.   Backup Power. Franchisee will provide battery backup power (or an
electric generator) at all locations on the Cable System where the loss of
electric power might disrupt the provision of service within City such that the
Cable System will operate for at least four hours even if electric service from
conventional utility lines is interrupted.
      n.   Preventive Maintenance. Upon completion of construction, Franchisee
will institute and adhere to a preventive maintenance program at least as
rigorous and stringent as that set forth on Exhibit B.
   V. - AUTHORIZED AREA LINE EXTENSION
   Section 5.1. 
      a.   Municipal Facilities. During the Term, Franchisee will provide, at
no cost to City, one aboveground cable drop of up to 150 feet and one cable
converter (set top) box, if necessary, to each municipal facility (as defined
below) within the Authorized Area. If City requests that a particular municipal
facility receive either a cable drop which exceeds 150 feet in length and/or an
underground installation, Franchisee may charge City the actual difference
between Franchisee's cost of installing a 150-foot above ground drop and
Franchisee's actual cost of installing the drop as requested by City.
      b.   Landlord/Tenant. Franchisee is required, in accordance with this
Agreement and applicable law, to provide service to individual units of a
multiple housing facility with all services offered to other dwelling units
within the Authorized Area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in
writing, if requested by Franchisee, to the following:
         (1)   To Franchisee's providing of the service to units of the
facility;
         (2)   To reasonable conditions and times for installation, maintenance
and inspection of the system of the facility premises;
         (3)   To reasonable conditions promulgated by Franchisee to protect
Franchisee's equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and
         (4)   To not demand or accept payment from Franchisee for permitting
Franchisee to provide service to the facility and to not discriminate in rental
charges, or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and those who
do not.
   VI. - PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL CHANNELS
   Section 6.1. 
      a.   Channels Made Available. Franchisee will provide and equip with
fiber optic transmitters and receivers and carry the following public channels,
educational channels, and government access channels as set forth in 6(a)(1),
(2) and (3). The PEG channels can be either analog or digital format. All PEG
Channels will be placed on the basic tier of service (and in the lowest tier of
service, if different), unless both parties mutually agree otherwise. Such
channels will be available twenty-four (24) hours per day throughout the Term
of this Franchise at no cost to City or Users. PEG Channels will initially be
allocated as follows:
         (1)   Government Channel. One (1) government channel for use by City
for noncommercial purposes.
         (2)   Education Channel. One (1) educational channel to be
administered for noncommercial purposes by the School Systems, other public
primary and secondary schools or public higher education institutions from time
to time designated by City.
   Although City is served by multiple School Systems, Franchisee will design,
construct and operate its Cable System and Cable Services such that each School
System may provide noncommercial programming to subscriber locations within its
school district boundaries as they exist on the Effective Date. City
acknowledges that this may result in one channel being shared by several
entities with different noncommercial programming potentially being provided on
such channel at different locations within City.
         (3)   Public Access. One (1) public access channel for use for
noncommercial purposes.
      b.   PEG Access Support. Franchisee will make the following payments for
the support of PEG Channels in the amounts and according to the procedures set
forth below.
         (1)   A grant to City of Sixty Thousand Dollars ($60,000.00) within
thirty (30) days of the execution of this Franchise by City, which sum the City
may apply toward PEG channels or Users.
         (2)   Quarterly payments by Franchisee to City in an amount equal to
one percent (1%) of Franchisee's Gross Revenues. Such ongoing payments will be
and are in addition to the franchise fee set forth in Section 2 and in the
Cable Ordinance.
      c.   PEG Signal Quality. The PEG channel delivery system from the signal
input points described in Section 5(a)(4) will meet the same technical
standards as the remainder of the Cable System.
      d.   Free Basic Cable Installation and Service Drop. Franchisee shall
provide free installation and basic cable service to one location specified on
Exhibit "H."
   VII. - CUSTOMER SERVICE
   Section 7.1. 
      a.   Regulation of Rates. 
         (1)   With respect to rates and charges, the parties agree that they
will abide by federal law and FCC Regulations.
         (2)   Free installation and cable service may, at the discretion of
the Franchisee, be provided to non-profit community organizations, other than
schools.
         (3)   Nothing will prohibit Franchisee from requiring advance payment
for installation or service.
         (4)   Subject to provisions of applicable laws, nothing herein will
prohibit the Franchisee from levying a charge for late payment of a
subscriber's account or terminating service for non-payment.
      b.   Consumer Protection and Service Standards 
         (1)   General. Throughout the Term of this Agreement, Franchisee will
meet the standards regarding customer service set forth in Part 76, § 76.309 of
the FCC's Rules. In the event that the customer service standards set forth in
§ 76.309 of the FCC's Rules are modified or amended, Franchisee will upon
ninety (90) days' written notice from City to Franchisee comply with such
modified or amended Rules.
         (2)   Office Hours and Telephone Availability. 
            i.   Franchisee will provide a collect call or toll-free telephone
access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, including weekends and holidays; and arrangements for no charge delivery
and pickup of converter boxes, remotes and similar Franchisee-provided customer
premises equipment. No physical office in City need be maintained. Trained
representatives of Franchisee will be available to respond to telephone calls
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
            ii.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, will not exceed thirty (30)
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be referred, transfer
time will not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards will be met no less
than ninety (90%) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
            iii.   Under normal operating conditions, all incoming customer
service lines will not be simultaneously busy more than an accumulative period
of three percent (3%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
            iv.   Franchisee will evaluate maintaining a drop box for the
receipt of customers' bill payments. Such drop box, if maintained, will be at
City Hall or at such location as City and Franchisee may from time to time
agree.
            v.   When there are customers with problems relating to home wiring
or converters, Franchisee will dispatch a technician out to the home within 24
hours to make repairs or pick up and exchange the broken set top boxes. If the
customer wants to return the box, Franchisee will dispatch a technician within
seven business days.
         [(3)   Reserved. ]
         (4)   Installations and Outages. 
            i.   Franchisee will maintain an emergency system maintenance and
repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing the cable system on a
twenty four (24) hour basis, seven (7) days a week, including holidays.
            ii.   Under normal operating conditions, Franchisee will meet each
of the following four standards no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the
time, measured quarterly:
               (a)   Standard Installation: Standard installations will be
performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed.
"Standard" installations are those that are located up to 150 feet from the
existing distribution system.
               (b)   Service Interruption: Excluding conditions beyond the
control of Franchisee, Franchisee will begin working on Service Interruptions
promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes
known. Franchisee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next
business day after notification of the service problem.
               (c)   Appointment Windows. The "appointment window" alternatives
for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be
either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal
business hours. (Franchisee may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of Normal Business Hours for the express convenience of the
customer.)
               (d)   Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber
after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
               (e)   For other service problems: Within seven (7) business days
of request for problems other than those addressed above (such as hanging wires
or equipment removal after cancellation of service), except, in the case of an
emergency or where public safety is endangered, Franchisee will begin working
on the problem promptly after notice.
            iii.   Franchisee will make every reasonable effort to complete
work and restore service within one service response.
            iv.   If the service representative is running late for, an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, Franchisee will contact the subscriber. The appointment will be
rescheduled as necessary to a time that is convenient for the subscriber.
            v.   Franchisee guarantees that installations and service calls
will be performed during the time period agreed upon with the subscriber or
subscriber remuneration will be provided. Remuneration will be determined by
subscriber requirements, and may take the form of free installation, service
credit or promotional items of comparable value.
            vi.   Franchisee will, at its sole expense, properly bury or raise
all drops within thirty (30) days of the installation, except, however, in
areas where drops are buried and the ground is frozen, the drops will be buried
no later than May 31.
            vii.   All officers, agents or employees of Franchisee or its
contractors or subcontractors will wear on their outer clothing a photo
identification card bearing their name and photograph and the company logo.
Franchisee will account for all identification cards at all times. Every
vehicle of Franchisee or subcontractors having customer contact will be clearly
identified as Franchisee's vehicle.
            viii.   No charge will be made to a subscriber for the repair or
replacement of defective Franchisee-owned equipment provided by Franchisee and
leased or rented to the subscriber, except where the defect is caused by
subscriber abuse.
         (5)   Customer Communications. 
            i.   Franchisee will provide written instructions and information
on each of the following subjects at the time of installation of service, and
at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon reasonable request
of a resident or City:
               (a)   Products and services available.
               (b)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions
of subscription to programming and other services.
               (c)   Installation and service maintenance policies.
               (d)   Instructions on how to use the Cable Service.
               (e)   Channel positions of programming carried on the Cable
System.
               (f)   Billing and complaint procedures.
               (g)   Franchisee's address, telephone numbers, and office hours
including specified weekend and evening hours.
            ii.   Franchisee will give notice to subscribers and City of any
changes in rates, programming service or channel positions as soon as possible.
Notice will be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of
such changes if the change is within the control of Franchisee. Franchisee will
notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in
the other information required pursuant to subsection (i) above.
Notwithstanding the foregoing. Franchisee will not be required to provide prior
notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise
fee, or any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any
Federal agency, State, or franchising authority on the transaction between
Franchisee and the subscriber.
         (6)   Truth in Billing. 
            i.   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized to include basic and premium service charges and equipment
charges and as to any other charge thereon. Bills will clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates,
credits and franchise fees, if applicable.
            ii.   In case of a billing dispute, Franchisee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.
            iii.   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but not later than
either:
               (a)   The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution
of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
               (b)   Upon the return of all equipment (if any) supplied by
Franchisee if service is terminated.
            iv.   Credits for service will be issued promptly, but in no event
later than the first of the following to occur: (1) the customer's next billing
cycle following resolution or (2) 60 days following resolution.
         (7)   Additional Service Standards. 
            i.   Franchisee will adhere to its Complaint/Inquiry Resolution
Policy as from time to time in effect and will otherwise establish as needed
written procedures for reporting and resolving subscriber service complaints.
Franchisee will publish a copy thereof to each new subscriber, and to all
subscribers and City at such time as there is a material change in the policy.
A copy of Franchisee's current Policy is attached as Exhibit G.
            ii.   Franchisee will receive all material service and signal
quality subscriber complaints and will handle all such complaints promptly but
in no event later than seven (7) days after receipt. Franchisee will keep a log
of all complaints received describing the nature of each complaint, the date
and time it was received, the disposition of the complaint and the time and
date thereof Subject to applicable laws regarding subscriber policy, this log
will be made available to City for the preceding two years of request.
         (8)   Disconnect and Downgrade Charges. 
            i.   Franchisee will make no charge to any subscriber on account of
complete discontinuance of service and will remove the customer service drop
box upon request within fourteen (14) days.
            ii.   If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the
end of a prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber
service fee, using the number of days as a basis, will be refunded to the
subscriber by Franchisee.
         (9)   Subscriber Credits. Franchisee will credit one-thirtieth ( 1/30
th) of the regular monthly charge for each day, or fraction thereof exceeding
three hours, that service is not provided to the subscriber, automatically
after receipt of notification of a loss of a service, until the service is
restored, unless restoration is prevented by cause beyond the control of
Franchisee. Such credit will be made by the Franchisee following notification
to the Franchisee by the subscriber identifying the loss of service by channel
description and date and time.
      c.   Pay Per View. Subscribers will be given the option of not having pay
per view or per program service available at all or only having such service
provided upon the subscriber providing a security number selected by an adult
representative of subscriber.
      d.   Blocking. Franchisee will give subscribers the option to entirely
block both the audio and video portion of a channel or channels. Franchisee's
offering a converter which has this feature will comply with the preceding
sentence.
      e.   Complaints Referred by City. If City refers a complaint from a
subscriber to Franchisee for resolution, then within five (5) business days
Franchisee will investigate (including attempting to contact the subscriber)
and respond to City as to its proposed resolution of same, and will have an
additional five (5) business days if City requests a written response.
      f.   Reports. If there is a pattern of complaints about customer service
then Franchisee will provide reports to City quarterly as follows.
         (1)   The reports will be in a form reasonably acceptable to the City,
showing on a consistent basis, fairly applied the matters set forth below so as
to measure Franchisee's compliance with the service standards set forth above.
Such reports will show Franchisee's performance excluding periods of abnormal
operating conditions, and if Franchisee contends any such conditions occurred
during the period in questions, it will also describe the nature and extent of
conditions and show Franchisee's performance both including and excluding the
time periods Franchisee contends such conditions were in effect.
         (2)   The reports will show the number of phone calls originating from
within City (or other appropriate area for which telephone records are
reasonably available) and measure Franchisee's compliance with the standards
set forth above.
         (3)   Franchisee will maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored
in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of
all subscriber service complaints. Such log will list the date and time of such
complaints, identifying the subscribers and describing the nature of the
complaints and when and what actions were taken by Franchisee in response
thereto. Such log will promptly be made available by Franchisee to City,
reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least two (2) years, and
will be available for public inspection during regular business hours.
Franchisee will submit a summary of such complaints quarterly to City for its
review or a copy thereof if City so requests.
      g.   Access to Service. Franchisee will not deny service, deny access, or
otherwise discriminate on the availability or rates, terms or conditions of
Cable Services provided to actual or potential subscribers on the basis of
race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability, age,
marital status, location within City, status with regard to public assistance
or income level. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Franchisee reserves the right
under Section 623(d) of the Federal Cable Act to establish a rate structure,
for the provision of Cable Service. Franchisee will comply at all times with
all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to
nondiscrimination. The preceding provisions will not prevent Franchisee from
providing discounts to selected groups of subscribers, senior citizens age 65
or older and head of household with some form of incentive or discount.
   VIII. - FRANCHISE ADMINISTRATION.
   Section 8.1. 
      a.   Meetings. As one means to assist in the administration of the
Franchise, City (or its designated official or representative) and Franchisee
will make reasonable efforts to schedule and hold Periodic (as defined below)
conferences with representatives from City in order to discuss matters relating
to the enforcement and administration of the Franchise. Such periodic
conferences may focus on franchise administration business matters including,
but not limited to: (a) information supplied pursuant to scheduled and periodic
preventive maintenance inspections; (b) public, educational, and governmental
access support; (c) franchise fees; (d) response times, billing practices and
other customer service items; (e) construction-related concerns; and (f)
resolving or addressing concerns, questions or disputes with respect to
multiple operators serving or attempting to serve the same subscriber or
geographic area (including cutting of cable and/or damage to other facilities
and equipment). For purposes of this provision, the term "periodic" means: (a)
quarterly until the construction of Franchisee's Cable System is completed; (a)
semi-annually after the construction of Franchisee's Cable System is completed;
and (b) where the parties mutually agree in good faith concerning the need to
do so, City and Franchisee may schedule and hold conferences more or less
frequently than the foregoing requirements. Except in the case of an emergency,
such conferences should be held within the normal business hours of Franchisee.
      b.   FCC Technical Standards. Franchisee will comply with 47 CFR § 76.601
and subsequent amendments:
      c.   Representative. Franchisee will designate a managerial
representative to attend the meetings of City, upon request, to assist with the
resolution of cable complaints, and to serve as liaison between Franchisee and
City as matters arise pertaining to the provision of cable services and the
administration of this Franchise Agreement.
      d.   Reports. 
         (1)   Upon request, on or before one hundred twenty (120) days after
the end of Franchisee's fiscal year and each successive year Franchisee will
submit a written report to City containing the following information:
            i.   A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the
initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in the development of
the Cable System, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued
during the reporting year, total number of subscribers, subscribers added or
discontinued during the reporting year;
            ii.   A list of Franchisee's officers, members of its board of
directors and other principals of Franchisee; and
            iii.   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding ten
(10%) percent or more of the voting interest of Franchisee.
         (2)   Simultaneously with the Annual Report required under subsection
(1), Franchisee will submit to City an annual plant survey report on a City-
wide basis if there are any changes from the prior year's report. Said the
report will contain the results of testing prescribed by the FCC and will be in
sufficient detail to enable City to ascertain that the technical standards of
the FCC are achieved.
         (3)   A copy of Franchisee's or parent corporation's publicly
available annual reports (including financial reports to shareholders), and
those of its parent, will be submitted to City within thirty (30) days of its
issuance.
         (4)   All reports under this Agreement will be provided at the expense
of Franchisee.
   IX. - INDEMNIFICATION; INSURANCE; PERFORMANCE AND COMPLETION BONDS
   Section 9.1. 
      a.   General Duty. Franchisee agrees to defend, indemnity and save
harmless the City and its employees, agents, servants, officers, directors,
officials, contractors, subcontractors and representatives (collectively,
"Indemnified Party") against all damages, losses and expenses (including,
without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit or defense)
arising from any claims, demands and suits for personal jury (fatal or
nonfatal), property damage or claims of any other nature, to the extent such
damages, losses or expenses arise out of or are caused by the negligent or
other wrongful acts or failures to act of Franchisee or its employees, agents,
servants, officers, directors, shareholders, officials, contractors,
subcontractors or representatives. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this
Subsection will not apply to any liability which may accrue to the City with
regard the City's use of any channel provided for the City's use or arising out
of the use of the emergency override capability required pursuant to this
Agreement.
      b.   Franchisee's Additional Duty. The City and Franchisee acknowledge
that Section 635A of the Federal Cable Act limits the liability of the City to
third parties in connection with the grant of the Franchise. In particular,
Section 635A limits to injunctive and declaratory relief any relief in any
court proceeding brought by a third party involving any claim arising from the
regulation of cable service or from a decision to grant, renew, transfer or
amend the Franchise, to the extent that relief is required by any other
provision of federal, state or local law. Notwithstanding this provision.
Franchisee agrees that, in addition to its duty to indemnity the City under
subsection 13.1(a) above, Franchisee will indemnify and hold harmlessly the
City against all damages, losses and expenses (including, without limitation,
reasonable attorneys fees and costs of suit or defense) arising from third-
party suits which either: (1) challenge the authority of the City to issue the
Franchise; or (2) allege that, in issuing the Franchise, the City has acted in
a disparate or discriminatory manner.
      c.   Notice and Defense. The Indemnified Party will give Franchisee
reasonably prompt written notice of any claim, demand, action or proceeding for
which indemnification will be sought under this provision of the Agreement and,
if such claim, demand, action or proceeding is a third-party claim, demand,
action or proceeding, Franchisee will have the right at its expense to assume
the defense of such claim, demand, action or proceeding, using counsel
reasonably acceptable to the indemnified Party. The Indemnified Party will have
the right to participate, at its own expense, with respect to any such third-
party claim, demand, action or proceeding that Franchisee so defends. In
connection with any such third-party claim, demand, action or proceeding,
Franchisee and the indemnified Party will cooperate with each other and provide
each other with access to relevant books and records in their possession. No
such third-party claim, demand, action or proceeding will be settled without
the prior written consent of the indemnified Party, which consent the
Indemnified Party will not unreasonably withhold or delay.
      d.   The Franchisee will obtain, effective from the Effective Date of
this Agreement, and will keep in force and effect during the Term of this
Agreement insurance coverage with limits of $2,000,000 injury per person.
$5,000,000 bodily injury per accident, $2,000,000 for damage to property, and
$5,000,000 property damage per occurrence.
      e.   The Franchisee will maintain in force, during the Term of this
Agreement and any renewal or extension thereof, Workers= Compensation
Insurance, covering its obligations under the Workers= Compensation statute,
and will show to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that such insurance is
in effect at all times.
      f.   Franchisee may, as its option, self-insure by providing adequate
assurances to the City of its methods of doing so.
   X. - PRIVACY
   Section 10.1. 
      a.   Cable Tapping Prohibited. Franchisee will not, nor will Franchisee
knowingly permit any person, agency, or entity, without the customer's consent,
to tap, or to arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device
or customer outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of
the system, polling with audience participation or audience viewing surveys to
support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewer behavior
cannot be identified.
      b.   Invasion of Privacy and Personal Rights Prohibited. In the conduct
of providing its services or pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise
resulting from its services, Franchisee will take all action necessary to
prevent an invasion of a customer's right to privacy or other personal rights
as such rights are defined by applicable law. Franchisee will not without
lawful court order utilize the Cable System's interactive two-way equipment or
capability for personal surveillance of any customer or general citizen.
      c.   Sale of Personalized Data Restricted. Franchisee will not sell or
otherwise make available to unaffiliated third parties lists of the names and
addresses of customers which identifies, by name, customer viewing habits, or
personalized data pertaining to a customer's use of any of Franchisee's
services without the express written consent of the customer to which the
personalized data pertains. For purposes of this Section, "personalized data"
will mean the name and/or address of an individual customer directly associated
with data obtained on his or her use of specific services provided by or
through Franchisee. Nothing in this Agreement will be construed to prevent, as
a normal incident of commercial enterprise, the sale or availability of "non-
personalized" or "aggregate data" which is not personalized data as defined in
this Agreement.
   XI. - TAXES, RATES AND CHARGES
   Section 11.1. Nothing contained in this Agreement will be construed to
exempt Franchisee from any tax, levy or assessment which is or may later on be
authorized by law.
   XII. - TRANSFERS, OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL
   Section 12.1. 
      a.   Franchise Transfers. The Franchise, the Cable System and any portion
of the Cable System may not be transferred without the prior written consent of
City.
         (1)   Exclusions. For the purpose of this Section 12, "transfer" and
"transferred" will not include: (a) a transfer solely for security purposes
(such as the grant of a mortgage or security interest) but will include any
realization on the security by the recipient, such as a foreclosure on a
mortgage or security interest; or (b) the replacement of components of the
Cable System in the course of ordinary maintenance and day-to-day operation.
         (2)   Exception. Franchisee may, without additional approval by City,
transfer or assign this Franchise Agreement to an entity controlled and at
least 50% owned by Ameritech Corporation (a Delaware corporation with its
principal place of business at 30 South Wacker Drive, Chicago, Illinois, 60606)
so long as SBC Communications or Ameritech Corporation is the ultimate publicly
traded parent corporation, where the new entity: assumes all of Franchisee's
cable services operations and obligations in the Southeast Michigan area
(Wayne, Oakland, Macomb and Washtenaw Counties); assumes all of Franchisee's
obligations and liabilities under this Franchise, agrees to comply with all
provisions of this Franchise Agreement and Cable Ordinance and becomes a
signatory to the Franchise Agreement; has the legal, managerial, technical and
financial ability to properly perform and discharge such obligations and
liabilities, and such abilities are each at least as great as those of
Franchisee. City will be advised in writing of such transfer and of the new
entity's qualifications at least sixty (60) days before such transfer occurs
and will be reimbursed any reasonable, documented costs it incurs in connection
with such transfer.
      b.   Transfer of Ownership or Control. There will be no transfer of or
acquisition of control of Franchisee or of any entity, at any tier or level,
which directly or indirectly controls Franchisee without the prior written
consent of City.
         (1)   For the purposes of this Franchise,"…transfer of or acquisition
of control of Franchisee …" will mean any change in the identity of the
entities, individuals or group which directs, or has the power to direct, the
management and policies of Franchisee, whether through the ownership of voting
securities or other equity interest, by contract or otherwise. Without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, for the purposes hereof, such a change will be
deemed to have occurred at any point in time when there is (a) a change in
working or effective voting control, in whatever manner effectuated, of
Franchisee; (b) an agreement of the holders of voting stock or rights of
Franchisee which effectively vests or assigns policy decision-making in any
person or entity other than Franchisee; or (c) a sale, assignment or transfer
of any shares or interest in Franchisee which results in a change in the
control of Franchisee.
      c.   Applications for Consent/Procedure. If Franchisee seeks to obtain
the consent of City to any transactions or matters described in Section 12(a),
(b) or (c), Franchisee will submit an application for such consent to City and
will submit or cause to be submitted to City such additional documents and
information as City may reasonably request.
         (1)   City will have 120 days from the date of submission of an
application (such as an FCC Form 394) to act upon any such application for
consent. If City fails to act upon such application for consent within 120
days, such application will be deemed consented to unless the City and
Franchisee otherwise agree to an extension of time.
         (2)   City will not unreasonably withhold its consent to any proposed
transfer, and may grant its consent outright, may grant such consent with
reasonable conditions which it finds are in the public interest, or may deny
consent but may not use the transfer to renegotiate the Franchise.
         (3)   Nothing in any approval by City of an authorization of any
transfer will be construed to waive or release any rights of City in and to the
streets, Public Ways, and public places of City, or as a release of any of
City's police powers, or as an exercise of eminent domain.
         (4)   City's granting of consent in any one instance will not require
it to grant consent in other instances.
         (5)   Franchisee will pay and/or reimburse City for all costs
reasonably incurred by City due to any proposed transfer.
   XIII. - RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE
   Section 13.1. With respect to the renewal of Franchisee's Franchise, the
parties agree as follows:
      a.   Applicability of Federal Law. City and Franchisee agree that any
proceedings undertaken by City that relate to the renewal of Franchisee's
Franchise will be governed by and comply with applicable federal law, including
the renewal provisions in Section 626 of the Federal Cable Act as then in
effect.
   XIV. - DEFAULTS
   Section 14.1. 
      a.   Events of Default. The occurrence, at any time during the Term of
the Franchise, of any one or more of the following events, will constitute an
Event of Default by the Franchisee under this Franchise.
         (1)   The failure of Franchisee to pay the Franchise fee, Section 6(b)
PEG support fees or liquidated damages assessed pursuant to 14(c) on or before
the due dates specified herein.
         (2)   A franchisee's breach or violation of any of the terms,
covenants, representations or warranties contained herein or Franchisee's
failure to perform any obligation of this Agreement.
         (3)   Franchisee's failure to pay or cause to be paid any
governmentally imposed taxes of any kind whatsoever, including but not limited
to real estate taxes, income taxes and personal property taxes on or before the
due date for same, provided, however, Franchisee will not be in default with
respect to the non-payment of taxes which are being disputed in good faith in
accordance with applicable law.
         (4)   The entry of any judgment against Franchisee in excess of One
Hundred Thousand ($100,000.00) Dollars which remains unpaid and is not stayed
pending rehearing or appeal, for ninety (90) or more days following entry
thereof.
         (5)   The dissolution or termination, as a matter of law, of
Franchisee or any general partner of Franchisee without the prior approval of
City, which will not unreasonably be withheld.
         (6)   If Franchisee files a voluntary petition in bankruptcy; is
adjudicated insolvent; obtains an order for relief under Section 301 of the
Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C. 3301); files any petition or fails to contest any
petition filed against it seeking any reorganization, arrangement, composition,
readjustment, liquidation, dissolution or similar relief for itself under any
laws relating to bankruptcy, insolvency or other relief for debtors; seeks or
consents to or acquiesces in the appointment of any bankruptcy trustee,
receiver, master, custodian or liquidator of Franchisee, or any of Franchisee's
property and/or Franchise and/or of any and all of the revenues, issues,
earnings, profits or income thereof; makes an assignment for the benefit of
creditors; or fails to pay Franchisee's debts generally as they become due.
      b.   Uncured Events of Default. Upon the occurrence of an Event of
Default which can be cured by the immediate payment of money to City or a third
party, Franchisee will have thirty (30) days from written notice from City to
Franchisee of an occurrence of such Event of Default to cure same before City
may exercise any of its rights or remedies provided for in Section 15. Upon the
occurrence of an Event of Default by Franchisee which cannot be cured by the
immediate payment of money to City or a third party, Franchisee will have
ninety (90) days from written notice from City to Franchisee of an occurrence
of such Event of Default to cure same before City may exercise any of its
rights or remedies provided for in Section 15.
         (1)   If any Event of Default is not cured within the time period
allowed for curing the Event of Default, as provided for herein, such Event of
Default will, without additional notice, become an Uncured Event of Default,
which will entitle City to exercise the remedies provided for in Section 15.
   XV. - REMEDIES
   Section 15.1. 
      a.   Remedies. Upon the occurrence of any Uncured Event of Default as
described in Section 13, City will be entitled to exercise any and all of the
following cumulative remedies
         (1)   The commencement of an action against Franchisee at law for
monetary damages.
         (2)   The commencement of an action in equity seeking injunctive
relief or the specific performance of any of the provisions which, as a matter
of equity, are specifically enforceable.
         (3)   For a violation of a material provision of this Franchise, City
will have the right to seek the forfeiture and termination of the Franchise in
accordance with Section 16.
         (4)   In no event may liquidated damages exceed $10,000 by the term of
the Franchise.
      b.   Remedies Not Exclusive. The rights and remedies of City set forth in
this Franchise, or in the Cable Ordinance, will be in addition to and not in
derogation of, any other rights and remedies provided by law or in equity.
      c.   Liquidated Damages. In addition to the other remedies provided for
herein, liquidated damages in the amounts set forth below may be awarded City
(individually and on behalf of subscribers) from Franchisee. Franchisee agrees
that such sums are reasonable given that the actual damages are difficult of
precise ascertainment and that the actual damages are often incurred by City
and subscribers, and cumulatively are large, but are so small for each
subscriber as to not be worth their while pursuing, and that without provisions
such as this Franchisee would be unjustly enriched.
         (1)   For violations of Section 12 liquidated damages in the amount of
$100 per day.
         (2)   For Uncured Events of Default other than violations of Section 4
(a) liquidated damages in the amount of $250 per day that the Uncured Event of
Default continues.
         (3)   In no event may liquidated damages under this Section 15(c)
exceed $10,000 during the term of the Franchise.
      d.   Liquidated Damages Procedure. Liquidated damages may be awarded in
accordance with the following procedure.
         (1)   Franchisee will be given written notice of City's intent to
assess liquidated damages at least ten (10) days in advance of the City Council
meeting at which such damages are assessed.
         (2)   Franchisee may appear at the City Council meeting at which such
damages are assessed either in person, by agent, or by letter (or other
writing) to submit its views with respect to the proposed assessment.
         (3)   The City Council may then assess liquidated damages in amounts
not exceeding those set forth above.
         (4)   Such assessment by City will be final and binding and will be
subject to judicial review only if it is arbitrary, capricious, or
substantially disparate, will be a monetary obligation of Franchisee to City in
the amount determined by City Council; and will be paid in full by Franchisee
within seven (7) business days of the date of assessment by City Council.
   XVI. - REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE
   Section 16.1. 
      a.   Major Breach of Franchise. When any event, act or omission on the
part of Franchisee occurs which represents a substantial or repeated violation
of a material provision of this Agreement, then such event, act or omission may
be considered a major breach of this Agreement. Under such circumstances, City
will notify Franchisee in writing by certified mail, of the specific breach,
and direct Franchisee to comply with all the provisions of this Agreement for
which the Franchisee is in violation.
      b.   Events of Default. The events, acts and omissions referred to in
this Section are the following: (1) bankruptcy; (2) insolvency; (3) failure to
pay taxes or franchise fees; (4) failure to receive written City approval for
assignment or transfer; or (5) a major breach of this Franchise (as noted in
Subsection 15(a) above) that remains uncured for the 60-day cure period
described in Subsection 16(c) below. They do not include events in the nature
of force majeure.
      c.   Corrective Action. Where Franchisee corrects any of the enumerated
conditions within 60 days from the receipt of notice from City, then in no
event will the enumerated condition be weighed against Franchisee in any
subsequent review of Franchise performance.
      d.   Public Hearing. 
         (1)   Scheduling and Procedures. No sooner than 75 days after such
written notice if notice of the breach is sent by certified mail to Franchisee,
City may set a date for a public hearing on the matter. The hearing will be
before Council or its designee and will afford full due process to Franchisee
and will be held on the record. Both Franchisee and City will be permitted to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to present
evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The public hearing may be canceled at
any time, if City is satisfied that Franchisee has corrected and/or cured the
violation.
         (2)   Notice. City will provide written notice, by certified mail, to
Franchisee of the time and place of said public hearing in a manner consistent
with state law.
         (3)   Evidence Regarding Status of Alleged Violation. At the time of
the hearing, Franchisee may present information on the current status of the
alleged breach of the Franchise. If the situation has been resolved, or steps
are being taken to resolve the situation, then Franchisee should present such
information at the hearing.
         (4)   Effect of Failure to Attend. If Franchisee fails to attend the
hearing, or submit a written response, or request a continuance of the hearing,
then Franchisee will be deemed to have waived its right to a further
continuation of the matter, and may be declared in default of the Franchise.
      e.   Alternatives if Violation is Found. City may (once it has held the
public hearing) direct the Franchisee to take corrective action within a
specified period of time, or may declare the Franchisee in default of this
Agreement, and afterwards, revoke, terminate or cancel the Franchise.
      f.   Notice to Franchisee. If City directs corrective action to take
place within a specified time or declares the Franchisee in default of this
Agreement, then that declaration will be reduced to writing, and the notice of
corrective action or default will be mailed, by certified mail, or in the
alternative may be hand-delivered, to Franchisee within 15 days of City's
action.
      g.   Revocation for Failure to Correct Violation. If, within 45 days
after receipt of the notice of City's direction of corrective action as
provided in this Section, Franchisee does not take significant action to
rectify the breach, or submit a plan detailing how the Franchisee will
eliminate the breach, then City may revoke Franchisee's Franchise and will
notify Franchisee immediately; provided however, that such revocation will not
be effective any earlier than 30 days following the date of such notification.
   XVII. - CONTINUITY OF SERVICE
   Section 17.1. It will be the right of all subscribers to receive all
available services so long as their financial and other obligations to the
Franchisee are honored. In the event the Franchisee elects to overbuild,
rebuild, modify, surrender or sell the system, or City purchases the cable
system, the Franchisee will make reasonable and best efforts to provide
continued, uninterrupted service to subscribers for a period of up to six (6)
months beyond the effective date of such sale or surrender of the franchise, or
longer by mutual agreement of City and Franchisee; and the terms and conditions
of the Franchise Agreement will remain in effect for the duration of such
period.
   XVIII. - COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS; SEVERABILITY.
   Section 18.1. 
      a.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement to the
contrary, Franchisee will at all times materially comply with all applicable
laws and regulations of the Federal, state, county and City governments and all
administrative agencies of those governments, including, but not limited to,
judicial orders; provided, however, that if any such Federal, state or local or
county law or other applicable regulation will require Franchisee to perform
any service, or will permit Franchisee to perform any service or will prohibit
Franchisee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of this
Agreement or of any law or regulation of the Issuing Authority existing as of
the date of the Agreement, then Franchisee will be excused from performance
under this Agreement, provided that it acts in good faith reliance on such
Federal, state, local or county law or regulation, pending resolution of such
conflict; provided, further, that, from the date of this Agreement through and
until the expiration of the Term of the Franchise granted under this Agreement,
no change made by the City in its ordinances or regulations will amend the
Franchise or this Agreement without Franchisee's written consent. In the event
of a conflict between this Agreement and any local law, rule or regulation
(including, without limitation, any ordinance authorizing the grant of a cable
television franchise), the terms of this Agreement will prevail.
      b.   If any provision of this Agreement or any related agreement is held
by any court or by any Federal, state or local law, rule or regulation now or
later on in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any
way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or
regulation, said provision will be considered as a separate, distinct and
independent part of this Agreement or such other agreement, and such holding
will not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions of this
Agreement or of such other agreement. In the event that such law, rule or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed,
so that the provision of this Agreement or of such other agreement which had
been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules and
regulations then in effect, said provision will immediately return to full
force and effect and will afterwards be binding on the parties to the
Agreement, provided that the City will give Franchisee sixty (60) days' written
notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision.
      c.   If the City determines that a material provision of the Agreement or
any related agreement is affected by such action of a court of the Federal,
state or local government, the City and Franchisee will have the right to
modify any of the provisions of this Agreement or in such related agreements to
such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of this Agreement and all related agreements.
   XIX. - MISCELLANEOUS
   Section 19.1. 
      a.   Entire Agreement; Amendment. This Agreement, the documents that are
referred to in this Agreement and the documents that are to be delivered
pursuant to this Agreement constitute the entire agreement among the parties
pertaining to the subject matter of this Agreement, and supersede all prior and
contemporaneous agreements, understandings, negotiations and discussions of the
parties, whether oral or written, and there are no representations or other
agreements among the parties in connection with the subject matter of this
Agreement, except as specifically set forth in this Agreement. No amendment,
supplement, modification, waiver, or termination of this Agreement will be
binding unless executed in writing by the party to be bound by such amendment,
supplement, modification, waiver, or termination. No waiver of any of the
provisions of this Agreement will be deemed or will constitute a waiver of any
other provision of this Agreement, whether or not similar, nor will such waiver
constitute a continuing waiver unless otherwise expressly provided in writing
by the waiving party.
         (1)   City may waive any obligation or requirement of performance on
the part of Franchisee set forth in this Franchise, in whole or in part, at any
time. Such waivers include but are not limited to instances of a claim or
showing by Franchisee that the costs associated with the provision being waived
would increase the rates Franchisee is legally allowed to charge subscribers,
such as a claim that such costs are an "external cost" which allow Franchisee
to increase its rates under the FCC rules.
      b.   No Inducement. Franchisee, by accepting this Franchise, acknowledges
that it has not been induced to accept the Franchise by any promise, oral or
written, by or on behalf of City or by any third person regarding any term or
condition of this Franchise not expressed herein. Franchisee further pledges
that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any Municipal
employee or official regarding receipt of a cable television franchise, except
as expressed in this Agreement.
      c.   Notice. 
         (1)   To City. All notices required or permitted to be given to City
under any provisions of this Agreement will be in writing and will be deemed
served:
            i.   When delivered by hand or by overnight express or similar
service to City's offices during normal business hours; or
            ii.   When mailed to any other person designated in writing in this
Agreement to receive such notice, via certified mail, return receipt requested.
         (2)   To Franchisee. All notices required to be given to Franchisee
under any provision of this Agreement will be in writing and will be deemed
served when delivered by one of the methods described in Subsections 20(c)(1)
(i) and (ii) above.
      (3)   Addresses. Notice will be given to the following addresses:
                  City Clerk
                  City of Dearborn
If to City:       13615 Michigan Avenue
                  Dearborn, Michigan
                  48126
With a Copy to:   Corporation Counsel
                  Ameritech New Media, Inc.
                  Attention: Vice President
                  and General Counsel
If to Franchisee: 300 South Riverside
                  Plaza
                  Suite 1800 North
                  Chicago, Illinois
                  60606
                  Schnelz, Wells, Mona-
                  ghan & Wells, P.C.
                  Attention: Todd H. Wells,
                  Esq.
With a Copy to:   255 S. Old Woodward
                  Avenue
                  Suite 200
                  Birmingham, Michigan
                  48009
 
   Either party may change its address for notice purposes at any time by
giving notice of such address change in accordance with the foregoing.
      d.   Successors. Subject to Section 12 of this Agreement, this Agreement
will inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, the parties and their
respective successors and assigns, who will comply with all terms and
conditions of this Agreement.
      e.   Counterparts; Headings. This Agreement may be executed in two or
more counterparts, each of which will be deemed an original, but such
counterparts will together constitute but one and the same Agreement. The Table
of Contents and the Section and Subsection headings in this Agreement are
inserted for convenience of reference only and will not constitute a part of
this Agreement.
      f.   Exhibits. If a document or matter is disclosed in any Exhibit to
this Agreement, it will be deemed to be disclosed for all purposes of this
Agreement without the necessity of specific repetition or cross-reference.
Unless expressly provided otherwise, all capitalized terms used in any Exhibit
to this Agreement will have the definitions specified in this Agreement.
   IN WITNESS OF THIS AGREEMENT, the parties have signed below, effective as of
the Effective Date, by their duly authorized representatives.
WITNESSED:                CITY OF DEARBORN
____________ ____________ By ____________ ____________  ____________
                                                        Date
____________ ____________ Its ____________ ____________
WITNESSED:                AMERITECH NEW MEDIA, INC.
____________ ____________ By ____________ ____________  ____________
                                                        Date
____________ ____________ Its ____________ ____________
 
EXHIBIT A-1—AMERITECH NEW MEDIA CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE
   Ameritech New Media will complete the construction of the cable system
within 24—30 months of the commencement date of this Franchise Agreement.
EXHIBIT A-2—CABLE SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
   The Cable System will meet the requirements set forth below.
   System Functional Requirements: The Cable System will pass frequencies of at
least 750 megahertz (MHZ) cable bandwidth and be capable of providing (a) the
continuous, downstream, one-way transport without compression of at least 110
analog multicast video channels in 6 MHZ NTSC Amplitude Modulation/Vestigial
Side Band format ("NTSC") to all points and subscribers on the Cable System in
City, and (b) the continuous, upstream, one-way transport without compression
of four 6 MHZ NTSC channels. The Cable System will be designed, spaced, and
constructed for system operation to 750 MHZ meeting all FCC standards at full
channel loading.
   The Cable System will use a hybrid fiber optic/coaxial trunk and coaxial
feeder/distribution network architecture as is set forth below. Any digital to
analog conversion point will be so located that in total there are no more than
three (3) of the following between such conversion point and any subscriber;
optical to electrical conversion devices, electrical to optical conversion
devices, multiplexers, demultiplexers, amplifiers or line extenders. The fiber
optic/coaxial transfer point ("nodes") will be placed so that the maximum
amplifier cascade will not exceed three (3) amplifiers for each subscriber.
   The Cable System will be fully addressable from its inception to support
applications such as pay-per-view and other selection-oriented services. The
approximate 35 MHZ of upstream spectrum in the Cable System will be used to
carry signals from the subscriber terminal to a VEO and VOC (each described
below) so that the VOC can analyze such signaling information and send
appropriate signaling information to the VEO for subsequent routing to the
designated subscriber.
   The Cable System will be capable, without modification, of providing the
continuous, one-way downstream transport of digital multicast service. Such
digital multicast service will support the same applications as analog
multicast service using compressed digital transmissions. Each digital
multicast channel block will also occupy 6 MHZ of spectrum, carrying multiple
compressed digital signals in MPEG format.
   For both analog and digital multicast service the video signal delivered to
the subscriber will meet or exceed the FCC standards for signal quality set
forth at 47 CFR § 76.601 and following.
   Cable System Architecture: The Cable System network architecture will be
made up of three primary levels of geographic distribution. These levels are
the Video Operations Center (VOC), the Video Serving Office (VSO) and the Video
End Office (VEO). Each office in the hierarchy will provide the functions of
the lower offices in that hierarchy. That is, a VSO can also be a VEO and a VOC
may also be a VSO and/or a VEO.
   The VOC will serve a metropolitan area. Control and management of
Franchisee's distribution network are performed at the VOC. The VOC is also the
primary entry point for multicast programming to Franchisee's network. Within
the VOC, video, audio and data information for the metro serving area is
collected and formatted for transport over Franchisee's inter-office
distribution network. The VOC will also be the primary operations point for the
Integrated Network Management System (INMS) which will provide continuous
monitoring of all facilities and systems used to deliver Franchisee's services
to subscribers. Inter-office communications and administrative traffic will be
carried by a separate network called the Management and Support Network (MSN).
   Programming information received at the VOC will be transported to VSOs via
a fault tolerant fiber optic network called the Metropolitan Video Transport
System (MVTS). The MVTS will be designed for cost effective, inter-office
distribution of digitized video/audio signals to multiple VSOs within the
metropolitan area. The VOC and VSOs will be connected by fiber paths in a
redundant architecture to allow reliable delivery. The MVTS will consist of
equipment nodes at each office location. At these sites video/audio/data
signals will be added, dropped off, processed, multiplexed, converted from
analog to digital and digital to analog, and combined for distribution to sites
further downstream, or distribution to local users.
   Each VSO within the MVTS ring initiated at the VOC will be associated with
its own serving area of subscribers. Each VSO will have the ability to support
the distribution of services to some 50,000 to 200,000 homes within a given
community. At the VSO, the incoming signals will be passed through an optical
splinter which forwards one set of the incoming signals in their original
digital form to the next VSO over the MVTS, and sends the other set of signals
to MVTS demultiplexers. These devices will convert the optical signals to
electrical signals, strip off a specified number of channels which are provided
by the VOC for distribution to the VSO serving areas, demultiplex the stripped
off digital signals, and convert them from digital-to-analog. Text and data may
be inserted into the television signals at the VSO. The VSOs will also be able
to insert locally originated channels, such as public access, education and
government channels, for delivery only to their specified serving area.
   The VSO will transport signals to the VEOs via an analog fiber system called
the Analog Video Transport System (AVTS). The AVTS will be optimized for one-
way delivery of Radio Frequency (RF) video "channels." The channels ultimately
available to an individual subscriber will be assembled at the VSO for delivery
to the VEOs through multiple-fiber links. The initial deployment will be three
strands of fiber with channel groupings of 40 6 MHZ NTSC channels, 30 6 MHZ
NTSC channels, and 40 6 MHZ NTSC channels, respectively. These groupings will
be based on optimizing the link performance and the "reach" of the AVTS network
within the initial spectrum of 54 to 750 MHZ. In addition, the VSO will be the
location where public, educational, government, and other local channels ("PEG"
channels) are inserted into Franchisee's network. By inserting this program at
the VSO, PEG information will be distributed to all VSOs commonly connected to
the MVTS.
   When more than one community is served by a given VSO, PEG channels will be
uniquely assigned to each community.
   A VEO will be designed to serve from 16,000 to 30,000 homes passed. The VEO
will receive the three optical signals from the VSO, convert them into
electrical signals, filter and combine them into one signal, and convert the
result into an optical format for distribution through optical/electrical
conversion nodes to the subscriber's premises via the Hybrid-Fiber Coaxial-
cable (HFC) network. Each VEO will also receive the upstream signaling
information from subscriber terminals (STs) via optical fiber from the nodes,
convert them into electrical signals, and manage their delivery to the VOC. VEO
subscribers will be grouped into nodes that are arranged geographically. Node
sizing will average no more than 500 homes served. From each node, coaxial
cable will be used to deliver all information streams to and from subscribers;
optical cable will be used to carry upstream and downstream communication back
to the VEO.
   All coaxial cable portions of the Cable System, and coaxial cable drops and
coaxial cable installed by Franchisee on subscriber premises (to the outlets
typically located on a subscriber's wall), will allow the passage of 1 GHz of
spectra while meeting the FCC standards for signal quality described above so
as to allow for channel expansion without replacement of such coaxial cable.
   The nodes will be so arranged, or if necessary rearranged, so that the
subscribers served by each correspond with both the corporate boundaries of
City and school district boundaries such that each individual subscriber
receives only the PEG or other local channels corresponding to the City and
school district in which that subscriber is located.
EXHIBIT A-3—TECHNICAL AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
   The quality and level of the downstream (forward path) RF electrical signal
will meet the specifications listed below:
Item                             Specification*
Frequency Range (MHZ)            54 to 750
Forward Path .....
Frequency Range (MHZ)            5 to 40
Reverse Path .....
Maximum Visual Carrier
Level Difference [After          10.0
30m of Drop Cable] (dB) .....
In Channel Frequency
Response [-0.5 to 3.75 MHZ       -2.0
Relative to Visual Carrier]
(dB) .....
Minimum Signal Level per         +3.0
Visual Carrier (dBmV) .....
Maximum Signal Level per         +15.0
Visual Carrier(dBmV) .....
Minimum Visual Carrier to        43.0
Noise (dB) .....
Maximum Composite Non-           -51.0
Coherent Triple Beat (dBc) .....
Maximum Composite Non-
Coherent Second Order            -51.0
(dBc) .....
Hum Modulation of Visual         3.0
Carrier (%) .....
Modulation Format:
Analog .....                     NTSC, AM-VSB
Digital .....                    256-QAM
Digital Encoding Format .....    MPEG-2
 
* Franchisee's specifications will be equal to or better than those required
for compliance with the Federal Communications Commission Title 47, Part 76,
Subpart K, Item 76.601 ff. This includes changes anticipated by the FCC for 12/
30/99 affectivity, at which time the specifications stated must be met at the
subscriber terminal and not the subscriber tap or network ground block. The
initial service offering will be carried in the 54 to 750 MHZ frequency range.
However, with upgrades in distribution equipment, that spectrum can be expanded
to 1 GHz and beyond as driven by market demand and equipment availability. All
performance specifications are based on CW carriers, 256-QAM signals do not
have periodic fixed frequency carries like AM-VSB signals. The minimum carrier
level specified for 256-QAM as the design objective represents the average
power level into a 75 Ohms load read by an RMS power meter when an unmodulated
CW sinusoidal carrier at the middle of a 6 MHZ passband is transmitted by the
network 256-QAM modulator. The CW carrier power level is set to the same
average power read by an RMS power meter when an actual 256-QAM symbol is fed
to the 256-QAM modulator at the head-end. As for the minimum visual carrier to
noise ratio for 256-QAM, the design objective is to achieve a low enough
probability of error for compressed image payload at that carrier-to-noise
ratio after error connection.
EXHIBIT B—AMERITECH NEW MEDIA PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
      1.   Daily inspection, and adjustment if necessary, of the signal quality
on each cable channel.
      2.   Daily scan, and adjustment if necessary, of carrier levels with
spectrum analyzer.
      3.   Daily logging of any and all adjustments made to headend or the
antenna tower.
      4.   Daily monitoring, and logging, of signal leakage, and repair if
necessary, to ensure that Cable System is within FCC allowed levels.
      5.   Inspection of drops as integral part of every service call, and
schedule for replacement, if necessary.
      6.   Inspection and recording of signal levels at the time of each
service call.
      7.   Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend audio and
video carrier levels.
      8.   Monthly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend video
cipher AGC levels.
      9.   Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of satellite
receiver input carrier noise.
      10.   Monthly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend audio
and video modulation levels.
      11.   Quarterly performance measurements in accordance with FCC technical
specifications (and adjustment if necessary) at a minimum of four extremities
of the distribution system to include:
         a.   Video and audio signal levels;
         b.   Overall difference in signal level or response flatness;
         c.   Hum modulation;
         d.   Carrier noise; and
         e.   Signal ingress.
      12.   Monthly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend
scrambler levels.
      13.   Annual inspection, and repair if necessary, of all standby power
supplies.
      14.   Semi-annual monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend RF
input levels to off-air processors.
      15.   Semi-annual inspections, and repair if necessary, of:
         a.   Antenna tower;
         b.   All earth stations; and
         c.   Buildings and fences.
      16.   Semi-annual extremity tests in accordance with FCC technical
specifications (and adjustment if necessary) of the distribution system to
include:
         a.   Cross modulation distortion;
         b.   Composite second and third order products; and
         c.   RF sweep response.
      17.   Annual testing of cumulative leakage index in accordance with FCC
technical specifications.
      18.   Annual extremity tests (and adjustment if necessary) of the
distribution system in accordance with FCC technical specifications to include:
         a.   Twenty-four hour signal level stability; and
         b.   Channel response flatness.
EXHIBIT C—AMERITECH NEW MEDIA, INC.
FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENT CERTIFICATE
CITY OF DEARBORN
   For year ending: ____________
GROSS RECEIPTS:
Installation .....       ____________
Basic
(Basic Service, FM
Service Tier, A/O) ..... ____________
Expanded Basic
Service .....            ____________
Premium Services .....   ____________
Equipment
(converter and
remote) .....            ____________
Pay Per View .....       ____________
Advertising .....        ____________
Itemized Franchise
Fees .....               ____________
Leased Access .....      ____________
Other .....              ____________
TOTAL GROSS
RECEIPTS .....           ____________
 
_____
   I have reviewed the foregoing and certify that Ameritech New Media, Inc.,
has reported all revenues subject to franchise fees in the City of Dearborn.
 
____________ ____________  ____________
Authorized Signature       Date
 
EXHIBIT D—INDEMNITY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
   City and Franchisee agree that Franchisee's duty to defend and indemnify
Indemnitees encompasses claims that City (1) lacked authority under federal or
state law, the Municipal Charter, Municipal Code or Cable Ordinance (as amended
in connection with the grant of the Franchise) in issuing the Franchise to
Franchisee, (2) violated federal or state due process, equal protection or
civil rights laws in awarding the Franchise to Franchisee, (3) acted in an
illegally disparate or discriminatory manner against City's incumbent cable
operator in awarding the Franchise to Franchisee or (4) accepted terms or
conditions in the Franchise awarded to Franchisee which violate federal or
state laws, if any, regarding equal protection rights of competitors.
   City and Franchisee agree that Franchisee's duty to defend and indemnify
under Section 8b. (3) will not include any duty to defend or indemnify against
claims which arise solely from events occurring after the grant of the
Franchise, including, without limitation, any claims that City has engaged in
disparate or discriminatory regulatory enforcement activities under the Cable
Ordinance after the grant of the Franchise.
   In addition, Franchisee's duty to defend and indemnify does not include any
claims by City's incumbent cable operator, regardless of when the claims arise,
that any action by City in granting a franchise to Franchisee violates any of
the incumbent cable operator's contractual rights.
   City and Franchisee agree that if any action is commenced against
Indemnitees which raises both claims that are covered by Franchisee's duty to
defend under Section 9(a) & (b) and claims that are not covered by Franchisee's
duty to defend, Franchisee's duty to defend City in that action will extend
only to the claims that are covered by Franchisee's duty to defend under
Section 9(a) & (b).
EXHIBIT E—REPRESENTATIVES
   The term "representatives" in Sections 8(b) and 8(g) also includes persons
occupying positions such as the following whether or not they are "employees"
of City:
—Mayor, Executive Assistant to the Mayor
—Corporation Counsel
—Clerk
—Treasurer
—Building Director, Assistant Building Director
—Director of Public Works, Assistant Director of Public Works
—Members of Cable Television boards or similar boards who oversee cable
regulatory matters
—Community Development Director
—Cable Television Director, Cable Coordinator, Cable Manager
—Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector
EXHIBIT F—EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE
   Certificate of Insurance attached.
EXHIBIT G—FRANCHISEE'S CURRENT COMPLAINT/INQUIRY RESOLUTION POLICY
   HOW TO REGISTER A COMPLAINT ABOUT SIGNAL QUALITY
   Ameritech is dedicated to providing the highest quality cable television
service to our customers and to ensuring that any problem you may encounter is
immediately resolved to your satisfaction. The following section summarizes the
procedures you'll need to know if you have a complaint about the quality of the
television signals you receive.
   SIGNAL QUALITY COMPLAINT RESOLUTION PROCEDURE
   Our "At Your Service" Center is open for business 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, and can be reached by calling 1-800848-CAST sm (2278). When you call
about a service problem, Personal Assistant will attempt to determine the
nature of the problem and, if possible, will help you resolve the problem over
the phone. If the problem can't be resolved during the call, the Personal
Assistant will schedule a Service Technician to visit your home, usually within
24 hours of the time of the call, excluding weekends and holidays. If our
workload permits, the service call will be scheduled for the same day as your
call. There is no charge for service calls if the problem is caused by our
equipment.
   Emergencies such as fallen utility poles, violent storms, or very cold
weather may affect signal quality. We are committed to acting promptly to
correct any emergency situation, and pledge immediate response at any time if a
large area is experiencing technical difficulties.
   Our Personal Assistants and Service Technicians are trained and authorized
to do whatever is reasonably necessary to solve a customer's problem, including
replacement of any non-operating equipment, in order to provide the highest-
quality service.
   If a signal quality problem is not resolved to your satisfaction using this
procedure, you can contact the franchise authority for your community. We will
maintain all complaint records for at least one year.
"At your service" center 1-800-848-CAST sm (2278)
EXHIBIT H—CABLE TELEVISION WIRE DROPS
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES
Dearborn City Hall                                  13615 Michigan Ave, 48126
Dearborn Civic Center                               15801 Michigan Ave, 48126
Dearborn Police Building                            16099 Michigan Ave, 48126
19 th District Court Building                       16077 Michigan Ave, 48126
Dearborn Power House                                16001 Michigan Ave, 48126
Henry Ford Centennial Library                       16301 Michigan Ave, 48126
Bryant Library                                      22100 Michigan Ave, 48124
Dearborn City Hall West Annex                       4500 Maple, 48126
Dearborn Historical Museum                          21950 Michigan Ave, 48124
Dearborn Fire Station #2                            19800 Outer Drive, 48124
Dearborn E. Sewerage Plant                          1390 Miller, 48120
Central Garage                                      2650 Greenfield, 48120
Dearborn Animal Shelter                             2661 Greenfield, 48120
Department of Public Works                          2951 Greenfield, 48120
Central Fire Station                                3750 Greenfield, 48120
Dearborn Historical Museum                          915 Brady, 48124
Ice Skating Center                                  14900 Ford Road, 48126
Snow Branch Library                                 23950 Princeton, 48124
Dearborn East Annex                                 4501 Schaefer, 48126
Dearborn Fire Station #4                            6501 Schaefer, 48126
Esper Branch Library                                12929 Warren, 48126
Dearborn Fire Station #3                            3630 Wyoming, 48120
Robert Herndon Dearborn Hills Golf Course Clubhouse 1300 S. Telegraph, 48124
Hubbard Manor East                                  5500 Calhoun, 48126
Hubbard Manor West                                  22077 Beech, 48124
Kennedy Plaza                                       5111 Bingham, 48126
Sisson Manor                                        1515 Mason, 48124
Townsend Towers                                     7000 Freda, 48126
 
   AUTHENTICATION
   This is to certify that the undersigned do hereby authenticate the foregoing
Ordinance adopted on December 7, 1999, and published on December 15, 1999,
effective the day following publication. True copies of this Ordiance may be
inspected or obtained in the Office of the City Clerk.
   Michael A. Guido, Mayor
   Kathleen Buda, City Clerk
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
   The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately
determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each
supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified
in the Code and are considered "Include." Ordinances that are not of a general
and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omit."
   In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this
Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's
historical evolution.
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/  Supp. No.
                      Omit
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/  Supp. No.
                      Omit
10-1285  7-19-10      Include   42
10-1287  8-16-10      Include   42
10-1288  8-16-10      Include   42
10-1289  9-7-10       Include   42
10-1298  10-25-10     Include   42
10-1302  12-13-10     Include   42
11-1308  1-4-11       Include   42
11-1309  1-4-11       Include   42
11-1310  1-4-11       Include   42
11-1311  2-7-11       Include   42
11-1312  2-7-11       Include   42
11-1315  3-7-11       Include   43
11-1316  3-7-11       Include   43
11-1317  3-21-11      Include   43
11-1323  5-16-11      Include   43
11-1324  5-16-11      Include   43
11-1325  5-16-11      Include   43
11-1328  6-6-11       Include   43
11-1329  6-6-11       Include   43
11-1330  6-20-11      Include   43
11-1331  6-20-11      Include   43
11-1332  6-20-11      Include   43
11-1333  9-19-11      Include   43
11-1334  10-3-11      Include   43
11-1335  10-24-11     Include   43
11-1336  11-7-11      Include   43
11-1337  11-7-11      Include   43
11-1338  11-21-11     Include   43
11-1339  11-21-11     Include   43
11-1340  12-12-11     Include   43
11-1341  12-12-11     Include   43
11-1342  12-12-11     Include   43
12-1343  1-10-12      Include   44
12-1344  1-10-12      Include   44
12-1346  1-24-12      Include   44
12-1347  1-24-12      Include   44
12-1348  2-7-12       Include   44
12-1349  2-7-12       Include   44
12-1350  2-27-12      Include   44
12-1351  2-27-12      Include   44
12-1352  3-6-12       Include   44
12-1353  3-27-12      Include   44
12-1355  5-8-12       Include   44
12-1358  6-12-12      Include   44
12-1359  6-19-12      Include   44
12-1360  6-19-12      Include   44
12-1361  8-6-12       Include   45
12-1364  9-11-12      Include   45
12-1365  9-11-12      Include   45
12-1373  11-13-12     Include   45
13-1378  1-15-13      Include   45
13-1383  2-12-13      Include   45
13-1384  2-12-13      Omit      45
13-1387  3-19-13      Include   45
13-1388  3-19-13      Include   45
13-1389  4-16-13      Include   45
13-1394  4-30-13      Include   45
13-1395  4-30-13      Include   45
13-1398  6-11-13      Include   45
13-1401  6-11-13      Omit      45
13-1402  6-11-13      Include   45
13-1404  7-23-13      Include   45
13-1406  8-13-13      Omit      45
13-1407  8-13-13      Include   45
13-1408  8-13-13      Include   45
13-1409  8-13-13      Include   45
13-1410  9-10-13      Include   45
13-1412  11-12-13     Omit      45
13-1413  11-26-13     Include   45
13-1415  1-14-14      Omit      45
13-1416  1-14-14      Omit      45
14-1420  2-11-14      Include   46
14-1421  3-4-14       Include   46
14-1422  3-18-14      Include   46
14-1423  5-6-14       Include   46
14-1425  5-20-14      Omit      46
14-1426  5-20-14      Include   46
14-1427  5-20-14      Include   46
14-1428  6-17-14      Include   46
14-1429  7-22-14      Include   46
14-1430  7-22-14      Include   46
14-1432  8-12-14      Include   46
14-1433  8-20-14      Include   46
14-1434  9-9-14       Include   46
14-1435  9-9-14       Include   46
14-1436  9-9-14       Include   46
14-1438  9-23-14      Include   46
14-1440  10-21-14     Include   46
14-1441  11-12-14     Include   46
14-1442  11-12-14     Include   46
14-1443  11-12-14     Include   46
14-1444  11-12-14     Include   46
14-1446  12-9-14      Include   46
14-1447  12-9-14      Include   46
14-1448  12-9-14      Include   46
14-1449  12-9-14      Omit      46
14-1450  12-9-14      Omit      46
14-1451  12-9-14      Omit      46
14-1452  12-9-14      Omit      46
15-1453  1-27-15      Include   47
15-1454  1-27-15      Include   47
15-1455  2-10-15      Include   47
15-1457  3-17-15      Include   47
15-1463  5-6-15       Include   47
15-1465  5-19-15      Include   47
15-1466  6-23-15      Include   47
15-1469  6-23-15      Include   47
15-1471  7-21-15      Omit      47
15-1472  7-21-15      Omit      47
15-1473  7-21-15      Omit      47
15-1476  9-8-15       Include   47
15-1489  9-22-15      Include   47
15-1494  11-24-15     Include   47
15-1495  10-20-15     Include   47
15-1497  11-10-15     Include   47
15-1502  11-24-15     Include   47
15-1510  12-8-15      Include   47
15-1511  12-8-15      Include   47
15-1512  12-8-15      Include   47
15-1513  12-8-15      Omit      47
15-1514  12-16-15     Include   47
16-1518  1-26-16      Include   47
16-1521  2-9-16       Include   47
16-1522  2-9-16       Include   47
16-1523  2-9-16       Include   47
16-1529  3-15-16      Include   47
16-1532  4-12-16      Include   47
16-1533  4-12-16      Include   47
16-1534  4-12-16      Include   47
16-1537  5-24-16      Include   47
16-1539  10-18-16     Include   47
16-1540  9-20-16      Include   47
16-1541  6-14-16      Include   47
16-1543  9-6-16       Include   47
16-1549  10-4-16      Include   47
16-1550  10-4-16      Include   47
16-1551  10-4-16      Include   47
16-1552  10-18-16     Include   47
16-1553  10-18-16     Include   47
16-1554  10-18-16     Include   47
16-1555  10-18-16     Include   47
16-1558  --16         Include   48
16-1559  11-15-16     Include   48
16-1560  11-15-16     Include   48
16-1561  11-15-16     Include   48
16-1565  1-17-17      Include   48
17-1569  --17         Include   48
17-1570  3-7-17       Include   48
17-1571  3-21-17      Include   48
17-1574  3-21-17      Include   48
17-1575  3-21-17      Include   48
17-1577  --17         Include   48
15-1578  5-9-17       Include   48
17-1579  5-23-17      Include   48
17-1580  5-23-17      Include   48
17-1581  --17         Include   48
17-1586  --17         Include   48
17-1587  6-13-17      Include   48
17-1590  8-15-17      Include   48
17-1594  9-12-17      Include   48
17-1595  9-12-17      Include   48
17-1596  9-26-17      Include   48
17-1597  10-10-17     Include   48
18-1607  3-13-18      Omit      48
18-1608  3-13-18      Omit      48
18-1612  5-15-18      Include   48
18-1613  6-12-18      Include   48
18-1614  6-12-18      Include   48
18-1615  6-19-18      Include   48
18-1616  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1617  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1618  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1619  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1620  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1621  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1622  7-17-18      Include   48
18-1624  8-21-18      Include   48
18-1625  8-21-18      Include   48
18-1623  8-21-18      Include   48
18-1629  9-11-18      Include   48
18-1630  9-25-18      Include   48
18-1631  12-18-18     Include   48
18-1633  1-15-19      Include   48
19-1636  1-29-19      Include   48
19-1637  1-29-19      Include   48
19-1638  1-29-19      Include   48
19-1639  1-29-19      Include   48
19-1640  1-15-19      Include   48
19-1641  1-29-19      Include   48
19-1642  2-26-19      Include   48
19-1643  2-26-19      Include   48
19-1648  5-21-19      Include   48
19-1649  5-21-19      Include   48
19-1650  5-21-19      Include   48
19-1651  5-21-19      Include   48
19-1652  6-18-19      Include   48
19-1653  6-18-19      Include   48
19-1654  7-16-19      Include   48
19-1655  7-16-19      Include   48
19-1656  7-16-19      Include   48
19-1657  9-10-19      Include   49
19-1658  9-10-19      Include   49
19-1659  9-10-19      Include   49
19-1660  9-10-19      Include   49
19-1662  9-24-19      Include   49
19-1663  9-24-19      Include   49
19-1666  11-26-19     Include   49
19-1667  12-10-19     Include   49
19-1669  1-14-20      Include   49
19-1670  1-14-20      Include   49
20-1672  6-2-20       Include   49
20-1674  8-25-20      Include   49
20-1676  7-14-20      Include   49
20-1677  8-25-20      Include   49
20-1678  8-25-20      Include   49
20-1679  8-25-20      Include   49
20-1680  8-25-20      Include   49
20-1682  9-22-20      Include   50
20-1683  9-22-20      Include   50
20-1685  10-6-20      Include   50
20-1689  10-20-20     Include   50
20-1690  12-8-20      Include   50
20-1691  12-8-20      Include   50
20-1693  12-8-20      Include   50
21-1696  2-9-21       Include   50
21-1705  3-9-21       Include   50
21-1707  6-8-21       Include   50
21-1708  5-11-21      Include   50
21-1709  6-15-21      Include   50
22-1724  2-8-22       Include   51
22-1725  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1726  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1727  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1728  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1729  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1730  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1731  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1732  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1733  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1734  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1735  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1736  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1737  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1738  1-25-22      Include   51
22-1739  2-8-22       Include   51
22-1741  4-12-22      Include   51
22-1742  --22         Include   51
22-1743  5-24-22      Include   51
22-1749  6-7-22       Include   51
22-1751  7-12-22      Include   51
22-1752  6-15-22      Include   51
22-1754  6-15-22      Include   51
22-1755  7-12-22      Include   51
22-1762  7-26-22      Include   51
22-1763  8-23-22      Include   51
22-1768  8-23-22      Include   51
22-1769  9-13-22      Include   51
22-1771  9-13-22      Include   51
22-1773  9-13-22      Include   51
22-1774  10-25-22     Include   51
22-1775  10-25-22     Include   51
22-1776  10-25-22     Include   51
22-1777  10-25-22     Include   51
22-1778  12-6-22      Include   51
22-1779  12-6-22      Include   51
22-1780  12-6-22      Include   51
22-1781  12-14-22     Include   51
22-1782  12-14-22     Include   51
22-1783  1-10-23      Include   51
23-1784  1-24-23      Include   52
23-1789  5-9-23       Include   52
23-1790  6-13-23      Include   52
23-1791  6-13-23      Include   52
23-1792  6-13-23      Include   52
23-1795  8-22-23      Include   52
23-1796  9-12-23      Include   52
23-1799  9-12-23      Omit      52
23-1803  10-10-23     Include   52
23-1804  1-9-24       Include   52
23-1805  1-9-24       Include   52
24-1815  4-23-24      Include   52
24-1816  4-23-24      Include   52
24-1817  5-21-24      Include   52
24-1818  5-21-24      Include   52
24-1820  6-11-24      Include   52
24-1823  9-24-24      Include   53
24-1824  10-8-24      Include   53
24-1825  10-8-24      Include   53
24-1826  10-8-24      Include   53
24-1827  10-22-24     Include   53
24-1828  10-22-24     Include   53
24-1829  11-19-24     Include   53
24-1830  11-19-24     Include   53
24-1831  12-10-24     Include   53
24-1832  12-10-24     Include   53
24-1833  1-14-25      Include   53
24-1834  1-14-25      Include   53
24-1835  1-28-25      Include   53
24-1836  1-28-25      Include   53
25-1837  1-28-25      Include   53
24-1838  3-18-25      Include   53
24-1839  5-20-25      Include   53
24-1840  4-22-25      Include   53
24-1841  5-20-25      Include   53
24-1842  5-20-25      Include   53
24-1843  5-20-25      Include   53
25-1844  6-10-25      Include   53
25-1845  7-15-25      Include   53
25-1846  7-15-25      Include   53
25-1847  7-15-25      Include   53
25-1848  7-15-25      Include   53
25-1849  7-15-25      Include   53
25-1850  8-12-25      Include   53
25-1851  9-9-25       Include   53
25-1853  9-9-25       Include   53
 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED
   This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the
text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Statutes
Annotated.
Editor's note— The Michigan Statutes Annotated are obsolete and will no longer
be updated. References to MSA will be removed from the Code text as pages are
supplemented.
MSA Section
    this Code
MSA                      Section
                         this Code
2.212 et seq.            1-2
2.213, 2.214             1-3
2.217                    1-2
3.447(122)               18-728
3.521 et seq.            5-1358
                         5-1369(b)
3.560(101) et seq.       18-431
4.1700(51) et seq.       Char., § 3.2
4.1700(71) et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. III
                         Ch. 2, Art. V
                         Char., § 3.1
4.1702(1) et seq.        Char., § 3.5
4.1800(11) et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. V
                         5-1161
4.1801(1) et seq.        Ch. 2, Art. III
                         Ch. 2, Art. V
5.2071 et seq.           Char., §§ 1.1—20.6
                         5-1358
5.2073(a)                Char., § 6.1
                         Char., § 13.8
5.2073(b)                Char., § 12.3
5.2073(c)                Char., Ch. 12
5.2073(d)                Char., § 6.2
                         Char., § 6.6
5.2073(e)                Char., § 1.3
5.2073(h)                Char., § 13.3
5.2073(i)                Char., § 13.7
                         Char., § 13.13
5.2073(k)                5-26
                         5-451
                         Char., § 9.2
                         Char., § 9.8
5.2074                   Char., Ch. 15
5.2074(1)                Char., § 13.14
                         Char., § 16.1
5.2074(2)                Char., § 16.4
5.2075                   Char., Ch. 15
5.2077                   Char., Ch. 15
                         Char., § 15.1
5.2078(1)                Char., § 8.4
5.2082                   1-9
5.2082(4)                Char., § 8.3
5.2082(6)                Char., § 9.10
                         Char., § 9.12
5.2082(10)               Char., § 9.7
                         Char., § 19.6
5.2083                   Char., § 17.3
5.2083(3)                Char., § 5.1
5.2084                   Char., Ch. 15
5.2084(2)                1-1
                         Char., § 9.9
5.2084(f)                Char., § 13.17
5.2085 et seq.           Char., § 1.2
5.2100 et seq.           Char., § 19.5
5.2421 et seq.           Ch. 15
5.2769(51) et seq.       Ch. 16
5.2949(1) et seq.        5-27
5.2991 et seq.           Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2
                         2-386
5.3010 et seq.           7-64
5.3010(1) et seq.        7-64, 7-65
                         7-67
                         7-81
                         7-96
                         7-99, 7-100
                         7-102
5.3011 et seq.           Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 6
                         2-473
5.3188(1) et seq.        Ch. 2, Art. VI
                         Char., Ch. 16
5.3228(21) et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. VI
                         2-507
                         Char., § 13.3
5.3520(1) et seq.        7-163
                         7-165
                         7-172
6.1001 et seq.           Ch. 8
                         Char., Ch. 12
                         Char., § 12.1
6.1544(1)                Char., § 12.6
6.1644(1)                Char., § 6.3
6.1654 et seq.           Char., § 1.3
7.1 et seq.              2-548
7.24 et seq.             Char., § 13.7
7.30(1)                  Char., § 13.9
7.87 et seq.             Char., § 13.11
7.521 et seq.            12-112
                         12-115
8.214(1) et seq.         7-65
8.215(61) et seq.        7-100
9.263                    Ch. 6
9.391(11) et seq.        Ch. 5, Art. VI
9.1661(1) et seq.        Ch. 18, Art. V
                         18-798
                         18-801
9.1800 et seq.           18-148
9.1801 et seq.           Ch. 18
                         18-52
                         18-189
                         18-198
                         18-246
9.1806(2)                18-61
9.1807                   18-63
9.1810                   18-64
9.1813                   18-65
9.1815, 9.1816           18-66, 18-67
9.1817                   18-69
9.1818(1)                18-70
9.1819, 9.1820           18-71, 18-72
9.1822                   18-74
9.1824—9.1826          18-75—18-77
9.1829, 9.1830           18-79, 18-80
9.1831, 9.1832           18-82, 18-83
9.1833                   18-81
9.1836—9.1839          18-86—18-89
9.1841                   18-90
9.1844                   18-92
9.1846—9.1849          18-93—18-96
9.1851                   18-97
9.1853—9.1857          18-98—18-102
9.1858(2)                18-103
9.1859, 9.1860           18-104, 18-105
9.1861, 9.1862           18-108, 18-109
9.1864                   18-113
9.1867                   18-114
9.1868—9.1870          18-116—18-118
9.1872, 9.1873           18-119, 18-120
9.1875                   18-121
9.1877                   18-122
9.1879                   18-124
9.1881                   18-84
9.1949                   18-431
9.1951(2)—9.1951(5)    18-496—18-499
9.1955, 9.1956           18-186, 18-187
9.2001                   18-188
9.2011                   18-194
9.2012                   18-193
9.2012(1)                18-189
9.2020(i)(g)             18-277
9.2024                   18-191
                         18-195
9.2025, 9.2026           18-196, 18-197
9.2302                   18-146
9.2303                   18-153
9.2304                   18-152
9.2305, 9.2306           Ch. 18
9.2310                   Ch. 18
9.2312                   18-159
                         18-556
9.2314—9.2316          18-160—18-162
9.2325                   18-271
9.2325(1)                18-271, 18-273
9.2325(2)                18-273
9.2325(3), 9.2325(4)     18-274, 18-275
9.2326                   18-278
9.2326(1)                18-249
9.2327, 9.2328           18-246
9.2331, 9.2332           18-247, 18-248
9.2333                   18-250
9.2334                   18-306
                         18-316
9.2335, 9.2336           18-307, 18-308
9.2337—9.2339          18-311—18-313
9.2342                   18-314
9.2343                   18-315
                         18-321
9.2345                   18-317
9.2347—9.2350          18-381—18-384
9.2352                   18-385
9.2353                   18-155
9.2354                   18-318
9.2372                   18-355
9.2376                   18-342
9.2377                   18-462
9.2378                   18-596
9.2379, 9.2380           18-157, 18-158
9.2382                   18-320
9.2383                   18-406
9.2384                   18-407
                         18-466
9.2385—9.2393          18-408—18-416
9.2394                   18-352
                         18-417
9.2395—9.2406          18-418—18-429
9.2407 et seq.           18-164
9.2408—9.2410          18-432—18-434
9.2416—9.2419          18-463—18-466
9.2419(1)                18-475
9.2420—9.2422          18-467—18-469
9.2422(7)                18-247
9.2423, 9.2424           18-470, 18-471
9.2425                   18-475
9.2426                   18-472
9.2427                   18-280
9.2427(3)                18-282
9.2428                   18-281
9.2428(1)                18-283
9.2488(4)                18-284
9.2501(1)(k)             18-186, 18-187
9.2503(4)                18-729
9.2503(6)                18-729
9.2604                   18-198
9.2604(1)                18-199
9.2642(1)                18-728
9.2660                   18-150
11.475(1) et seq.        5-1369(b)
12.871 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. XV
12.1081(1) et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5
13.1321 et seq.          14-271
13.1820(1) et seq.       5-203
14.15(1101) et seq.      14-157
14.15(7403), 14.15(7404) 14-112
14.15(12901) et seq.     12-616
16.460                   14-96
18.812(1) et seq.        Ch. 5, Art. VI
18.1004(2)               14-112
18.1208(1) et seq.       12-4
19.401(1) et seq.        12-821
19.720(1) et seq.        Ch. 12, Art. XI
19.734 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. XI
19.1101 et seq.          18-103
24.13101 et seq.         18-192
27.3178(598.1)           14-316
27A.8312                 18-363
27A.8395                 18-576
tit. 28                  Ch. 14
28.91 et seq.            14-291
28.191 et seq.           14-291
28.244 et seq.           Ch. 4
28.276                   14-61
28.310                   14-107
28.311                   14-98
28.342(1) et seq.        14-317
28.358                   14-64
28.364                   14-136
28.364(1)(a)             14-64
28.364(1)(f)             14-159
28.423                   14-261
28.430—28.432          14-267—14-269
28.434                   14-270
28.436(11) et seq.       14-291
28.437                   14-41
28.440(1) et seq.        14-265
28.533 et seq.           14-198
28.535                   14-199
28.536                   14-196
28.538                   14-200
28.588                   14-92, 14-93
28.596                   14-104
28.603(1) et seq.        18-166
28.609(1)                14-99
28.622                   14-62
28.643(7)                14-7
28.648                   14-105
28.703                   14-180
28.703 et seq.           14-176
28.704                   14-178
28.704(1)                14-178
28.707                   14-177
28.709                   14-179
28.718 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. XIV
28.747                   14-38
28.788(5)                14-160
28.790(1)—28.790(3)    14-137—14-139
28.803                   14-97
28.808(5)                14-63
28.820(1)                14-106
28.868(6))               1-8
116.114(1) et seq.       11-261
 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS
   This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the
text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws.
MCL Section
    this Code
MCL                            Section
                               this Code
8.3 et seq.                    1-2
8.4                            1-3
8.4a                           1-3
8.6                            1-2
15.231 et seq.                 Ch. 2
                               Ch. 2, Art. III
                               Ch. 2, Art. V
                               2-481(8)
                               2-484(4)
                               2-549
                               17-263
                               19-43
15.261 et seq.                 Ch. 2
                               Ch. 2, Art. V
                               2-481(7)
                               2-365—2-367
                               2-484(2)
                               5-1161
                               13-565
                               Char., § 7.5, Char., § 7.6
                               Char., § 7.8
                               19-43
15.321 et seq.                 Char., § 3.2
15.341 et seq.                 Ch. 2
                               Ch. 2, Art. III
                               Ch. 2, Art. V
                               Char., § 3.1
15.401 et seq.                 Char., § 3.5
24.201 et seq.                 18-431
                               18-501
24.201—24.328                18-436(a)
                               18-436(f)
28.421 et seq.                 14-291
28.451 et seq.                 14-265
28.457(7)                      14-265
28-721 et seq.                 14-346
28-725a                        14-346
43.51 et seq.                  Ch. 5, Art. VI
117.1 et seq.                  Char., § § 1.1—20.6
                               5-1358
117.3                          5-451
117.3(a)                       Char., § 6.1
                               Char., § 13.8
117.3(b)                       Char., § 12.3
117.3(c)                       Char., Ch. 12
117.3(d)                       Char., § 6.2
                               Char., § 6.6
                               Char., § 7.2
117.3(e)                       Char., § 1.3
117.3(g)                       Char., § 7.16
117.3(h)                       Char., § 13.3
117.3(i)                       Char., § 13.7
                               Char., § 13.13
117.3(k)                       5-26
                               Char., § 9.2
                               Char., § 9.8
117.3(m)                       Char., § 7.9
117.4a                         Char., Ch. 15
117.4a(1)                      Char., § 13.14
                               Char., § 16.1
117.4a(2)                      Char., § 16.4
117.4b                         Char., Ch. 15
117.4d                         Char., Ch. 15
                               Char., § 15.1
117.4e(1)                      Char., § 8.4
117.4h(1)                      Char., § 8.2
117.4i                         1-9
117.4i(4)                      Char., § 8.3
117.4i(6)                      Char., § 9.10
                               Char., § 9.12
117.4i(9)                      Char., § 8.1
117.4i(10)                     Char., § 9.7
                               Char., § 19.6
117.4j                         Char., § 17.3
117.4j(3)                      Char., § 5.1
117.5                          Char., Ch. 15
117.5(f)                       Char., § 13.17
117.5b                         1-1
                               Char., § 9.9
117.21 et seq.                 Char., § 19.5
117.30                         13-521
117.61 et seq.                 Char., § 1.2
123.51 et seq.                 Ch. 15
123.161 et seq.                19-32
123.955                        Ch. 7
124.1—124.13                 12-886
124.281 et seq.                Ch. 16
124.351—124.359              12-886
124.401—124.426              12-886
124.451—124.479              12-886
124.501—124.512              12-886
124.531—124.536              12-886
125.31 et seq.                 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2
125.71 et seq.                 Ch. 7
125.140 et seq.                11-252
125.539(i)                     11-311
125.601 et seq.                Ch. 7
125.651 et seq.                Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 6
                               2-473
                               Ch. 7
125.901 et seq.                Ch. 7
125.1352                       18-728
125.1401 et seq.               11-261
                               11-267
                               11-280
                               11-291
125.1501 et seq.               Ch. 5
                               5-27
125.1504d                      11-321
125.1601 et seq.               Ch. 7, Art. IV
                               7-142
                               7-156
                               7-158
                               7-163
                               7-165
                               7-172
125.1651 et seq.               Ch. 7
                               Ch. 7, Art. III
                               7-61
                               7-64, 7-65
                               7-67
                               7-81
                               7-96
                               7-99, 7-100
                               7-102
                               7-116
125.1667 et seq.               7-66
                               7-101
125.3205(1Xc)                  17-274
125.3514(10)                   17-274
125.3801 et seq.               2-386
125.3865                       2-383
126.1601 et seq.               Ch. 7
129.12                         Char., § 7.15
131.1 et seq.                  Ch. 2, Art. VI
                               Char., Ch. 16
141.101—141.140              12-886
141.421 et seq.                Ch. 2, Art. VI
                               2-507
                               Char., § 13.3
168.1 et seq.                  Ch. 8
                               Char., Ch. 12
                               Char., § 12.1
168.544a                       Char., § 12.6
168.644a                       Char., § 6.3
168.654 et seq.                Char., § 1.3
204.422                        12-328
205.27                         12-1201
                               12-1262
205.51 et seq.                 12-112
                               12-115
205.93                         18-199D(b)
205.422                        12-1201, 14-22
211.1 et seq.                  2-548
                               11-286
                               11-297
211.1—211.157                5-27(24)
211.24 et seq.                 Char., § 13.7
211.30a                        Char., § 13.9
211.43b                        Char., § 7.15
211.44 et seq.                 Char., § 13.11
213.321 et seq.                7-65
                               7-100
247.183                        Ch. 6
247.651                        18-367
252.201 et seq.                Ch. 5, Art. VI
257.1 et seq.                  Ch. 18
                               18-52
                               18-148
                               18-189
                               18-198
                               18-219
                               18-246
                               18-617
                               18-850
257.1a                         18-52
257.1d                         14-265
257.2—257.4                  18-54—18-56
257.4b                         18-57
257.5                          18-59
257.6a                         18-60
257.6b                         18-61
257.7                          18-63
257.8b                         14-265
257.10                         18-64
257.13                         18-65
257.15, 257.16                 18-66, 18-67
257.17                         18-69
257.18a                        18-70
257.19, 257.20                 18-71, 18-72
257.22                         18-74
                               18-367
257.24—257.26                18-75—18-77
257.25b                        18-126, 18-444
257.29, 257.30                 18-79, 18-80
257.31, 257.32                 18-82, 18-83
257.33                         18-81
257.36—257.39                18-86—18-89
257.41                         18-90
257.44                         18-92
257.46—257.49                18-93—18-96
257.51                         18-97
257.53—257.57                18-98—18-102
257.58b                        18-103
257.59, 257.60                 18-104, 18-105
257.61, 257.62                 18-108, 18-109
257.64                         18-113
257.67                         18-114
257.68—257.70                18-116—18-118
257.72, 257.73                 18-119, 18-120
257.75                         18-121
257.77                         18-122
257.79                         14-318
                               18-124
257.81                         18-84
257.212                        18-199(a)
                               18-199(e)
257.217b                       18-444
257.221                        18-367
257.223                        18-200
257.237                        18-367
257.249                        18-431
257.251b                       18-496
257.251c                       18-497
257.251d                       18-498
257.251e                       18-499
257.252(h)                     18-367
                               18-368
257.255, 257.256               18-186, 18-187
257.266a                       18-199B(a)(2)
257.301                        12-889, 18-188
257.310e                       18-173
257.311                        18-194
257.312                        18-194
257.312(a)                     18-189
257.319                        14-117
                               14-321
                               14-322
257.320                        18-277
257.321a                       18-199(g)
                               18-199C(g)(2)
257.324                        18-191
                               18-195
257.325, 257.326               18-196, 18-197
257.328                        12-888
                               18-193
257.403                        18-287A(b)
257.501—257.532              12-888
257.520                        18-499
257.602                        18-146
257.603                        18-153
257.604                        18-152
257.605, 257.606               Ch. 18
257.610                        Ch. 18
257.612                        18-159
                               18-556
257.614—257.616              18-160—18-162
257.617a                       18-219
257.618—257.622              18-220—18-224
257.624a, 257.624b             18-199C(g)(4)vii.
257.625                        18-270(f)
                               18-271
                               18-272
257.625(1)(c)                  18-854
257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (7) 18-199C(a)(2)
257.625(1), (3), (7)           18-199C(a)(2), (3)
257.625(6)                     18-271
                               18-289
257.625b                       18-271
                               18-289
257.625c(1)                    18-275(b)
257.625c—257.625f            18-272(b)(3)
257.625f                       18-275A
257.625k                       18-271
257.625l                       18-271
257.626                        18-278
257.626a                       18-249
257.627, 257.628               18-246
257.631, 257.632               18-247, 18-248
257.633                        18-250
257.634—257.636              18-306—18-308
257.637—257.639              18-311—18-313
257.642, 257.643               18-314, 18-315
257.643a                       18-321
257.644, 257.645               18-316, 18-317
257.647—257.650              18-381—18-384
257.652                        18-385
257.653                        18-155
257.653a                       18-155
257.654                        18-318
257.655                        18-558
257.657
257.658b                       18-444
257.659                        18-507
257.660                        18-126
257.661                        18-503
257.662                        18-507
257.666                        18-554
257.667                        18-526
257.669, 257.670               18-527, 18-528
257.672                        18-355
257.676                        18-342
                               18-618
257.676b                       14-12
257.677                        18-462
257.677a                       17-102
257.678                        18-596
257.679, 257.680               18-157, 18-158
257.682                        18-320
257.683                        18-406
                               18-368
257.684                        18-407
                               18-466
257.685—257.693              18-408—18-416
257.685                        18-444
257.686                        18-444
257.694                        18-352
                               18-417
257.695—257.706              18-418—18-429
257.697                        18-444
257.698                        18-444
257.705                        18-444
257.706                        18-444
257.707 et seq.                18-164
257.708—257.710              18-432—18-434
257.708a                       18-444
257.709                        18-444
257.710a                       18-444
257.710c                       18-444
257.710d                       18-436
257.710e                       18-435, 18-444
257.712                        18-438
                               18-440
257.714                        18-442
257.716—257.719              18-463—18-466
257.719(a)                     18-475
257.720—257.722              18-467—18-469
257.722(7)                     18-247
257.723, 257.724               18-470, 18-471
257.725                        18-475
257.726                        18-472
257.727                        18-280
257.727c                       18-282
257.728                        18-281
257.728a                       18-283
257.728d                       18-284
257.801(1)(k)                  18-186, 18-187
257.803d                       18-729
257.904                        12-900, 18-198
                               18-199A(a)
                               18-199C(b)(1)—(3)
                               18-199C(g)(2)
257.907(14)                    18-193
257.942a                       18-728
257.961                        18-150
257.1301—257.1340            12-866
                               12-916
257.2102                       12-886
257.2111                       12-887
257.2115                       12-887
257.2123                       12-888
275.904                        18-270(f)
280.1—280.630                17-263
281.951 et seq.                5-1369(b)
287.1002                       4-31
287.261 et seq.                Ch. 4, Art. II
287.290                        Ch. 4
287.321 et seq.                4-22
                               4-27
                               15-28
287.331                        14-6
287.351                        4-22
289.81 et seq.                 Ch. 12, Art. XV
289.801—289.810              14-217
289.1109                       12-250
289.1111                       12-250
289.3105                       12-250
289.6135                       12-230
                               12-250
289.7101—289.7137            14-217
290.601 et seq.                Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5
299.401 et seq.                16-3
299.501 et seq.                16-3
311.1 et seq.                  14-271
323.1 et seq.                  5-1358
                               5-1369(b)
324.101 et seq.                19-209
324.5501 et seq.               13-542
                               13-545
324.5524                       13-542
                               13-545
324.5524(5)                    13-545
324.5525(j)                    13-548
324.5540                       13-541
324.5542                       13-541
324.8301—324.8336            14-6
324.20135                      14-44
325.1001 et seq.               19-69, 19-70
325.1001—325.1023            19-43
330.1100a                      14-321
333, pt. 74                    12-1201
                               12-1262
333.511                        4-27
333.1101 et seq.               14-157
333.2451                       14-246
333.2701 et seq.               5-1384
333.2882                       2-638
333.6103                       14-321
333.6230                       14-321
333.7101—MCL 333.7545        14-246
333.7212                       18-271(f)
333.7214                       18-271(f)
333.7401                       14-274(i)(2)
333.7403, 333.7404             14-112
333.12901 et seq.              12-616
333.16101— 333.18838         14-6
333.16215                      18-272(f)(3)
333.18801—333.18838          14-6
333.26421 et seq.              5-1384, 5-1385, 5-1387, 12-1244
333.27951 et seq.              5-1384, 5-1385, 5-1386, 14-158
336.11 et seq.                 Ch. 13
338.41 et seq.                 12-4
338.821—338.851              14-273
338.2301—338.2313            5-27(27)
339.2401—339.2518            5-27(22)
339.2001 et seq.               5-241
399.1 et seq.                  Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3
399.172                        Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3
399.201 et seq.                Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3
                               2-479
                               2-489(2)
                               17-260
399.205(2)                     2-483
399.211                        2-483
400.60                         14-96
436.1 et seq.                  Ch. 3
436.33b                        14-112
                               14-321(b)
436.1101—436.2303            14-273
                               18-287A(a)
436.1105                       14-274(i)(1)
                               18-287A(f)
436.1703                       18-199C(g)(4)vii.
                               18-287(c)
                               18-287A(a)
440.1101 et seq.               18-103
442.211 et seq.                12-821
445.481 et seq.                Ch. 12, Art. XI
445.551 et seq.                Ch. 12, Art. XI
450.2101—450.3192            12-886
460.1                          17-260
460.6(g)                       17-273
460.1301 et seq.               17-260
                               17-274
462.109                        17-260
466.22                         18-529
480.11 et seq.                 Ch. 18, Art. V
                               18-798
                               18-801
484.3101 et seq.               17-263
500.402—500.480              12-888
500.1901—500.1955            12-888
500.3101 et seq.               18-192
500.3101—500.3179            12-888, 18-193
500.3101                       12-888, 18-193
500.3102                       18-193
522.601—522.650              18-199C(g)(1)
600.3801                       12-1208
                               12-1223
                               12-1269
600.8312                       18-363
600.8395                       18-576
691.1201 et seq.               Ch. 13
712A.1                         14-316
712A.18m                       14-321
722.1—722.6                  14-321
722.641                        12-328
722.751 et seq.                14-317
750.1 et seq.                  14-291
750.5                          18-60
750.49 et seq.                 Ch. 4
750.50c.                       4-31
750.81                         14-61
750.81(1), (2)                 12-1201
                               12-1262
750.115                        14-107
750.116                        14-98
750.131                        14-89
750.161                        14-64
750.167                        14-136
750.167(1)(a)                  14-64
750.167(1)(c)                  14-13
750.167(1)(e)                  14-134
750.167(1)(f)                  14-159
750.167(1)(j)                  14-15
750.167(1)(k)                  14-16
750.167(1)(l)                  14-133
750.169                        14-135
750.170                        14-131
                               14-135
750.226                        14-261
750.233—750.235              14-267—14-269
750.237                        14-270
750.240                        14-41
750.271 et seq.                14-95
750.301 et seq.                14-198
750.303                        14-199
750.304                        14-196
750.306                        14-200
750.356                        14-92, 14-93
750.356a                       14-105
750.356b                       14-110
750.364                        14-104
750.377a                       14-99
750.390                        14-62
750.411g                       14-7
750.412                        14-105
750.413                        14-105
750.414                        14-105
750.416                        14-105
750.448                        14-180
750.448 et seq.                14-176
750.449                        14-178
750.449a                       14-178
750.452                        14-177
750.454                        14-179
750.463 et seq.                Ch. 12, Art. XIV
750.479                        14-38
750.520b—750.520g            14-321
750.520e                       14-160
750.535                        14-97
750.540e                       14-63
750.552                        14-106
752.525                        14-135
752.541—752.543              14-137—14-139
752.841 et seq.                14-291
752.901 et seq.                18-166
764.9f                         1-8
769.1j                         14-321
771.3                          14-321
780.751—780.834              18-270(g)(7)
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES
   This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code.
Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this
table.
Ordinance  Adoption Date Section Section
Number                           this Code
Ordinance Adoption                Section
          Date     Section        this Code
Number
50-573    9-19-50  1—3          10-63—10-65
                   3-a, 3-b       10-66, 10-67
                   4              10-68
                   5              10-62
                   6              10-61
51-631    5-15-51                 10-66, 10-67
55-1088   12-22-55 2—4          2-186—2-188
59-1316   9- 1-59  1—11         14-81
60-1335   2- 2-60  1—5          2-471—2-475
61-1404   10- 3-61                14-81
63-1453   9-17-63  5              2-189
68-1600   6-18-68  1—10         2-596—2-605
72-1756   7- 5-72  5              14-158
72-1757   7- 5-72  6              14-157
74-1805   12-17-74 1, 2           17-221, 17-222
77-1862   5-17-77                 14-158
77-1874   10- 4-77 2              10-36
                   4—6          10-37—10-39
77-1877   11- 1-77 1—8          7-96—7-103
79-1920   2-20-79  1              14-157
80-1      7- 1-80  2—5          2-566—2-569
                   5.1            2-570
                   6—12         2-571—2-577
80-2      7- 1-80  1, 2           16-31, 16-32
80-4      7- 1-80  1, 2           2-101, 2-102
80-5      7-15-80  1—5          18-771—18-775
80-7      11- 5-80 1              8-26
                   2.1—2.12     8-27—8-38
                   2.14—2.25    8-39—8-50
                   2.27—2.30    8-51—8-54
                   2.33, 2.34     8-55, 8-56
                   2.36—2.39    8-57—8-60
                   2.41, 2.42     8-61, 8-62
                   2.43           8-63, 8-64
                   2.45, 2.46     8-65, 8-66
                   2.50—2.55    8-67—8-72
                   2.57—2.115   8-73—8-131
                   3              8-1
80-9      10-21-80 1—5          13-41—13-45
                   6              13-45
                   7              13-47
80-1970   1- 2-80                 14-157
81-12     1-20-81  2—5          19-66—19-69
                   6.1—6.19     19-70
                   7.1            19-80
                   7.2—7.4      19-75—19-77
                   7.5            19-77
                   8, 9           19-78, 19-79
                   10.1, 10.2     19-80
                   10.3—10.5    19-81—19-83
                   11             19-84
                   12.1—12.3    19-85
                   12.4, 12.5     19-86
                   14             19-88
                   15.1—15.5    19-89
                   15.6—15.8    19-96
                   15.9, 15.10    19-90
                   15.12—15.14  19-91—19-93
                   15.15—15.17  19-93—19-95
                   16.1—16.5    19-97—19-101
                   16.6—16.11   19-101—19-106
                   16.12          19-106
                   16.13—16.16  19-107
                   16.17—16.22  19-108
                   17—19        19-109—19-111
                   20             19-71
                   21             19-73
                   26             19-72
81-13     2-17-81  1—4          2-546—2-549
81-16     2-17-81  1—8          12-386—12-393
81-17     4- 7-81  1.2            6-1
                   1.3, 1.4       6-3, 6-4
                   1.5—1.13     6-6—6-14
                   2.1—2.13     6-46—6-58
                   3.1—3.9      6-15—6-23
                   4              6-5
                   4.1—4.3      6-59
                   5.1            6-2
81-18     4- 7-81  I—XIV        App. A
81-20     4-21-81  1—9          12-416—12-424
81-24     5-20-81  2              2-491
                   3, 4           2-506, 2-507
                   5—26         2-507—2-528
81-25     6- 2-81  1—3          12-1—12-3
                   4—13         12-5—12-14
81-26     6- 2-81  1              12-446
                   2              12-447—12-449
                   3—5          12-450—12-452
                   6              12-453, 12-454
                   7              12-455
81-28     6-25-81  1, 2           2-77, 2-78
                   3              2-80
                   5              2-79
                   7              2-82
                   8              2-76
81-29     7-21-81  101            14-136
                   101(a)         14-64
                   101(b)(i)      14-176
                   101(c)         14-13
                   101(e)         14-134
                   101(f)         14-159
                   101(h)         14-12
                   101(j), 101(k) 14-15, 14-16
                   101(l)         14-133
                   101(m)         14-61
                   102            14-61
                   103            14-135
                   104            14-8
                   105—107      14-102—14-104
                   108            14-94
                   109            14-93
                   110            14-111
                   111            14-107
                   112            14-110
                   113, 114       14-99, 14-100
                   115, 116       14-100, 14-101
                   117            14-99
                   118            14-105
                   119            14-62
                   120            14-266
                   121            14-131
                   122            14-38
                   122(a)         14-39
                   124            14-92
                   125            14-97
                   126            14-216—14-218
                   127            14-98
                   128            14-2
                   203—206      14-236—14-239
                   207—209      14-177—14-179
                   211            14-180
                   212            14-325
                   215            14-324
                   215(1)         14-323
                   216            14-63
                   217            14-132
                   218, 219       14-321, 14-322
                   301—303      14-14
                   401, 402       14-197, 14-198
                   403            14-196
                   404            14-199
                   405            14-196
                   406            14-200
                   501            14-265
                   502            14-41
                   503            14-40
                   504            14-37
                   505            14-17
                   601            14-267
                   602            14-264
                   603            14-263
                   604—607      14-268—14-271
                   608            14-262
                   609            14-261
                   610, 611       14-259, 14-260
                   612            14-258
                   613            14-257
                   701            14-6
                   702            14-109
                   703            14-108
                   704            14-106
                   705            14-42
                   706            14-156
                   707            14-5
                   708            14-4
                   709            14-3
                   801            14-95
                   802            14-89
                   803—805      14-88
                   806, 807       14-90, 14-91
                   808, 809       14-86
                   810            14-87
                   811            14-96
                   812            14-85
                   813            14-84
81-55     11- 4-81 1, 2           12-886, 12-887
                   2a             12-888
                   2b             12-889
                   2c             12-890
                   3              12-891
                   3a             12-892
                                  12-896—12-899
                   3b             12-893
                   3c             12-901
                   4              12-893
                   5—8          12-902—12-905
                   9              12-895
                   10             12-906
                   11             12-900
                   12—15        12-907—12-910
                   16             12-911, 12-912
                   18             12-913
                   19             12-894
                   21—25        12-914—12-918
                   26             12-919, 12-920
                   27—31        12-921—12-925
                   31a            12-926
81-56     11- 4-81 1              12-476
                   2—4          12-478—12-480
                   6              12-477
                   7              12-481
                   9              12-482
                   9.1—9.4      12-483—12-486
                   10, 11         12-487, 12-488
81-57     11- 4-81 1              17-96—17-98
                                  17-100
                   2              17-101
                   3              17-99
81-58     11- 4-81 1—5          12-951—12-955
                   7              12-956
81-59     11- 4-81 1, 2           12-326, 12-327
                   3              12-325
                   4, 5           12-328, 12-329
81-60     11- 4-81 1              17-152
                   2              17-151
81-64     11- 4-81 1              4-23
                   2              4-22
                   3, 4           4-24, 4-25
                   6              4-26
                                  4-28
                   6a             4-29
                   7—10         4-30—4-33
                   11             4-21
81-65     11- 4-81 1.2, 1.3       5-671, 5-672
                   1.10           5-673
                   2.1            5-691, 5-692
                   2.2, 2.3       5-693, 5-694
                   2.4—2.7      5-721—5-724
                   2.8, 2.9       5-726, 5-727
                   2.10           5-725
                   2.11           5-695, 5-696
                   2.12—2.14    5-697—5-699
                   2.16, 2.17     5-700, 5-701
                   2.18, 2.19     5-746, 5-747
                   2.20, 2.21     5-702, 5-703
                   3.1—3.4      5-766—5-769
                   4.1—4.6      5-786—5-791
                   5.1—5.6      5-811—5-816
                   6.1—6.11     5-836—5-846
                   7.1—7.16     5-866—5-881
                   7.16a          5-882
                   7.17—7.23    5-883—5-889
                   8.1—8.12     5-906—5-917
                   9.1—9.12     5-936—5-947
                   10.1—10.72   5-966—5-1037
                   11.1           5-1057
                   11.2           5-1056
                   11.3           5-1058, 5-1059
                   11.4—11.7    5-1060—5-1063
                   11.8           5-1068
                   11.9, 11.10    5-1065, 5-1066
                   11.11—11.15  5-1071—5-1075
                   11.16, 11.17   5-1069, 5-1070
                   11.18          5-1067
                   11.19          5-1064
                   11.20—11.58  5-1076—5-1114
81-68     11- 4-81 1, 2           12-851, 12-852
                   3              12-854, 12-855
                                  12-862
                   4              12-856, 12-857
                                  12-861
                                  12-863
                   5              12-858
                   6              12-853
                   7              12-859, 12-860
81-69     11- 4-81 2.3            4-1
81-70     11- 4-81 1.2            12-169
                   1.3, 1.4       12-161, 12-162
                   1.5            12-166
                                  12-168
                   1.6            12-165
                   1.7            12-170—12-173
                   1.8            12-174
                   1.9            12-164
                   1.10           12-175
                   1.12           12-167
                   1.13           12-163
                   2.1            12-186, 12-187
                   2.2—2.9      12-188—12-195
                   3.1—3.5      12-206—12-210
81-72     11- 4-81 1, 2           11-101
                   4              11-101
81-73     11- 4-81 1.1, 1.2       13-96, 13-97
                   1.3            13-96
                   2.1—2.10     13-111—13-120
                   2.11—2.26    13-120—13-135
                   3.1, 3.2       13-146, 13-147
                   3.2-A—3.2-G  13-147—13-153
                   3.3—3.10     13-154—13-161
                   4.1—4.3      13-136
81-74     11- 4-81 1—3          12-701—12-703
                   4              12-705
                   5              12-708
                   6              12-704
                                  12-707
                   7, 8           12-709, 12-710
                   9              12-706
                   10—13        12-711—12-714
81-75     11- 4-81 1              12-351
                   2              12-352—12-354
                   3              12-355
                   4              12-356—12-358
                   5, 6           12-359, 12-360
                   6-a            12-361
                   6-b            12-362
81-76     11- 4-81 1              12-72
                   2              12-71
                   3              12-73
                   3-b            12-74, 12-75
                   3-c            12-76, 12-77
                   3-d            12-78—12-80
                                  12-84
                   4              12-83, 12-84
                   5              12-81
                   6              12-84
81-77     11- 4-81 2—5          5-121—5-124
                   6—8          5-126—5-128
                   9              5-125
                   10—22        5-129—5-140
                   22-a           5-141
81-79     11- 4-81 1              12-533
                   2              12-531
                   3              12-534
                                  12-536
                   4              12-535
                   5              12-537
                   6              12-538—12-541
                   7, 8           12-542, 12-543
                   9              12-544—12-548
                   10             12-549
                   11             12-532
81-81     11- 4-81 2              12-587
                   3              12-586
                   4              12-588
                   5              12-589, 12-590
                   6              12-591
                   7              12-592—12-594
                   8, 9           12-595, 12-596
81-82     11- 4-81 1, 2           14-9
81-83     11- 4-81 1—4          18-26—18-29
81-84     11- 4-81 1              12-746
                   2              12-748, 12-749
                   3—5          12-750—12-752
                   6              12-753, 12-754
                   6a             12-755
                   7—9          12-756—12-758
                   10             12-747
                   11             12-759—12-762
                   11a            12-763
                   12, 13         12-764, 12-765
                   14             12-766, 12-767
                   15—22        12-768—12-775
                   23             12-777
                   25             12-776
                   26             12-778
81-85     11- 4-81 1              14-256
81-87     11- 4-81 1—8          14-291—14-298
81-88     11- 4-81 1              5-189
81-89     11- 4-81 1—3          13-181—13-183
81-90     11- 4-81 1              5-71
                   2, 3           5-72, 5-73
                   5              5-71
81-91     11- 4-81 1.2—1.5      5-446—5-449
                   2.1—2.16     5-450
                   3.1—3.17     5-471—5-487
                   4.1, 4.2       5-506, 5-507
                   4.3(a, b)      5-508
                   4.3(c, d)      5-509
                   5.1—5.12     5-526—5-537
                   6.1            5-556
                   7.1, 7.2       5-576, 5-577
                   8.1, 8.2       5-596, 5-597
                   8.3—8.9      5-599—5-605
                   8.10           5-598
                   9.1—9.10     5-621—5-630
                   10.1           5-647
                   10.2           5-646
                   10.3           5-647—5-649
                   10.4, 10.5     5-650, 5-651
                   11.2           5-451
81-92     11- 4-81 1—5          13-206—13-210
81-93     11- 4-81 1—8          5-46—5-53
81-94     11- 4-81 1—7          14-83
81-95     11- 4-81 1—7          2-406—2-412
81-96     11- 4-81 1.1—1.8      10-1—10-8
                   2.1—2.5      5-291—5-295
81-97     11- 4-81 1              5-92
                   2              5-91
                   3—15         5-93—5-105
81-98     11- 4-81 1—5          12-111—12-115
81-99     11- 4-81 1—4          12-41—12-44
                   6—9          12-45—12-48
81-100    11- 4-81 1              12-277
                   2              12-276
                   4(a), 4(b)     12-278, 12-279
                   5              12-280
                   6              12-281, 12-282
                   7              12-283
                   8              12-284, 12-285
81-101    11- 4-81 1—12         17-121—17-132
                   15             17-133
81-102    11- 4-81                11-26
                   1.1—1.25     11-27
                   2              11-41
                   2.2, 2.3       11-42, 11-43
                   3.1—3.5      11-56—11-60
                   4              11-76
                   4.1—4.9      11-77—11-85
                   5              11-96
                   5.1—5.4      11-97—11-100
                   5.6—5.8      11-102—11-104
                   6              11-116
                   6.1—6.8      11-117—11-124
                   7              11-136
                   7.1—7.5      11-137—11-141
                   8.1—8.8      11-151—11-158
                   9              11-171
                   9.1—9.7      11-173—11-179
                   9.8            11-172
                   10.1           11-191
                   10.2—10.6    11-193—11-197
                   10.7           11-192
                   10.8, 10.9     11-198, 11-199
                   11.1, 11.2     11-211, 11-212
                   12             11-226
                   12.1—12.3    11-227
                   12.4—12.7    11-228—11-231
                   13.1           11-61
                   13.3           11-62
                   14.1           11-28
81-103    11- 4-81 1.2(a)         18-52
                   1.3—1.9      18-53—18-59
                   1.11           18-63
                   1.11(a), 1.11  18-60, 18-61
                   (b)
                   1.12           18-62
                   1.13—1.18    18-64—18-69
                   1.18(a)        18-70
                   1.20—1.33    18-71—18-84
                   1.35—1.39    18-85—18-89
                   1.41           18-90
                   1.43—1.54    18-91—18-102
                   1.54(a)        18-103
                   1.55—1.63    18-104—18-112
                   1.65—1.67    18-113—18-115
                   1.70—1.74    18-116—18-120
                   1.76—1.80    18-121—18-125
                   2.1—2.7      18-146—18-152
                   2.8(a)—(d)   18-153
                   2.8(e)         18-154
                   2.8(f)         18-153
                   2.9—2.23     18-155—18-169
                   2.24—2.26    18-216—18-218
                   3.1, 3.2       18-186, 18-187
                   3.2(a)         18-188
                   3.3            18-189
                   3.3(a)         18-190
                   3.4, 3.5       18-195, 18-196
                   3.5a           18-196
                   3.6—3.8      18-197—18-199
                   3.8(a)         18-200
                   3.9, 3.10      18-191, 18-192
                   3.11           18-194
                   3.12           18-193
                   4.1—4.5      18-219—18-223
                   4.7—4.9      18-224—18-226
                   5.1            18-246
                   5.3, 5.4       18-247, 18-248
                   5.5            18-250
                   5.6            18-249
                   6.1            18-271
                   6.1a           18-272
                   6.1b           18-273
                   6.2—6.4      18-274—18-276
                   6.4b           18-277
                   6.5—6.7      18-278—18-280
                   6.8            18-282
                   6.9            18-281
                   6.9a           18-283
                   6.9b           18-284
                   6.10, 6.11     18-285, 18-286
                   7.1—7.13     18-306—18-318
                   7.13(a)        18-319
                   7.14, 7.15     18-320, 18-321
                   8.1            18-341
                   8.2            18-345
                   8.2(d), 8.2(e) 18-343
                   8.2(f)         18-344
                   8.4—8.11     18-346—18-353
                   8.13           18-354
                   8.14           18-359
                   8.14a          18-360
                   8.15           18-363
                   8.16, 8.17     18-357, 18-358
                   8.18           18-342
                   8.19           18-356
                   8.20           18-355
                   9.1—9.4      18-381—18-384
                   9.6—9.8      18-385—18-387
                   9.10           18-388
                   10.1—10.24   18-406—18-429
                   10.25a—10.25e18-431
                   10.26—10.28  18-432—18-434
                   10.30, 10.31   18-437, 18-438
                   10.33          18-442
                   10.37          18-436
                   10.38          18-435
                   11.1—11.10   18-462—18-471
                   11.12—11.15  18-472—18-475
                   11.16          18-201
                   11.17          18-461
                   12.1—12.4    18-496—18-499
                   12.5(a)—(c)  18-500
                   12.5(d)        18-501
                   12.6, 12.7     18-502, 18-503
                   12.8           18-507
                   12.8(a)—12.8 18-504—18-506
                   (c)
                   12.8(e)        18-504
                   13.4           18-554
                   13.6           18-526
                   13.9, 13.10    18-528, 18-529
                   14.1—14.9    18-551—18-559
                   14.10          17-102
                   15.1—15.3    18-576—18-578
                   15.5           18-579
                   16.1           18-596
                   16.3—16.5    18-597—18-599
81-104    11- 4-81 1—4          14-11
81-105    11- 4-81 1—4          14-317—14-320
81-106    11- 4-81 1              14-316
81-108    11- 4-81 1, 2           12-136, 12-137
                   5              12-141
81-110    11- 4-81 1              18-706
                   2              18-708
                   3              18-707
81-111    11- 4-81 2—4          5-186—5-188
                   5—18         5-190—5-203
81-112    11- 4-81 1—15(a)      5-1331—5-1346
                   16—19(a)     5-1347—5-1351
                   20—23        5-1352—5-1355
81-113    11- 4-81 1—5          2-431—2-435
81-114    11- 4-81 1—4          2-451—2-454
81-115    11- 4-81 1              7-141
                   2              7-156
                                  7-173
                   2(art. I)—   7-157—7-172
                   2(art. XVI)
                   3              7-142
81-116    11- 4-81 1—8          7-61—7-68
81-117    11- 4-81 1—8          7-96—7-103
81-118    11- 4-81 2              12-972
                   3              12-971
                   4—23         12-975—12-994
                   24, 25         12-973, 12-974
                   26—31        12-995—12-1000
81-122    11- 4-81 1—3          7-26—7-28
81-124    11- 4-81 1              17-51, 17-52
                   2              17-53
81-125    11- 4-81 1, 2           18-671, 18-672
                   2a             18-673
                   2b             18-673
                   3—6          18-674—18-677
                   6(a)           18-688
                   7—16         18-678—18-687
                   16(e)          18-689
81-126    11- 4-81 1, 2           3-1
81-127    11- 4-81 1              2-376, 2-377
                   1-a, 1-b       2-378, 2-379
                   2, 3           2-380, 2-381
                   4, 5           2-384, 2-385
                   6, 7           2-382, 2-383
                   8—12         2-386—2-390
81-129    11- 4-81 1—3          3-2
81-130    11- 4-81 1, 2           14-36
81-131    11- 4-81 1—7          18-746—18-752
81-132    11- 4-81 1—5          5-221—5-225
81-134    11- 4-81 1—3          14-82
81-135    11- 4-81 1.2            5-261
                   1.3            5-241
                   1.4—1.9      5-262—5-267
                   1.11—1.15    5-268—5-272
                   2.1, 2.2       5-274, 5-275
                   2.3            5-273
81-138    11- 4-81 1—12         17.5-1—17.5-12
81-140    11- 4-81 1              17-242, 17-243
                   2              17-244
                   2a             17-245, 17-246
                   2b             17-247
                   3—5          17-248—17-250
                   6              17-251, 17-252
                   7—11         17-253—17-257
                   12             17-241
81-141    11- 4-81 1—3          2-231—2-233
81-191    12- 1-81                14-5
81-192    12- 1-81                12-6
82-200    1-19-82  1—6          11-261—11-266
82-212    3-16-82                 12-521
                   1—3          12-501—12-503
                   4(a—c)       12-504
                   4(d)           12-505
                   5, 6           12-506, 12-507
                   7              12-508—12-510
                   8, 9           12-511, 12-512
                   10(a), 10(b)   12-513, 12-514
                   10(c)          12-515, 12-516
                   10(d)—10(f)  12-517—12-519
                   11             12-520
82-213    6-15-82                 12-448
                                  12-452
                                  12-454
82-214    3-16-82                 12-6
82-226    4- 6-82                 App. § 3.5,
                                  Apps. A, B
82-227    4-20-82  1              12-562
                   2              12-561
                   3              12-563
                                  12-568
                   4—7          12-564—12-567
                   8              12-569
                   9              12-570, 12-571
                   10, 11         12-572, 12-573
82-233    6-15-82                 12-6
82-234    6-15-82                 12-506
82-247    8-17-82                 App. § XV
82-252    9-21-82                 8-95—8-97
82-253    10- 5-82                2-570
82-258    11- 3-82                14-98
82-262    12- 7-82 1              18-726
                   4              18-727
82-264    12-21-82                7-68
82-265    4- 4-82  1—5          7-81—7-85
83-270    4- 5-83                 2-515
                                  2-517, 2-518
83-272    5- 3-83  1, 2           7-116, 7-117
83-281    8-16-83                 5-1332
83-282    9- 6-83                 12-7
83-284    10- 4-83                12-9
83-286    12- 6-83                App. §§ 1.6a,
                                  2.7, 2.8, 2.18,
                                  3.1—3.3, 5.7,
                                  5.9, 5.11, 6.9,
                                  7.7, 8.4, 8.10,
                                  9.5, 9.6, 10.8,
                                  10.8a, 14.1, App. C
                   Rpld           2.17, 14.2
84-288    2-21-84                 2-515
                                  2-517
84-289    2-21-84                 11-26
                                  11-28
                                  11-62
                                  11-158
                                  11-212
                                  11-231
84-291    3-20-84                 14-2
                                  14-4
84-293    3-20-84                 8-82, 8-83
                                  8-85
                                  8-87
                                  8-89—8-91
                                  8-94
                                  8-104, 8-105
                                  8-113
                                  8-129
84-301    6- 5-84  1              App. § 9.2, App. B
84-303    6- 5-84                 2-517
84-308    7- 3-84                 12-5, 12-6
84-312    8-21-84                 11-198
84-314    9-18-84  1              App. § 8.12
84-317    11-20-84 1—3          9-361—9-363
85-323    6- 4-85  1.2—1.4      5-311—5-313
                   2.1            5-331
                   2.1.1, 2.1.2   5-332, 5-333
                   2.2—2.5      5-334—5-337
                   2.7            5-334—5-338
                   2.6            5-339
                   3.1—3.6      5-356—5-361
                   4.1            5-381, 5-382
                   4.1a           5-381
                   4.1b           5-381
                   4.2            5-383
                   4.2(a)—4.2(l)5-384—5-395
                   4.2(m)—(o)   5-396
                   4.4—4.9      5-397—5-402
                   5.1—5.6      5-421—5-426
                   6.1—6.3      5-427—5-429
                   6.5—6.7      5-314—5-316
85-326    6- 4-85  1              19-2
                   2              19-1
                   3              19-3, 19-4
                   4—12         19-5—19-13
                   12(a)          19-14
                   13—17        19-15—19-19
                   18             19-20, 19-21
                   19             19-22
                   20             19-23, 19-24
                   21—25        19-25—19-29
                   26             19-30
                   26(a)          19-31
                   27—30        19-32—19-35
85-327    6-18-85  1              App. § 10.8b
85-330    11- 7-85 2, 3           15-1, 15-2
                   8—19         15-21—15-32
                   20             15-3
85-333    8- 6-85                 12-6
85-337    9-17-85                 12-6
85-339    10-15-85                7-85
85-340    10-15-85                7-62
85-342    11- 6-85                7-97
86-351    2-18-86  1 Rpld         App. § 14.1
86-352    4- 1-86                 9-363
86-357    5- 6-86                 2-596
86-359    6- 3-86  1              App. §§ 2.19, 3.6,
                                  6.6, 8.9, 8.13, 9.7,
                                  10.7, 10.10, 12.4,
                                  13.1, 13.4, 13.6,
                                  13.7, 13.14, 15.1,
                                  15.4
86-361    7-15-86  3              12-138, 12-139
                   4              12-140
86-368    10- 7-86                19-21
86-369    10- 7-86 1              5-26
                   3              5-27
                   200.1, 200.2   5-1
86-370    10- 7-86 1—4          14-10
86-373    11- 5-86 1              17-196, 17-197
                   2—9          17-198—17-205
86-376    11-18-86                2-102, 2-103
87-378    1-20-87                 5-142
87-379    2- 3-87  1, 2           15-51, 15-52
                   3              15-56
                   3(A)—(C)     15-53
                   3(D), 3(E)     15-54, 15-55
87-382    3- 3-87                 14-322
88-411    4- 5-88                 14-257, 14-258
88-416    5- 3-88  1              12-275, 12-297
                   2              12-296
                   4—9          12-298—12-303
88-425    8- 3-88  101—105      9-1—9-5
                   201—211      9-31—9-41
                   301—307      9-61—9-67
                   401—404      9-81—9-84
                   501—508      9-106—9-113
                   601—603      9-136—9-138
                   701—705      9-161—9-165
                   801—804      9-186—9-189
                   901—904      9-211—9-214
                   1001, 1002     9-236, 9-237
                   1101—1103    9-261—9-263
                   1201, 1202     9-286, 9-287
                   1301—1304    9-311—9-314
                   1402           12-113
                   1501—1503    9-336—9-338
                   1601           9-6
88-427    8-16-88                 12-906
88-428    9- 6-88                 7-85
89-439    1-17-89                 2-569—2-571
                                  2-573
89-440    2-21-89                 8-131
89-441    2-21-89                 12-6
89-443    3- 7-89  1—4          2-578—2-581
89-446    4- 4-89                 7-81—7-85
89-447    5- 2-89                 14-39
89-448    5- 2-89                 14-94
                                  14-104
89-450    5- 2-89  1              17-28
                   2              17-26, 17-27
                   4—6          17-29—17-31
                   6a             17-32
89-451    5- 2-89                 14-3
89-455    7- 5-89                 5-1351
89-456    6-20-89  4              19-5
89-458    7- 5-89  2—4          19-121—19-123
89-461    8- 1-89                 5-1351
90-478    2- 6-90  1              12-791
                   2              12-792, 12-793
                   3—8          12-794—12-799
90-479    2- 6-90                 12-6
90-487    6-19-90                 2-567
                                  2-569—2-571
                                  2-573
90-488    5-15-90                 4-27
90-495    6-19-90  1—4          16-1—16-4
                   5              16-6
                   5(b)           16-5
                   6              16-7
                   7(a)—7(e)    16-8—16-12
                   8—10         16-13—16-15
90-496    6-19-90                 19-5
                                  19-12
90-497    12-18-90 1—14         12-230—12-244
90-502    9-18-90                 18-430
90-506    11-20-90 1—10         3-21—3-30
91-511    2-13-91                 5-1137—5-1140
                   1.1—1.4      5-1131—5-1134
                   2.1—2.11     5-1156—5-1166
                   3.1            5-1186, 5-1187
                   3.2—3.4      5-1188—5-1190
                   3.5            5-1186
                   3.6—3.13     5-1191—5-1198
                   4.1            5-1216
                                  5-1218, 5-1219
                   4.2            5-1217
                   4.3—4.7      5-1220—5-1224
                   5.1—5.7      5-1241—5-1247
                   5.8            5-1225
                   6.1, 6.2       5-1266
                   6.3—6.24     5-1267—5-1289
                   7.3            5-1135
                   7.6            5-1199
                   7.7            5-1136
91-514    4-16-91  702            9-162
91-517    7- 2-91                 19-28
                   25             19-29
91-528    11-19-91 5              7-117
92-529    1- 7-92  6.1a—6.1e    18-272—18-276
                   Rpld           18-274—18-276
92-533    6- 2-92  1—14         19-141—19-154
92-535    7- 7-92  12(b)          19-14.5
92-536    7-21-92  4              19-5(4)
                   24             19-28
                   25             19-29(a), (c), (e)
92-537    7-21-92  1—4          14-341—14-344
92-551    1- 5-93  1—9 Rpld     12-386—12-393
                   Added          12-386—12-394
93-554    1-19-93  1              18-357
93-558    4- 6-93  1—11         2-611—2-622
93-560    8- 3-93  1              Adopting ordinance, p. vii
93-573    11- 3-93 1—6          6-24
93-577    12-21-93                18-63.1, 18-288,
                                  18-289
93-578    12-21-93 Rpld           18-796—18-803,
                                  18-821—18-833,
                                  18-851—18-883,
                                  18-901—18-963,
                                  18-981—18-987,
                                  18-1006—18-1009
                   Added          18-796
93-579    1- 4-94                 18-287
93-580    12-21-93                18-159(3)
93-581    12-21-93                18-364
93-582    12-21-93                19-36
93-583    12-21-93                14-112
94-584    2- 1-94  Rpld           12-46
94-586    2-15-94                 14-44
94-588    3-16-94                 14-65
94-589    3-16-94                 18-170
94-590    3-16-94                 12-906
94-605    8-16-94  1.1—1.11     6-71—6-81
                   2.1—2.4      6-91—6-94
                   3.1—3.4      6-101—6-104
94-606    8-16-94  I—XVI        6-121—6-136
94-611    12- 6-94                14-326
94-612    10-18-94                18-276.1
94-614    11- 1-94 Added          18-193(f)
94-618    1- 3-95                 5-26
94-619    1- 3-95                 5-27
95-623    2-21-95                 14-10
95-631    4-18-95                 5-311(5), 5-313,
                                  5-317, 5-332,
                                  5-362,
                                  5-394—5-396,
                                  5-403, 5-446
95-632    4-18-95                 9-38(3), 9-39(b),
                                  9-62—9-65,
                                  9-67—9-69
95-633    4-18-95                 12-6
95-634    5- 2-95  Rpld           14-14
95-635    6- 6-95  Added          14-157(a)(3b), (b)(2b)
95-637    5-16-95                 12-886, 12-892,
                                  12-896—12-899,
                                  12-900(a), 12-907,
                                  12-908(a), (c),
                                  12-916(a), (d),
                                  12-917(a)
95-639    7- 5-95                 19-5, 19-12,
                                  19-28, 19-29
95-640    7- 5-95  Rpld           8-1, 8-26—8-133
                   Added          8-1, 8-26—8-100
95-644    8- 1-95  1.1—1.11     6-71—6-81
                   2.1—2.4      6-91—6-94
                   3.1—3.4      6-101—6-104
95-647    9-19-95                 10-38
95-649    10-17-95                14-113
95-651    11- 8-95                9-187(1)
95-652    11- 8-95                9-82(5)
96-657    2-20-96                 14-18
96-658    2-20-96                 18-349
96-659    2- 6-96                 18-199
96-660    2-20-96                 14-259
96-661    2-20-96  1—6          Adopting Ord. p. ix
96-662    3-20-96                 12-136—12-145
96-663    4- 2-96                 4-3—4-5
                   Rpld           4-31—4-33
96-664    4- 2-96                 12-231, 12-233,
                                  12-237
96-665    4- 2-96                 12-978
96-666    4- 2-96                 14-101
96-667    4-16-96                 14-38.1
96-668    4-16-96                 18-727, 18-729(h), (i)
                   Rpld           18-729(j)
96-670    5-21-96                 12-6
96-671    5-21-96                 18-473
96-679    7-16-96                 19-5(4)
                                  19-12
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a), (c), (e)
96-680    8- 7-96  Added          5-1356—5-1380
96-684    10-10-96                14-317
                   Dltd           14-318, 14-319
96-685    10-10-96                12-6
96-686    10-10-96 Added          3-31
96-687    10-10-96 Added          13-2(16), (17)
                                  13-4
97-693    2- 4-97                 14-107(a)
97-694    2-18-97                 14-321
97-695    2- 4-97                 18-199
97-696    2-18-97  1.1—1.11     6-71—6-87
                   2.1—2.4      6-91—6-94
                   2.5, 2.6 Added 6-95—6-96
                   3.1—3.4      6-101—6-104
97-697    2-18-97  Dltd           Appendix
                   I—XVIII AddedAppendix
97-702    5-20-97                 5-26
97-703    5-20-97                 5-451
97-704    5-20-97                 5-1130
97-705    5-20-97                 5-1306
97-706    6-17-97                 19-5(4)
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a), (c), (e)
97-707    7- 1-97  11-43
97-714    10-21-97 Added          18-270
                                  18-271—18-276
97-715    10-21-97 Added          14-114
97-718    12- 2-97                8-26—8-100
98-722    4- 7-98                 14-10
98-723    5- 5-98                 9-82(17)
                   Added          9-82(17)w.
98-726    6-16-98                 19-5(4)
                                  19-28
                                  19-28(a), (c), (e)
98-727    8-18-98                 7-68
98-728    7- 7-98                 7-81
                                  7-83—7-85
98-731    8- 5-98                 5-1332
98-738    10- 6-98 Added          14-19
98-739    10- 6-98 Added          14-20
98-740    10- 6-98                5-27(15)
98-741    10-20-98                12-6
98-742    10-20-98                5-311(5), (6)
                                  5-312(5)
                                  5-313—5-317
                                  5-331(b)
                                  5-332(c)
                                  5-333
                                  5-334(1)
                                  5-335—5-337
                                  5-337(1)
                                  5-338, 5-339
                   Added          5-356(n)
                                  5-359, 5-360
                                  5-362(12)
                                  5-381—5-389
                   Added          5-389A, 5-389B
                                  5-390, 5-391
                   Added          5-391A, 5-391B
                                  5-392—5-394
                                  5-395(2), (3)
                   Added          5-395(6)
                                  5-396(a)
                                  5-397—5-400
                                  5-402
                                  5-423
                                  5-426, 5-427
                                  5-429
98-744    10-20-98 Added          14-21
98-745    10-20-98                18-364
98-747    11-17-98 Added          2-476—2-489
98-748    12-15-98                9-32
98-749    12-15-98 Added          14-272
99-756    2-16-99  Added          14-45
99-757    2-16-99  Added          14-46
99-758    2-16-99                 18-186(a)
99-759    2-16-99                 18-193(a)
                                  18-193(c)
99-760    2-16-99                 18-406(a)
99-761    2-16-99                 18-435(c)
99-763    4-14-99                 10-38
99-764    4-20-99                 7-81
                                  7-83
                                  7-84(b)
                   Added          7-84(h)
                                  7-85
99-765    4-20-99                 9-211, 9-212
                   Added          9-215
99-767    5-12-99  Added          14-140
99-770    6- 1-99                 5-130
99-771    7- 6-99                 19-5(4)
                                  19-12(a), (b)
                                  19-12(d)
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a)
                                  19-29(c)
                                  19-29(e)
99-786    7-20-99  Added          9-70
99-787    8- 3-99                 5-311—5-317
                                  5-331—5-339
                                  5-356
                   Added          5-356A
                                  5-359, 5-360
                                  5-362
                                  5-381—5-396
                   Added          5-396A
                                  5-397—5-402
                                  5-423
                                  5-426, 5-427
                                  5-429
99-789    8-17-99  Added          5-1307
99-791    9-21-99                 2-476—2-489
99-792    9-21-99  Added          18-1
99-793    9-21-99                 18-270—18-276
                                  18-287
                   Added          18-287A
                                  18-289
99-794    9-21-99                 18-199
                   Added          18-199A—18-199D
99-797    11- 3-99 Added          9-33a
99-798    12- 7-99 Added          App., Arts. A, B
99-802    12-21-99                5-482
99-803    12-21-99 Added          11-251—11-260
00-806    1-18-00                 ch. 2, art. II, div. 2(tit.)
                   Rpld           2-76
                                  2-77, 2-78
                   Rpld           2-79
                                  2-80, 2-81
                   Rpld           2-82
00-807    1-18-00                 ch. 2, art. II, div. 3(tit.)
                                  2-101—2-103
00-808    1-18-00  Added          2-361—2-368
00-809    1-18-00  Rpld           15-51—15-56
00-810    2- 1-00                 18-26
00-812    2-15-00                 18-435, 18-436
00-813    3-21-00                 17-205(1)
00-814    4-18-00  Added          14-44A
00-817    4-18-00                 5-1130
00-822    6-20-00                 19-28—19-30
00-825    6-20-00  Added          14-38.2
00-826    7- 5-00                 14-258
00-827    7- 5-00  1—6 Added    2-369
00-829    8-15-00                 14-10
00-838    4- 3-01                 5-1333, 5-1345(e)
00-839    12-19-00                14-6
00-840    1-16-01                 14-216—14-218
                   Added          14-219
00-841    1-16-01                 14-157
01-842    2- 6-01                 9-82(17)
01-845    3-20-01                 2-365—2-368
01-848    5- 1-01                 5-1332
                   Added          5-1332.5
01-849    5- 1-01  Added          18-155.5
01-849    2-16-04                 18-155.5
(Rev.)
01-850    5- 1-01  Added          18-436.5
01-852    5-15-01                 9-312, 9-313
01-853    6-28-01                 19-28, 19-29
01-854    7-17-01  Added          14-318
01-856    8-21-01  Added          14-273
          Revised                 14-273
          1-14-02
01-857    8-21-01  Added          14-274
01-858    8-21-01  Added          14-275
01-862    9-18-01                 12-906(a)
01-863    11-20-01                1-9(a)
01-864    11-20-01                14-92
01-865    11-20-01                14-99
01-868    1-15-02  Rpld           5-1156—5-1162
                                  5-1164, 5-1165
                                  5-1187—5-1191
02-871    1-15-02                 7-101
02-872    1-15-02                 7-66
02-873    1-15-02                 9-33(j)
02-274    1-15-02                 8-26—8-89
                   Rpld           8-90—8-100
02-875    2- 5-02                 11-198
02-877    2- 5-02                 5-241
                                  5-261(a)
02-878    2- 5-02                 5-27(5)
02-879    3-19-02                 5-1345(e)
02-892    4-16-02  Added          14-115
02-893    4-16-02                 17-222
02-894    4-16-02  Added          19-166—19-168
02-895    5-21-02  Added          2-636, 2-637
02-896    5-21-02  Added          2-1
02-897    5-21-02                 5-131
02-898    5-21-02                 11-43
02-899    5-21-02                 13-4, 13-5
02-900    5-21-02                 17.5-11(a)
02-903    6-18-02                 19-5(4)
                                  19-28, 19-29
02-905    7-16-02                 5-1333
02-906    7-16-02  Added          5-1355.5
02-907    7-16-02                 9-312
02-916    11- 6-02                2-569—2-571
                                  2-573
                                  2-575
02-921    11-19-02 Added          2-624
02-922    11-19-02 Added          10-9
02-923    11-19-02 Dltd           12-889
                                  12-890
                                  12-893
                                  12-896
                                  12-900
                                  12-916
                                  12-921
03-926    1-21-03                 16-5
03-927    4- 1-03                 5-26
03-928    4- 1-03                 5-27
03-938    1-21-03                 2-571
03-939    1-21-03                 16-6
03-940    4-15-03                 19-166, 19-167
                   Dltd           19-168
03-944    3- 4-03                 13-210
03-945    3- 4-03                 13-207
03-953    5- 6-03  Added          9-3a
03-954    5- 6-03                 9-33
03-955    5- 6-03  Added          9-33b
03-956    5- 6-03                 9-38
03-957    5- 6-03                 9-82
03-958    5- 6-03                 9-106
03-959    5- 6-03                 9-137
03-960    5- 6-03                 9-162
03-963    6- 3-03  Added          14-22
03-964    6-17-03                 18-345
03-965    6-17-03                 18-356
03-966    6-17-03                 7-81
                                  7-83—7-85
03-970    6-17-03                 19-5
                                  19-28, 19-29
03-971    7-15-03                 14-261
03-975    7-15-03                 1-8
03-979    8-19-03                 17-27
03-980    8-19-03  Added          9-114
03-981    8-19-03  Added          9-190
03-982    9- 2-03  Added          14-345
03-984    9-16-03                 18-271, 18-272
                                  18-274
                   Added          18-275A
                                  18-276
                                  18-289
03-985    10-21-03                11-198
03-986    10-21-03                19-1
03-987    10-21-03                19-143
03-988    10-21-03                18-186
03-989    11- 5-03                18-356
03-991    11-18-03                9-212
                                  9-214
                   Added          9-216
03-992    11-18-03 Added          14-47
04-999    3-16-04                 5-27
04-1000   4-20-04                 15-21
                                  15-30
04-1001   4-20-04  Added          17-110—17-114
04-1002   5-18-04  1, 2           18-54
04-1003   7- 6-04  Added          14-116
04-1005   6-15-04                 12-296—12-303
04-1006   6-15-04                 19-5
                                  19-19
                                  19-27—19-29
                                  19-33
                   Added          19-37—19-41
04-1022   12-21-04                14-36
04-1023   12-21-04                14-321, 14-322
04-1024   12-21-04 Added          2-395—2-402
05-1033   3-21-05                 18-356
05-0134   4- 4-05  Added          14-48
05-1035   4-18-05                 8-26—8-76
                   Dltd           8-77—8-89
05-1037   5- 2-05                 11-41—11-43
                   Dltd           11-56
                                  11-57, 11-58
                   Dltd           11-59
                   Dltd           11-62
                   Dltd           11-191
                                  11-193, 11-194
                   Dltd           11-195
                                  11-197—11-199
05-1038   6- 6-05  Dltd           5-262—5-268
                                  5-269
                                  5-271
                                  5-273
                                  5-291
                   Dltd           5-293
05-1039   6- 6-05                 5-1331
05-1040   6- 6-05                 12-3
                                  12-5—12-7
05-1041   6- 6-05                 12-703
                                  12-705
                                  12-711
05-1044   6-20-05                 17-202
05-1045   6-20-05                 19-14.5
05-1046   6-20-05                 19-5
                                  19-28, 19-29
05-1047   7- 5-05                 2-596
05-1048   7- 5-05                 15-2, 15-3
                   Added          15-33—15-35
05-1049   7- 5-05                 5-133
05-1052   7-18-05  Added          17-258
05-1053   8- 1-05                 5-1333
05-1054   8- 1-05                 5-1350
05-1055   9- 6-05                 9-312
05-1060   10- 3-05 Dltd           5-1192—5-1199
05-1061   1-17-06                 18-357
05-1062   12- 5-05 Dltd           2-566—2-581
                   Added          2-566—2-576
06-1063   2-21-06  Dltd           18-361—18-363
                   Added          18-365—18-375
06-1064   3- 6-06                 5-1354
06-1065   4- 3-06  Added          14-161
06-1066   4-3-06                  18-356
06-1067   4- 3-06  Added          18-810—18-821
06-1068   4- 3-06                 11-251—254
                                  11-256, 11-257
                   Added          11-267—11-175
06-1070   5-15-06                 10-38
                   Added          10-40
06-1071   5-15-06  Added          5-28
06-1072   5-15-06                 11-158
06-1073   5-15-06                 13-2
06-1074   5-15-06  Added          13-5.1
06-1075   5-15-06                 13-7
06-1076   5-15-06                 13-207
06-1077   5-15-06                 13-208
06-1078   5-15-06                 13-209
06-1079   5-15-06                 13-210
06-1080   5-15-06                 19-5
                                  19-28, 19-29
06-1082   6-12-06  Added          12-1020—12-1043
06-1083   6-12-06  Rpld           12-455
06-1084   6-12-06                 14-10
06-1085   6-12-06  Added          18-760—18-769
06-1086   6-12-06  Added          18-770
06-1089   6-19-06                 14-318
06-1090   6-19-06                 18-150
Amend. of 6-25-06                 12-296—12-298
Amend. of 7-14-06                 2-566—2-576
06-1093   9- 5-06                 1-8
06-1091   8- 7-06                 18-770
06-1095   9-18-06                 9-137
06-1096   9-18-06                 5-1306
06-1097   9-18-06  Dltd           5-1307
06-1098   10- 2-06                5-1331
                                  5-1345
06-1105   11-20-06                11-211, 11-212
06-1106   11-20-06                14-38
06-1108   12- 4-06                18-796
06-1109   12- 4-06                12-502
                                  12-511
06-1112   12-18-06                5-95—5-97
                                  5-102-5-104
06-1113   12-18-06                12-6
07-1115   1-16-07                 14-46
07-1116   1-16-07  Added          14-49
07-1117   1-16-07                 14-259
07-1118   2- 5-07                 9-137
07-1119   2- 5-07                 9-33
07-1120   2-14-07                 9-41
07-1121   2- 5-07                 14-63
07-1122   2-20-07  Added          18-171
07-1126   5- 7-07  Added          12-600—12-608
07-1131   6-18-07                 19-5
                                  19-28, 19-29
                                  19-141—19-154
07-1133   8-20-07                 14-276
07-1136   9-17-07                 2-101—2-103
07-1137   11- 5-07                9-2—9-5
                   Added          9-7—9-10
07-1138   11- 5-07                9-312
07-1139   11-19-07 Added          11-241—11-244
07-1140   11- 5-07                9-262
07-1141   11- 5-07                18-673
07-1142   11- 5-07                18-687
07-1143   11-19-07                14-38
07-1144   11-19-07 Dltd           12-600—12-608
                   Added          12-600—12-609
07-1146   12-17-07                18-358
08-1148   5- 5-08  Added          11-300—11-311
08-1157   4-21-08  Added          14-117
08-1158   4-21-08  Added          18-443
08-1159   4-21-08                 2-574
08-1160   5- 5-08                 18-356
08-1163   5-19-08                 3-31
08-1166   6- 2-08                 18-342
08-1167   6- 2-08                 18-435
08-1168   6- 2-08                 18-796
08-1170   6-16-08                 19-5
                                  19-12(a), (b), (d)
                                  19-23
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a), (c), (e)
                                  19-33
                                  19-37
                                  19-39
                                  19-41
                                  19-88
08-1175   8- 4-08                 18-358
08-1176   9- 2-08                 9-161
                                  9-163
                                  9-165
                   Added          9-166—9-169
08-1178   9-24-08  Added          2-700—2-704
08-1179   9-15-08                 7-116
                                  7-117
08-1180   10- 6-08                12-906
08-1181   10- 6-08                10-38
08-1182   10- 6-08 Dltd           17-26—17-32
                   Added          17-26—17-37
08-1192   12-15-08 Dltd           5-121—5-141
                   Added          5-121—5-130
08-1193   12- 1-08                9-286
                                  9-287
                   Added          9-288
09-1197   1- 5-09                 10-9
09-1198   1- 5-09                 18-358
09-1199   1- 5-09                 8-59
                                  8-60
09-1202   2- 2-09                 18-357
09-1203   2- 2-09                 18-358
09-1204   2- 2-09  Added          12-1100—12-1112
09-1205   2- 2-09                 2-395—2-402
09-1218   4- 6-09  Added          18-351.5
09-1219   4- 6-09  Added          4-31
09-1221   4-27-09                 12-1028
09-1225   6- 1-09  Added          2-88, 2-89
09-1226   6- 1-09                 7-26—7-28
09-1227   6- 1-09  Added          7-35—7-37
09-1230   6-15-09                 19-5(4)
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a), (c), (e)
                                  19-41
09-1231   7-13-09                 8-1
09-1233   8-17-09                 5-186—5-196
                                  5-198(b), (f), (g)
                                  5-200—5-202
                                  5-203(b)
                   Added          5-204
09-1236   9- 8-09  Added          19-77(d)
09-1237   9- 8-09  Added          13-2(29)
                                  13-8
09-1238   9- 8-09                 11-303
                                  11-304
                   Added          11-305(5)
                                  11-306
                                  112-308
                                  11-309
                                  11-310
                                  11-311
09-1239   9- 8-09                 9-162
                                  9-163
                                  9-167
                                  9-169
09-1244   9-21-09                 5-1345(f)(5)
09-1255   11-23-09                18-358
10-1261   12-14-09                19-14
09-1262   12-14-09                5-356A
                                  5-362(1), (10—(12)
                                  5-394
                                  5-395
                                  5-396(a)—(d)
10-1263   1- 5-10                 19-21
10-1265   3-15-10                 14-44
                   Dltd           14-44A
10-1266   3-15-10  Added          2-568A
10-1268   5- 3-10                 13-41—13-44
                   Added          13-44A
                                  13-45—13-47
                   Added          13-48
10-1269   5- 3-10  Added          18-220A
10-1270   5- 3-10                 9-162(1)
                   Added          (3)
                                  9-163
                                  9-164
                                  9-165(a)
                                  9-166(a), (b)
                   Added          (c)
                                  9-168
                   Added          9-169
                   Rnbd           9-169
                   as             9-170
10-1271   5- 3-10                 11-41(a)
                                  11-42
                                  11-43
10-1273   6- 7-10                 19-5(4)
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a), (c)
10-1278   6-21-10                 19-27
                   Added          19-32(d)
10-1279   6-21-10                 12-139
10-1280   6-21-10                 12-6
10-1285   7-19-10                 9-4
                                  9-5
                                  9-10
                                  9-33
                                  9-33b.
                                  9-38
                                  9-82
                                  9-83
                                  9-106
                                  9-107
                                  9-108
                                  9-109
                                  9-110
                                  9-111
                                  9-112
                                  9-113
                                  9-114
                                  9-137
10-1287   8-16-10  Added          18-172
10-1288   8-16-10                 16-5
                                  16-6
                                  16-7
                                  16-10
10-1289   9- 7-19  Added          5-1381—5-1383
10-1298   10-25-10 Added          18-850—18-853
10-1302   12-13-10 Added          13-500
11-1308   1- 4-11                 4-27
                   Added          4-27A
                   Added          4-27B
11-1309   1- 4-11  Added          4-32
11-1310   1- 4-11  Added          14-92A
11-1311   2- 7-11  Added          2-566(c)
                                  2-567(a)
                                  2-568
                                  2-570
                                  2-571
                                  2-572
                                  2-573(c)
                   Added          2-573(d)
                                  2-574
                                  2-575(b)(5)
11-1312   2- 7-11  Added          14-44A
11-1315   3- 7-11  Dltd           13-71(b)
                                  13-72
                                  13-74
                   Dltd           13-75
11-1316   3- 7-11  Added          14-165—14-175.1
11-1317   3-21-11                 17-27
                   Added          17-35A
11-1323   5-16-11                 12-6
11-1324   5-16-11                 12-953
11-1325   5-16-11                 14-10(b)
11-1328   6- 6-11                 2-568A
                   Added          2-569(c)
11-1329   6- 6-11  Added          2-415—2-417
11-1330   6-20-11                 3-31
11-1331   6-20-11                 12-586
                                  12-591
11-1332   6-20-11                 19-5
                                  19-28
                                  19-29(a), (c)
11-1333   9-19-11  Added          2-615(b)(1)
11-1334   10- 3-11                5-1333
                                  5-1342(a)
                   Added          5-1342.1
                                  5-1345(c)
                                  5-1349
11-1335   10-24-11                18-356(a)
                   Dltd           (b)
                   Rtld           (c)—(g)
                   as             (b)—(f)
11-1336   11- 7-11                10-38
11-1337   11- 7-11 Added          10-38.1
11-1338   11-21-11                13-5(4)
11-1339   11-21-11                13-208
11-1340   12-12-11 Added          5-29
11-1341   12-12-11                9-7
                                  9-40 caption
                   Added          9-171
11-1342   12-12-11 Added          10-10
12-1343   1-10-12                 18-357
12-1344   1-10-12                 18-358
12-1346   1-24-12                 14-22
12-1347   1-24-12  Added          5-1358.5
                                  5-1363, 5-1367,
                                  5-1369(a), 5-1370
                                  5-1380
12-1348   2- 7-12                 13-5.1
12-1349   2- 7-12                 18-360(a)
12-1350   2-27-12                 2-361—2-368
12-1351   2-27-12                 9-33
12-1352   3- 6-12                 19-34
12-1353   3-27-12  Added          18-854
12-1355   5- 8-12                 2-376—2-389
12-1358   6-12-12                 19-5(4), 19-28,
                                  19-29
12-1359   6-19-12                 14-265
12-1360   6-19-12  Added          14-245—14-251
12-1361   8- 6-12  Added          13-2(30), (31)
12-1364   9-11-12                 14-259(a)
12-1365   9-11-12                 14-273—14-275
12-1373   11-13-12                9-161, 9-162(2)
13-1378   1-15-13                 2-566, 2-568
13-1383   2-12-13                 4-1
13-1387   3-19-13  Added          18-173
13-1388   3-19-13  Added          14-175.2
13-1389   4-16-13  Added          9-400
13-1394   4-30-13                 10-7
13-1395   4-30-13                 14-171
13-1398   6-11-13                 14-22
13-1402   6-11-13                 19-5(4), 19-28,
                                  19-29
13-1404   7-23-13                 14-265
13-1407   8-13-13                 4-2
                   Added          4-6
                                  4-22, 4-23,
                                  4-26, 4-32
13-1408   8-13-13                 13-45(3)
13-1409   8-13-13  Addd           11-280—11-290
13-1410   9-10-13                 18-271
13-1413   11-26-13                17-26—17-33
14-1420   2-11-14  Added          2-710—2-712
14-1421   3- 4-14  Added          18-345(a)(21)
14-1422   3-18-14  Added          10.38.2
14-1423   5- 6-14                 2-365(a)
14-1426   5-20-14  Added          19-42
14-1427   5-20-14                 19-5(4), 19-28,
                                  19-29(a), (c)
14-1428   6-17-14                 13-5.1
14-1429   7-22-14                 9-166
                   Rpld           9-167
                   Added          9-167
                   Added          9-172
14-1430   7-22-14                 11-42, 11-43
14-1432   8-12-14                 14-265
14-1433   8-20-14  Added          16-6a
14-1434   9- 9-14  Added          5-30
14-1435   9- 9-14  Added          13-2(32)
14-1436   9- 9-14  Added          13-45(8)
14-1438   9-23-14                 9-10
14-1440   10-21-14                5-1345(f)
14-1441   11-12-14 Rpld           2-121—2-124
14-1442   11-12-14                2-474
14-1443   11-12-14                7-27
14-1444   11-12-14                18-357
14-1446   12- 9-14 Added          9-411, 9-412
14-1447   12- 9-14                9-10
14-1448   12- 9-14                10-38
15-1453   1-27-15                 9-10
15-1454   1-27-15  Rpld           5-30
15-1455   2-10-15  Added          12-1200, 12-1201,
                                  12-1206—12-1214,
                                  12-1221—12-1224,
                                  12-1231—12-1234,
                                  12-1241—12-1243
15-1457   3-17-15                 17-27
15-1463   5- 6-15                 2-518
15-1465   5-19-15                 19-5(4), 19-28,
                                  19-29
15-1466   6-23-15  Added          13-5.1(f)
15-1469   6-23-15                 12-1200, 12-1201,
                                  12-1206—12-1214,
                                  12-1221—12-1224,
                                  12-1231—12-1234,
                                  12-1241—12-1243
15-1476   9- 8-15  Added          2-568(b)(6)n.
15-1489   9-22-15                 17-99
                                  17-99.1
15-1494   11-24-15                18-358
15-1495   10-20-15                18-530
15-1497   11-10-15                13-2
                                  13-5.1
15-1502   11-24-15                3-21—3-31
15-1510   12- 8-15                2-636
15-1511   12- 8-15                17.5-11(a)
15-1512   12- 8-15 Rpld           8-40
                                  8-44, 8-63, 8-64
                   Rpld           8-65
15-1514   12-16-15 Added          13-5.2
16-1518   1-26-16                 9-400
16-1521   2- 9-16                 2-88, 2-89
16-1522   2- 9-16                 7-27
16-1523   2- 9-16                 7-35—7-37
16-1529   3-15-16                 18-356
16-1532   4-12-16  Added          15-36
16-1533   4-12-16                 5-121
                   Added          5-123(c)
                                  5-127(1), 5-128(1)
16-1534   4-12-16                 9-287, 9-288
                   Added          9-289
16-1537   5-24-16                 14-22
16-1539   10-18-16                2-710—2-713
16-1540   9-20-16  Added          2-720
16-1541   6-14-16                 19-5(4), 19-28,
                                  19-29
16-1543   9-16-16                 18-358
16-1549   10- 4-16                4-22
16-1550   10- 4-16                15-28
16-1551   10- 4-16 Added          15-51—15-59
16-1552   10-18-16                14-12
16-1553   10-18-16                13-2(34)
16-1554   10-18-16 Added          13-25, 13-26
16-1555   10-18-16                12-1214
16-1558   - -16                   5-127
16-1559   11-15-16                18-26
16-1560   11-15-16                13-2
16-1561   11-15-16                12-1104
16-1565   1-17-17                 17-111—17-116
17-1569   - -17    Rpld           5-1331—5-1355.5
                                  5-1331—5-1340
17-1570   3-7-17                  2-474
17-1571   3-21-17  Added          11-291—11-298
17-1574   3-21-17                 5-1335
17-1575   3-21-17                 15-28
17-1577   - -17    Dltd           12-600—12-609
17-1578   5-9-17                  10-38, 10-38.1
17-1579   5-23-17                 15-53, 15-57
17-1580   5-23-17                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
17-1581   - -17    Added          12-1260—12-1274
17-1586   - -17                   15-36
17-1587   6-13-17                 9-38
17-1590   8-15-17                 12-6
17-1594   9-12-17                 18-193
17-1595   9-12-17                 18-559
17-1596   9-26-17  Added          18-322
17-1597   10-10-17                14-321
18-1612   5-15-18                 5-1335
18-1613   6-12-18  Added          12-250—12-257
18-1614   6-12-18                 12-230
18-1615   6-19-18                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
18-1616   7-17-18                 18-149
18-1617   7-17-18                 13-2
18-1618   7-17-18                 13-3
18-1619   7-17-18                 13-5
18-1620   7-17-18                 13-5.1
18-1621   7-17-18                 5-1331—5-1340
18-1622   7-17-18                 9-312
                   Dltd           9-313
18-1623   8-21-18  Added          18-202
18-1624   8-21-18                 12-756
                   Added          12-756A
18-1625   8-21-18                 12-766
18-1629   9-11-18                 18-150
18-1630   9-25-18  Added          19-190—19-207
18-1631   12-18-18 Added          12- 1244—12-1247
18-1633   1-15-19  Added          19-43
19-1636   1-29-19                 12-328
19-1637   1-29-19                 14-158
19-1638   1-29-19  Dltd           14-165—14-175.2
19-1639   1-29-19  Added          14-346
19-1641   1-29-19                 12-6
19-1642   2-26-19                 14-265
19-1643   2-26-19                 13-42, 13-45—13-47
                   Dltd           13-48
19-1648   5-21-19                 12-138, 12-139
19-1649   5-21-19                 12-143, 12-144
19-1650   5-21-19                 12-6
19-1651   5-21-19                 18-155, 18-155.5
19-1652   6-18-19  Added          13-13
19-1653   6-18-19                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
19-1654   7-16-19  Added          14-63
19-1655   7-16-19                 18-199
19-1656   7-16-19                 9-412
19-1657   9-10-19                 18-186, 18-189, 18-193
                   Added          18-126, 18-444
19-1658   9-10-19                 12-886–12-904
                   Dltd           12-905–12-926
19-1659   9-10-19                 18-63
19-1660   9-10-19                 19-43
19-1662   9-24-19                 12-328
19-1663   9-24-19                 14-22
19-1666   11-26-19                15-28
19-1667   12-10-   Added          1-10
          19
19-1669   1-14-20                 12-328
19-1670   1-14-20                 19-36
20-1672   6-2-20                  12-1247
20-1676   7-14-20                 14-6
20-1677   8-25-20                 14-158
20-1678   8-25-20                 14-106
20-1679   8-25-20                 13-5.1
20-1680   8-25-20                 13-5.3
20-1682   9-22-20  Added          5-1384–5-1395
20-1683   9-22-20                 9-2, 9-3, 9-3a, 9-38, 9-40
20-1685   10-6-20                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
20-1689   10-20-20                19-70, 19-73, 19-75, 19- 84, 19-86–19-88, 19.94, 19.98, 19.106, 19.108–19-112
20-1693   12-8-20                 5-128
21-1705   3-9-21                  12-1247
21-1708   5-11-21                 13-5.3
21-1709   6-15-21                 19-5, 19-12, 19-28, 19-29
21-1716   8-17-21                 18-193
21-1717   9-14-21                 5-1363
21-1721   11-16-21 Dltd           14-82
                   Added          13-14
                                  4-23, 5-103, 5-269, 5-273, 5-291, 5-397, 5-400, 5-472, 5-691, 5-1186, 5-1307, 12-3,
22-1724   2-8-22                  12-6, 12-11, 12-43, 12-113, 12-139, 12-143, 12-165, 12-189, 12-237, 12-252, 12-279,
                                  12-352, 12-362, 12-387, 12-417, 12-591, 12-852, 12-887, 12-953, 12-1036, 12-1103,
                                  12-1210, 12-1264, 17-113
22-1725   1-25-22                 12-6, 12-136, 12-139
22-1726   1-25-22  Added          2-51, 2-52
22-1727   1-25-22  Added          2-121
22-1728   1-25-22                 2-77, 2-78, 2-80
22-1729   1-25-22                 2-231, 2-232
                   Dltd           2-233
22-1730   1-25-22                 2-88
                   Added          2-88.1
22-1731   1-25-22                 7-35—7-37
22-1732   1-25-22                 7-26—7-28
                   Added          7-29—7-31
22-1733   1-25-22                 5-27, 5-28, 5-73, 5-92, 5-96, 5-98, 5-104, 5-123—5-126, 5-222, 5-226, 5-295, 5-450,
                                  5-766, 5-767, 5-1132, 5-1333, 5-1340
22-1734   1-25-22                 9-2, 9-3, 9-3a, 9-34, 9-35, 9-166—9-170, 9-213, 9-262, 9-288, 9-312, 9-363
22-1735   1-25-22                 11-41, 11-42, 11-57, 11-61, 11-193, 11-198, 11-199, 11-211, 11-212, 11-243, 11-303,
                                  11-310
22-1736   1-25-22                 2-101—2-103
22-1737   1-25-22                 2-376—2-387
22-1738   1-25-22  Added          2-53—2-60
22-1739   2-8-22                  12-1244 - 12-1246
                   Dltd           12-1247
22-1741   4-12-22                 18-278
22-1742   - -22                   2-566—2-576
22-1743   5-24-22                 12-250—12-257
22-1749   6-7-22   Added          17-259—17-275
22-1751   7-12-22  Added          18-616—18-620
22-1752   6-15-22                 5-121—5-130
22-1754   6-15-22                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
22-1755   7-12-22                 19-41
22-1756   8-23-22                 14-265
22-1757   8-23-22                 2-101, 2-103
22-1758   8-23-22                 2-52
                   Added          2-52.1
22-1759   8-23-22                 18-473
22-1760   8-23-22                 14-44
22-1761   8-23-22                 2-526
22-1762   7-26-22  Added          13-521—13-530
22-1763   8-23-22                 10-41
                                  9-3, 9-3a, 9-4, 9-5, 9-7—9-10, 9-33—9-40, 9-61—9-66, 9-68—9-70, 9-81—9-84, 9-106—9-
22-1768   8-23-22                 112, 9-114, 9-136, 9-137, 9-161—9-166, 9-168—9-172, 9-186—9-188, 9-190, 9-400, 13-
                                  5.1, 13-208
22-1769   9-13-22                 7-36
22-1771   9-13-22                 19-208—19-227
22-1773   9-13-22                 9-38
22-1774   10-25-22                12-328
22-1775   10-25-22                12-325
22-1776   10-25-22                13-3
22-1777   10-25-22                4-23
22-1778   12-6-22                 9-33a
22-1779   12-6-22  Added          18-364.1
22-1780   12-6-22                 2-383
22-1782   12-14-22 Dltd           5-1384—5-1395
                   Added          5-1384—5-1391
22-1783   1-10-23                 2-369
23-1784   1-24-23                 18-819
23-1789   5-9-23                  14-105
23-1790   6-13-23                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
23-1791   6-13-23                 18-193
23-1792   6-13-23                 2-406—2-412
23-1795   8-22-23                 4-23
23-1796   9-12-23                 19-14
23-1803   10-10-23                12-5, 12-6
23-1804   1-9-24                  5-1333, 5-1335—5-1337, 5-1339, 5-1340
                   Added          5-1341, 5-1342
23-1805   1-9-24                  12-250—12-257
                   Added          12-258—12-260
24-1815   4-23-24  Added          13-541—13-569
24-1816   4-23-24                 15-53
24-1817   5-21-24                 14-131
24-1818   5-21-24                 18-271
24-1820   6-11-24                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
24-1823   9-24-24                 12-1101—12-1107
24-1824   10-8-24                 12-6
24-1825   10-8-24                 4-23
24-1826   10-8-24                 17-242
24-1827   10-22-24                12-5
24-1828   10-22-24                15-53
24-1829   11-19-                  14-10
          2 4
24-1830   11-19-                  13-5, 13-5.1
          2 4
24-1834   1-14-25                 10-38, 10-38.1
24-1835   1-28-25  Added          20-1—20-6
25-1837   1-28-25                 13-5.3
25-1838   3-18-25                 12-297
                   Dltd.          12-297—12-300, 12-303
25-1840   4-22-25                 12-230, 12-231, 12-233, 12-235, 12-238, 12-240
25-1841   5-20-25                 19-5, 19-28, 19-29
25-1842   5-20-25                 12-250, 12-252, 12-255
25-1843   5-20-25  Added          2-638
25-1844   6-10-25                 4-23
25-1847   7-15-25  Added          11-312—11-333
25-1848   7-15-25                 12-6
                   Dltd.          12-791—12-799
25-1849   7-15-25                 14-7
25-1852   9-9-25                  11-42
                   Dltd.          11-193, 11-198
25-1853   9-9-25                  18-364.1
 
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted: February 2, 1993
Effective: February 11, 1993
 
Updated through: September 9, 2025
 
Published in 2006 by Order of the City Council
OFFICIALS
2024
 
Abdullah Hammoud
Mayor 
____________
Michael Sareini, President
Leslie Herrick, President Pro Tem
Robert Abraham
Kamal Alsawafy
Gary Enos
Mustapha Hammoud
Ken Paris
City Council 
____________
Jeremy Romer
Corporation Attorney 
____________
George T. Darany
City Clerk 
____________
Megan Lizbinski
Deputy City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
   The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately
determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each
supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified
in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general
and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted."
   In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this
Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's
historical evolution.
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/  Supp. No.
                      Omitted
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/  Supp. No.
                      Omitted
10-1267  5- 3-2010    Included   5
10-1272  5-17-2010    Included   5
10-1274  6-21-2010    Included   5
10-1275  6-21-2010    Included   5
10-1276  6-21-2010    Included   5
10-1277  6-21-2010    Included   5
10-1284  7-19-2010    Included   5
11-1306  1- 4-2011    Included   6
11-1307  1- 4-2011    Included   6
11-1318  4- 4-2011    Included   6
11-1319  4- 4-2011    Included   6
12-1362  9-11-2012    Included   7
12-1367  10- 9-2012   Included   7
12-1370  11-13-2012   Included   7
13-1393  4-30-2013    Included   7
13-1396  5-14-2013    Included   7
13-1397  5-14-2013    Included   7
13-1399  6-11-2013    Included   7
13-1400  6-11-2013    Included   7
13-1403  6-11-2013    Included   7
13-1405  8-13-2013    Included   7
13-1414  3- 4-2014    Included   7
14-1417  2-11-2014    Included   7
14-1418  2-11-2014    Included   7
14-1419  2-11-2014    Included   7
14-1424  5-20-2014    Included   7
14-1431  8-12-2014    Included   7
14-1445  12- 9-2014   Included   7
15-1458  4-21-2015    Included   8
15-1477  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1478  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1479  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1480  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1481  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1482  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1483  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1484  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1485  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1486  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1487  9-22-2015    Included   8
15-1491  10-20-2015   Included   8
15-1492  10-20-2015   Included   8
15-1493  10-20-2015   Included   8
15-1498  11-24-2015   Included   8
15-1499  11-24-2015   Included   8
15-1500  11-24-2015   Included   8
15-1501  11-24-2015   Included   8
15-1503  11-24-2015   Included   8
15-1504  11-24-2015   Included   8
16-1519  2- 9-2016    Included   8
16-1524  3-15-2016    Included   8
16-1525  3-15-2016    Included   8
16-1526  3-15-2016    Included   8
16-1531  4-12-2016    Included   8
16-1542  9- 6-2016    Included   8
16-1545  10- 4-2016   Included   8
16-1548  10- 4-2016   Included   8
15-1506  9- 6-2016    Included   9
15-1507  9-20-2016    Included   9
15-1508  9- 6-2016    Included   9
16-1557  1-17-2017    Included   9
16-1562  12-13-2016   Included   9
16-1563  12-13-2016   Included   9
17-1566  1-31-2017    Included   9
17-1567  1-31-2017    Included   9
17-1568  1-31-2017    Included   9
17-1573  7-18-2017    Included   9
17-1576  3-21-2017    Included   9
17-1582  6-13-2017    Included   9
17-1588  7-18-2017    Included   9
17-1591  9-12-2017    Included   9
17-1592  9-12-2017    Included   9
17-1593  9-12-2017    Included   9
17-1601  1-16-2018    Included   9
17-1602  1-16-2018    Included   9
17-1603  1-16-2018    Included   9
17-1604  1-16-2018    Included   9
18-1605  1-30-2018    Included   9
 
ARTICLE 1.00 - SHORT TITLE, RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 1.01. - Short title.
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Dearborn
Zoning Ordinance" or "The City of Dearborn Zoning Regulations." Within the
following text it may be referred to as the "ordinance" or the "zoning
regulations."
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 1.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 1.02. - Rules of construction.
   The following rules of construction apply to the text of these zoning
regulations:
   A.   The particular shall control the general.
   B.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
   C.   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
   D.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
   E.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   F.   All measurements shall be to the nearest integer, unless otherwise
specified herein.
   G.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "occupied for," and "maintained for."
   H.   The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "build"
includes the words "erect" and "construct." A "building" or "structure"
includes any part thereof.
   I.   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership,
an incorporated association, or any similar entity.
   J.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of the
zoning regulations, its meaning shall be construed as defined herein. Words or
terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
   K.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by
the conjunction "and," "or," or "either/or," the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
      1.   "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
      2.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
      3.   "Either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
   L.   Catch words and catch lines shall in no way by their presence or
absence limit or affect the meaning of these zoning regulations.
   M.   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where an
illustration accompanies any item within these zoning regulations, the written
text shall have precedence over said illustrations.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 1.02, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 1.03. - Definitions.
   Whenever used in these zoning regulations, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
   Accessory use, building, or structure. A use, building, or structure which
is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate to,
and is located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is
exclusively related.
   Adult book or supply store. See adult regulated uses.
   Adult physical culture establishment. See adult regulated uses.
   Adult model studio. See adult regulated uses.
   Adult motel. See adult regulated uses.
   Adult motion picture theater. See adult regulated uses.
   Adult motion picture arcade. See adult regulated uses.
   Adult regulated uses. As used in these zoning regulations, the following
definitions shall apply to adult regulated uses:
      A.   Reserved.
      B.   Adult book or supply store. An establishment having ten (10) percent
or more of all usable interior, retail, wholesale, or warehouse space devoted
to the distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other
periodicals and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording
tapes, and/or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein), or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material.
      C.   Cabaret. An establishment where live entertainment is provided,
presented, permitted or performed, which performances are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on or relationship to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) for observation
by or participation of patrons therein. Also, an establishment which features
any of the following: topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers,
strippers, male and/or female impersonators or similar entertainers, topless
and/or bottomless waiters, waitresses and/or employees.
      D.   Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing theater.
An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons wherein
still or motion pictures, video tapes or similar material is presented or
viewed which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) for observation by patrons
therein. Such an establishment is customarily not open to the public generally,
but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by
reason of age.
      E.   Adult model studio. Any place where models who display "specified
anatomical areas" (as defined herein) are present to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons who
pay some form of consideration or gratuity. This definition shall not apply to
any accredited art school or similar educational institution.
      F.   Adult motel. A motel wherein visual displays, graphic materials, or
activities are presented which depict, describe, or relate to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein).
      G.   Adult motion picture arcade or mini motion picture theater. Any
place where motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing
devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine
at any one (1) time, and where the images displayed depict, describe, or relate
to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined
herein).
      H.   Adult, nude, partially nude dancing. A business having as its
principal activity the live presentation of or display of nude, or partially
nude, male or female impersonator(s), dancer(s), entertainers(s), waiter(s) or
waitress(es), or employee(s) and which may or may not feature the service of
food or beverage. For the purpose of this ordinance, nude or partially nude
shall mean having any or all of the "specified anatomical areas" exposed (as
defined herein).
      I.   Massage parlor or massage establishment. A place where manipulated
massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the human body by
anyone using mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices or techniques, other
than the following: a duly licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor; a
registered or practical nurse operating under a physician's directions; or,
registered physical or occupational therapists or speech pathologists who treat
patients referred by a licensed physician and operate only under such
physician's direction. A massage establishment may include, but is not limited
to, establishments commonly known as massage parlors, health spas, sauna baths,
Turkish bathhouses, and steam baths. Massage establishments, as defined herein,
shall not include properly licensed hospitals, medical clinics, nursing homes,
beauty salons, barber shops, tanning and/or nail salons, athletic clubs or
other licensed facilities where massages are administered as an incidental or
accessory use to the main use of the premises, provided that the facility
maintains a separate room equipped with appliances and apparatus for massages
and, provided further, that the massages are administered only by certified
massage therapists. Each massage therapist must meet one (1) or more of the
following criteria:
         1.   Proof of graduation from a school of massage licensed by the
State of Michigan;
         2.   Official transcripts verifying completion of at least five
hundred (500) hours of massage training from an American community college or
university and three (3) references from massage therapists who are
professional members of a massage association referred to in this section;
         3.   Certification as recognized by the American Massage Therapy
Association, International Myomassethics Federation, or any other recognized
body work association with equivalent professional certification standards; or
         4.   A current license from another state with standards that are
equal or greater than those outlined in items 1., 2., and 3.
      J.   Adult personal service business. A business having as a principal
activity a person of one (1) sex, providing personal services for a person of
the other sex, or same sex, on an individual basis in a closed room or a
partitioned open space. It includes, but is not limited to, the following
activities and services: massage parlors, exotic rubs, modeling studios, body
painting studios, wrestling studios, individual theatrical performances. It
does not include activities performed by persons pursuant to, and in accordance
with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of Michigan.
      K.   Adult outdoor motion picture theater. A drive-in theater used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) for observation by patrons of
the theater. Such establishment is customarily not open to the public
generally, but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, excluding any
minor by reason of age.
      L.   Specified anatomical areas. Portions of the human body defined as
follows:
         1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of
the areola, and
         2.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      M.   Specified sexual activities. The explicit display of one or more of
the following:
         1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
         2.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
         3.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast.
   Alley. A narrow passage or way open to public travel, affording a secondary
means of vehicular access to abutting property but is not intended for general
traffic circulation or for parking, standing, or loading. A public alley is an
alley so designated upon a recorded plat, or otherwise formally accepted as
such by the City. Any other alley is a private alley.
   Alteration. Any change, addition or modification to a structure, building or
type of occupancy, such as walls or partitions, columns, or beams or girders,
or any change which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed."
   Alternative financial establishments. Any non-chartered financial
institution, business, or person that for compensation engages, in whole or in
part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders,
currency exchange, pay-day loans and/or similar services as its primary
function. "Alternative financial establishments" does not include a state or
federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan
company. "Alternative financial establishments" also does not include a retail
seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including
consumables, to retail buyers that cash checks or issue money orders for a
minimum flat fee as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or
business.
   Animal hospital. See clinic, veterinary.
   Apartment. See dwelling, multiple-family.
   Arcade. Any place, premise, establishment or room within a building which
utilizes more than fifteen (15) percent of usable floor area for machines which
may be used as a game, contest, or amusement of any description; the fifteen
(15) percent of floor area calculation shall include no more than twenty (20)
machines. For the purposes of this definition, "machine" shall mean any device,
apparatus, mechanical equipment or machine operated as amusement for required
compensation. The term does not include vending machines used to dispense
foodstuffs, toys, or other products for use and consumption.
   Architectural lighting. Any site or building lighting that is not sign
lighting (as defined in this Article) and is designed and placed so as to
attract general public attention to the site or building. Accent lighting
includes "rope lights", or similar string lights or illuminating devices,
whether or not pulsating, blinking, flashing or otherwise changing in light
intensity, brightness or color. Required parking lot or pedestrian safety
lighting shall not be considered accent lighting for purposes of this Article.
   Artificial light. Any light emanating from any man-made device.
   Automobile. Unless specifically indicated otherwise, "automobile" shall mean
any vehicle including, by way of example, cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and
the like.
   Automobile filling station. A place used for the retail sale and dispensing
of fuel or lubricants together with the fixed equipment from which the fuel is
dispensed directly into motor vehicles. Automobile filling stations may also
incorporate a convenience store operation as an accessory use, provided it is
clearly incidental to the filling station use. Parking requirements for filling
station/convenience store operations shall be computed by adding together the
parking space requirements for each separate use.
   Automobile repair. Major or minor repair of automobiles defined as follows:
      A.   Minor repair. Engine tune-ups and servicing of brakes, air
conditioning, exhaust systems; oil change or lubrication; wheel alignment or
balancing; or similar servicing or repairs that do not normally require any
significant disassembly or storing of the automobiles on the premises
overnight.
      B.   Major repair. Engine and transmission rebuilding and general
repairs, rebuilding or reconditioning; collision service such as body, frame or
fender straightening or repair; steam cleaning, undercoating and rust-proofing;
and similar servicing, rebuilding or repairs that normally do require
significant disassembly or storing of the automobiles on the premises
overnight.
   Automobile service station. A place where gasoline or other vehicle engine
fuel, kerosene, motor oil and lubricants, and grease are sold directly to the
public on the premises for the purposes of operation of motor vehicles;
including the sale of minor accessories (such as tires, batteries, brakes,
shock absorbers, window glass) and the servicing of and minor repair of motor
vehicles.
   Automobile repair garage. An enclosed building where major automobile repair
services may be carried out.
   Automobile or vehicle dealership. A building or premises used primarily for
the sale of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles to include
outside storage of vehicles.
   Automobile wash or car wash establishment. A commercial establishment
contained within a building or premises or portion thereof where automobiles
are washed.
   Base flood. A base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   Basement. That portion of a building which is partially or totally below
grade, but is so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to
the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to
the ceiling. This definition shall not apply to earth-bermed or earth-sheltered
homes. A basement shall not be counted as a story.
   Bedroom. A room designed or used in whole or part for sleeping purposes.
   Berm. See landscaping.
   Block. The property bounded by a street or by a combination of streets and
public lands, railroad, utility, or public rights-of-way, rivers, drains, or
streams, boundary lines of the City, or any other barrier to the continuity of
development.
   Board of appeals. The Dearborn Zoning Board of Appeals, created pursuant to
the provisions of Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
   Boarding house or rooming house. A building, other than a hotel, where for
compensation or by prearrangement for definite periods of time, lodging or
loading and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons. A rooming house
shall be deemed a boarding house for the purposes of these zoning regulations.
   Boutique resale store. A small-scale store, typically specializing in the
resale of a specific category of used goods such as books, music, antiques,
jewelry, clothing, or sports equipment, subject to the following limitations:
      A.   The gross area of the building is no greater than five-thousand
(5,000) square feet;
      B.   The store only takes delivery of used goods within the building, and
does not provide for outdoor or after-hours drop off of used goods, except that
oversized goods may occasionally be accepted through an exterior door during
business hours; and
      C.   The store is not otherwise subject to the regulated use provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance.
   Buildable area. See building envelope.
   Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or property or materials of any kind. A building shall
include tents, awnings, semi-trailers, or vehicles situated on a parcel and
used for the purposes of a building. A building shall not include such
structures as signs, fences or smokestacks, but shall include structures such
as storage tanks, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures.
   Building, principal. A building or, where the context so indicates, a group
of buildings which are permanently affixed to the land and which are built,
used, designed or intended for the shelter or enclosure of the principal use of
the parcel.
   Building, accessory. See accessory use, building, or structure.
   Building, temporary. A building which is not permanently affixed to the
property, and is permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specific period
of time. Construction of temporary buildings shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 511 of the Basic Building Code/1990, as amended,
edition prepared by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc.
   Building envelope. The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum setback
requirements within which building construction is permitted by the terms of
these Zoning Regulations.
   Building height. The highest point of the ridge for a gable, hip, studio,
gambrel or A-frame roof or the top of a parapet wall for a flat roof, measured
from the grade plane. An artificial grade (a grade raised around the perimeter
of the foundation of the structure) cannot be used to lessen the total overall
height of the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.png]
   Building line. A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required
front setback line (see illustration).
   Building official. The City official(s) designated by the mayor to
administer and enforce the building codes of the City or his or her designee.
   Bulk. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings and
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, including
standards for the height and area of buildings; the location of exterior walls
in relation to lot lines, streets, and other buildings; gross floor area of
buildings in relation to lot area; open space; and, the amount of lot area
required for each dwelling unit.
   Cabaret. See adult regulated uses.
   Cemetery. Land used for the burial of the dead, including columbariums,
crematories, and mausoleums.
   Child care center. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one
or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than
twenty-four (24) hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not
immediately available to the child. Child care center or day care center
includes a facility which provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive
weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility may also
be described as a day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent
cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center.
   Church, mosque, temple, or synagogue. Any structure wherein persons
regularly assemble for religious activity.
   City. The City of Dearborn, Wayne County, Michigan.
   City Council. The City Council of the City of Dearborn, Wayne County,
Michigan.
   Clinic, medical. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians,
dentists, or similar professionals. A medical clinic may incorporate customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental to or necessary for its operation or to
the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for overnight
patient care or major surgery.
   Clinic, veterinary. An institution which is licensed by the Michigan
Department of Health to provide for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of
animals, including those in need of medical or surgical attention. A veterinary
clinic may include customary pens or cages for the overnight boarding of
animals and such related facilities as laboratories, testing services, and
offices.
   Club or fraternal organization. An organization of persons for special
purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, agriculture,
literature, politics, or similar activities, but not operated for profit or to
espouse beliefs or further activity that is not in conformance with the
Constitution of the United States or any laws or ordinances. The facilities
owned or used by such organization may be referred to as a "club" in these
zoning regulations.
   Commercial use. The use of property for retail sales or similar businesses
where goods or services are sold or provided directly to the consumer. As used
in these zoning regulations "commercial use" shall not include industrial,
manufacturing, or wholesale activities.
   Commercial vehicle. Any vehicle possessing commercial license plates and
which falls into one or more of the categories listed below:
      A.   Truck tractor.
      B.   Semi-trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off
containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures.
      C.   Vending trucks, such as ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or vending
supply trucks.
      D.   Tow trucks.
      E.   Commercial hauling trucks.
      F.   Vehicle repair service trucks.
      G.   Snow plowing trucks.
      H.   Any vehicle with a commercial license plate having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of five thousand six hundred (5,600) pounds or a total length
in excess of twenty-two (22) feet.
   Commissary kitchen. A commercial kitchen that food businesses can rent to
prepare, store, and cook food.
   Commission. The Plan Commission of the City of Dearborn, as organized under
Public Act No. 207, the Public Acts of 1921 of the State of Michigan, as
amended, and City Charter § 10.27, and Ordinance No. 81-127.
   Condominium. A condominium is a system of separate ownership of individual
units and/or multi-unit projects according to Public Act 59 of 1978, as
amended. In addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit, each unit
owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the spaces and
building parts used in common by all the unit owners. For the purposes of these
zoning regulations, condominium terms shall be defined as follows:
      A.   Condominium Act. Shall mean Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.
      B.   Condominium lot. That portion of the land area of a site condominium
project designed and intended to function similar to a platted subdivision lot
for purposes of determining minimum yard setback requirements and other
requirements set forth in the schedule of regulations of these zoning
regulations.
      C.   Condominium subdivision plan. Drawings and information which show
the size, location, area, and boundaries of each condominium unit, building
locations, the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements, and
other information required by Section 66 of Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, as
amended.
      D.   Condominium unit. That portion of the condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed
for the condominium project.
      E.   Common elements. Portions of the condominium project other than the
condominium units.
      F.   Contractible condominium. A condominium project from which any
portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn pursuant to
provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with these zoning
regulations and the Condominium Act.
      G.   Conversion condominium. A condominium project containing condominium
units some or all of which were occupied before the establishment of the
condominium project.
      H.   Convertible area. A unit or a portion of the common elements of the
condominium project referred to in the condominium documents within which
additional condominium units or general or limited common elements may be
created pursuant to provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance
with these Zoning Regulations and the Condominium Act.
      I.   Expandable condominium. A condominium project to which additional
land may be added pursuant to express provision in the condominium documents
and in accordance with these zoning regulations and the Condominium Act.
      J.   General common elements. Common elements other than the limited
common elements, intended for the common use of all co-owners.
      K.   Limited common elements. Portions of the common elements reserved in
the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all co-owners.
      L.   Master deed. The condominium document recording the condominium
project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the
bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan.
      M.   Site condominium project. A condominium project designed to function
in a similar manner, or as an alternative to a platted subdivision. A
residential site condominium project shall be considered as equivalent to a
platted subdivision for purposes of regulation in these zoning regulations.
   Congregate housing. See housing for the elderly.
   Contractor's yard. A site on which a building or construction contractor
stores equipment, tools, vehicles, building materials, and other appurtenances
used in or associated with building or construction. A contractor's yard may
include outdoor or indoor storage, or a combination of both.
   Convalescent home. See nursing home.
   Convenience store. A one-story, retail store that is designed and stocked to
sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who
purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket").
Convenience stores are designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go
traffic.
   Co-op (cooperative) housing. A multiple dwelling owned by a corporation
which leases its units to stockholders on a proprietary lease arrangement.
   Court. An open unoccupied space, other than a yard and bounded on at least
two (2) sides by a building. A court extending to the front yard or front lot
line or to the rear yard or rear lot line is an outer court. Any other court is
an inner court.
   Curb cut. The entrance to or exit from a property provided for vehicular
traffic to or from a public or private thoroughfare.
   Cul-de-sac. See road.
   Day labor agency. Any for-profit or non-profit facility and/or agency that
provides short-term temporary labor services (work done where the worker is
hired and paid one day at a time, with no promise that more work will be
available in the future) for agricultural, construction, maintenance,
landscaping, food service or industrial trades; or other physically intensive
work. Job seekers congregate to be hired by the day or by the job for short
periods of time by third parties. Job seekers must be present to receive and
accept a job offer or be transported to a job site, and typically return to the
facility for payment. Related support services may be offered to job seekers
while they wait onsite.
   Deck. A platform, commonly constructed of wood, which is typically attached
to a house, and which is typically used for outdoor leisure activities.
   Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
      A.   Gross density. The number of units per acre of total land being
developed.
      B.   Net density. The number of units per acre of land devoted to
residential use.
   Detention basin. A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to
collect surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the water
gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of the
property, onto natural or man-made outlets.
   Development. The construction of a new building, reconstruction of an
existing building, or improvement of a structure on a parcel or lot, the
relocation of an existing building to another lot, or the improvement of open
land for a new use.
   Distribution center. A use which typically involves both warehouse and
office/administration functions, where short- and/or long-term storage takes
place in connection with the distribution operations of a wholesale or retail
supply business.
   District, zoning. A portion of Dearborn within which, on a uniform basis,
certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which certain
yards, open spaces, lot areas, and other requirements are established.
   Dix-Vernor Business District Improvement Authority. This district is located
in the southeast portion of Dearborn and generally includes properties fronting
the intersection of Dix and Vernor and extending toward Industrial to the west
and Amazon to the east as shown in the map below. The full legal description of
this business district can be found in the “Development Plan and Tax Increment
Financing Plan” as approved by City Council Resolution No. 12-674-15, along
with any subsequent amendments as approved by City Council.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7141.png]
 
   Drive-in. A business establishment so designed that its operation involves
providing a service or a product to patrons while they are in their car, rather
than within a building or structure.
   Dwelling. Any building, or part thereof, containing sleeping, kitchen, and
bathroom facilities designed for and occupied by one family. In no case shall a
travel trailer, motor home, automobile, tent or other portable building not
defined as a recreational vehicle be considered a dwelling. In the case of
mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the
part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purposes of these
zoning regulations.
   Dwelling, accessory apartment. A dwelling unit that is accessory to and
typically contained within a conventional single-family dwelling, and which is
occupied by:
      A.   Persons related to the occupant of the principal residence by blood,
marriage or legal adoption, or
      B.   Domestic servants or gratuitous guests. An accessory apartment
commonly has its own kitchen, bath, living area, sleeping area, and usually a
separate entrance.
   Dwelling, manufactured. A building or portion of a building designed for
long-term residential use and characterized by all of the following:
      A.   The structure is produced in a factory in accordance with the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as
amended; and
      B.   The structure is designed to be transported to the site in a nearly
complete form, where it is placed on a foundation and connected to utilities;
and
      C.   The structure is designed to be used as either an independent
building or as a module to be combined with other elements to form a complete
building on the site.
   A mobile home is a type of manufactured housing, which is defined as
follows:
      D.   Dwelling, mobile home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built upon a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure. Recreational vehicles as described and regulated
herein shall not be considered "mobile homes" for the purposes of these zoning
regulations.
   Dwelling, multiple-family. A building designed for and occupied by three or
more families living independently, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and
bathroom facilities for each. Examples of multiple-family dwellings units
include those commonly known as apartments, which are defined as follows:
      A.   Apartment. An apartment is an attached dwelling unit with party
walls, contained in a building with other apartment units which are commonly
reached off of a common stair landing or walkway. Apartments are typically
rented by the occupants. Apartment buildings often may have a central heating
system and other central utility connections. Apartments typically do not have
their own yard space. Apartments are also commonly known as garden apartments
or flats.
      B.   Efficiency unit. An efficiency unit is a type of multiple-family or
apartment unit consisting of one (1) principal room, plus bathroom and kitchen
facilities, hallways, closets, and/or a dining alcove located directly off the
principal room.
   Dwelling, one-family or single-family. An independent, detached residential
dwelling designed for and used or held ready for use by one (1) family only.
Single-family dwellings are commonly the only principal use on a parcel or lot.
   Dwelling, duplex. A detached building, designed exclusively for and occupied
by two (2) families living independently of each other, with separate
housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
   Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms, along with bathroom and kitchen
facilities, designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy by one (1) family
for living, cooking, and sleeping purposes.
   Dwelling unit, single-family attached or townhouse. A townhouse is an
attached single-family dwelling unit with party walls, designed as part of a
series of three (3) or more dwellings, with its own front door which opens to
the outdoors at ground level, its own basement, and typically, with its own
utility connections and front and rear yards. Townhouses are sometimes known as
row houses.
   Easement. A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner of
the property shall not erect any permanent structures.
   Engineer, City. The city engineer is the person [or] firm authorized to
advise the city administration, city council, and plan commission on drainage,
grading, paving, stormwater management and control, utilities, and other
related site engineering and civil engineering issues.
   Enforcement Official. The enforcement official is the person or persons with
the responsibility for enforcing and administering requirements of applicable
sections of these zoning regulations. The enforcement official may be referred
to as the city planner, director of building and safety, the building inspector
or other appropriate party so designated. Such titles do not refer to a
specific individual, but generally to the office, department, or City official
(s) most commonly associated with the administration of the regulation being
referenced.
   Erected. A physical change on a site, including construction,
reconstruction, or alteration of buildings or structures thereon. Excavation,
fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered part of the word "erected."
   Essential services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public or quasi-public utilities or municipal departments or City-certified
cable television companies of underground, surface or overhead gas, steam,
electrical, fuel or water systems for the purposes of transmission,
distribution, collection, communication, supply, or disposal; including towers,
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment, which are
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal
departments for the general health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Essential services shall not include storage yards, sales or business offices,
or commercial buildings or activities.
   Excavation. The removal or movement of soil, sand, stone, gravel, or fill
dirt from any parcel except for common household gardening, farming, and
general ground care.
   Exception. An exclusion from the normal zoning ordinance rules and
regulations for the purposes of permitting particular uses or structures which
are considered essential or appropriate in certain locations or under certain
conditions as may be approved by the zoning board of appeals. A variance is not
required for uses or structures which are permitted because of an exception.
   Family. A family is an individual or married couple and the children
thereof, with not more than two (2) other persons related directly to the
individual or married couple by blood or marriage or two (2) unrelated
individuals, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit,
subject to the limitations of the structure as provided by City Ordinance,
Section
11-177. The following criteria shall be utilized as guidelines to define a
family or a single-family use within the meaning of this ordinance:
      A.   That there exists a shared kitchen facility where cooking is
accomplished for the entire family unit and there is no direct charge for meals
other than sharing of expenses.
      B.   That there be a commonality of purpose among the members
constituting the family unit and that the living arrangements shall be based on
a relationship other than simply providing accommodations and/or food, and that
the living arrangements shall not be designed to be merely of a temporary or
transitory nature.
      C.   That the living arrangements shall not constitute a multiple-family
use nor constitute a rooming house or other such facility designed to provide
accommodations purely for economic motivation.
      D.   That the accommodations for members of the family unit shall not
change the interior architectural or structural design of the living facility.
   Family day care home. A private home in which one (1) but less than seven
(7) minor children are received for care and supervision under a license issued
by the State of Michigan per 1973 PA 116 as amended (MCL 722.111 et seq.) and a
Certificate of Occupancy issued by the City.
   Farm. A parcel of land containing at least ten (10) acres which is used for
gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry, and dairy
products, including necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits and
the storage of related equipment used. A "farm" shall exclude the raising of
fur-bearing animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, and dog
kennels.
   Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal, or any other material or combination of materials, used to prevent or
control entrance, confine within, or mark a boundary.
   Fill, filling. The deposit or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground,
except for common household gardening, farming, and general ground care.
   Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   Flood hazard area. Land which on the basis of available floodplain
information is subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in
any one (1) given year.
   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source as mapped by the City of Dearborn, Department of Public Works,
Engineering Division.
   Floor area, gross. The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.
   Floor area, net. See floor area, usable residential and floor area, usable
nonresidential.
   Floor area, usable nonresidential. In order to account for unoccupied
accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms
and other similar areas, off-street parking requirements, pursuant to
Article 4.00 of this ordinance, shall be calculated using eighty (80) percent
of the gross square footage of a building using exterior dimensions.
   Floor area, usable residential. The gross floor area minus areas in
basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, and enclosed or unenclosed
porches.
   Food truck park. A parcel of land where one or more food trucks congregate
to sell food or beverages to the general public.
   Food trucks. A business serving or offering for sale food and/or beverages
from a mobile food unit, which shall mean a fully enclosed vehicle or trailer
that is also licensed by the state as a mobile food service establishment or
special transitory food unit.
   Foster care home. See state-licensed residential facility.
   Foster child. A child unrelated to a family by blood or adoption with whom
he or she lives for the purposes of care and/or education.
   Fraternal organization. See club.
   Garage, private. An accessory building used for the parking or storage of
motor vehicles owned and used solely by the occupants of the building to which
it is accessory. Private garages shall not have public repair facilities. A
private garage may be either attached to or detached from the principal
structure.
   Garage, public. See automobile repair garage.
   Gas station. See automobile filling station and Automobile service station.
   Gazebo. A freestanding roofed structure that is open on all sides.
   Glare. Light emanating directly from a light source that has the potential
to create visual discomfort or momentary blindness when viewed.
   Grade. The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior
walls.
   Grade plane. A reference plane representing the average of the finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished
ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be
established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the
lot line, or where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building
between the structure and a point 6 feet from the building.
   Greenbelt. See landscaping.
   Group day care home. A private home in which more than six (6) but not more
than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of
less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood,
marriage, or adoption. Group day care home includes a home that gives care to
an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
   Group home. See state-licensed residential facility.
   Gym or gymnasium. A room or building equipped for gymnastics, exercise or
sport.
   Harmful increase. An unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which
causes, or may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal injury, or
damage to land or water resources.
   Hazardous uses. All uses which involve the storage, sale, manufacture, or
processing of materials which are dangerous and combustible and are likely to
burn immediately, and from which either poisonous fumes or explosions are to be
anticipated in the event of fire. These uses include all high hazard uses
listed in Section 306 of the Basic Building Code/1990 edition, as amended or
updated, prepared by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc.
   Height of building. See building height.
   Highway. See street.
   Home occupation. An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a
dwelling by the inhabitants thereof, where such use is clearly incidental to
the principal use of the dwelling as a residence, and where such use does not:
      A.   Change the character or appearance of the residence,
      B.   Does not result in any signs or displays on the premises,
      C.   Does not result in any sales of commodities or goods on the
premises.
   Hospital. An institution which is licensed by the Michigan Department of
Health to provide in-patient and out-patient medical and surgical services for
the sick and injured, and which may include such related facilities as
laboratories, medical testing services, central service facilities, and staff
offices.
   Hospital, veterinary. See clinic, veterinary.
   Hotel. A building occupied as a more or less temporary abiding place for
individuals who are lodged with or without meals in rooms consisting of a
minimum of one (1) bedroom and a bath, occupied for hire, and which typically
provides hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of
linens, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use of furniture, a
dining room and general kitchen, and meeting rooms.
   Housing for the elderly. An institution other than a hospital, hotel, or
nursing home, which provides room and board to nontransient persons primarily
sixty (60) years of age or older. Housing for the elderly may include the
following:
      A.   Senior apartments. Multiple-family dwelling units occupied by
persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
      B.   Elderly housing complex. A building or group of buildings containing
dwellings where the occupancy is restricted to persons sixty (60) years of age
or older or couples where either the husband or wife is seventy (70) years of
age or older.
      C.   Congregate housing. A type of semi-independent housing facility
containing congregate kitchen, dining, and living areas, but with separate
sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically provide special support services,
such as transportation and limited medical care.
      D.   Dependent housing facilities. Facilities such as nursing homes which
are designed for older persons who need a wide range of health and support
services, including personal nursing care.
   Ice cream parlor. A retail establishment whose business is limited to the
sale of ice cream, frozen desserts, yogurt, dessert items, candies and
confections, and beverages in a ready-to-eat state, not to include any seating
area. Businesses serving hot dogs, hamburgers, salads, pizza, hot or cold
sandwiches, or similar entree items are not considered ice cream parlors for
the purposes of these zoning regulations.
   Impervious surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
   Indoor recreation center. An establishment which provides indoor exercise
facilities and/or indoor court sports facilities, and which may include
spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. For the purposes
of these zoning regulations, a bowling establishment shall be considered a type
of indoor recreation center.
   Industry, heavy. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use
engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive
materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
   Industry, light. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
   Ingress and egress. As used in these zoning regulations, "ingress and
egress" generally is used in reference to a driveway which allows vehicles to
enter or leave a parcel of property, or to a sidewalk which allows pedestrians
to enter or leave a parcel of property, a building, or another location.
   Junk. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise
with parts missing, or other scrap materials that are damaged, deteriorated, or
are in a condition which prevents their use for the purpose for which the
product was manufactured.
   Junkyard or salvage yard. An area where waste and used or secondhand
materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, shredded,
disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to: junk, scrap iron,
metals, paper, rags, tires, bottles and automobiles.
   Kennel. Any lot or premises on which more than three (3) dogs, cats, or
other domestic animals six (6) months or older are kept, either permanently or
temporarily, either for sale, breeding, boarding, training, hobby, protection,
or pets, subject to the regulations set forth herein regulating private and
commercial kennels.
   Landfill. A tract of land that is used to collect and dispose of "solid
waste" as defined and regulated in Michigan Public Act 641 of 1979, as amended.
   Landscaping. The treatment of the ground surface with live plant materials
such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines, and
other live plant material. In addition, a landscape design may include other
decorative man-made materials, such as wood chips, crushed stone, boulders, or
mulch. Structural features such as fountains, pools, statutes, and benches
shall also be considered a part of landscaping, but only if provided in
combination with live plant material. Artificial plant materials shall not be
counted toward meeting the requirements for landscaping. Various landscaping-
related terms are defined as follows:
      A.   Berm. A continuous, raised earthen mound comprised of nontoxic
materials with a flattened top and sloped sides, capable of supporting live
landscaping materials, and with a height and width that complies with the
requirements of these zoning regulations.
      B.   Grass. Any of a family of plants with narrow leaves normally grown
as permanent lawns in Wayne County, Michigan.
      C.   Greenbelt. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved
for the planting of a combination of shrubs, trees, and ground cover to serve
as an obscuring screen or buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance
with the requirements of these zoning regulations.
      D.   Ground cover. Low-growing plants that form a dense, extensive growth
after one complete growing season, and tend to prevent weeds and soil erosion.
      E.   Hedge. A row of closely planted shrubs or low-growing trees which
commonly form a continuous visual screen, boundary, or fence.
      F.   Hydroseeding. A method of planting grass where a mixture of the
seed, water, and mulch is mechanically sprayed over the surface of the ground.
      G.   Interior parking lot landscaping. A landscaped area located in the
interior of a parking lot in such a manner as to improve the safety of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the
appearance of the parking area.
      H.   Mulch. A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or
other materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain
moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, or aid plant
growth.
      I.   Nurse grass. Any of a variety of rapidly growing annual or perennial
rye grasses used to quickly establish ground cover to prevent dust or soil
erosion.
      J.   Planting. A young tree, vine, shrub, or herb that would be placed on
or in the ground.
      K.   Screen or screening. A wall, wood fencing, or combination of
plantings of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a visual barrier.
If the screen is composed of nonliving material, such material shall be
compatible with materials used in construction of the main building, but in no
case shall include wire fencing.
      L.   Shrub. A self-supporting, deciduous or evergreen woody plant,
normally branched near the base, bushy, and less than fifteen (15) feet in
height.
      M.   Sod. An area of grass-covered surface soil held together by matted
roots.
      N.   Tree. A self-supporting woody, deciduous or evergreen plant with a
well-defined central trunk or stem which normally grows to a mature height of
fifteen (15) feet or more in Wayne County, Michigan.
         1.   Deciduous tree. A variety of tree that has foliage that is shed
at the end of the growing season.
         2.   Evergreen tree. A variety of tree that has foliage that persists
and remains green throughout the year.
      O.   Ornamental tree. A deciduous tree which is typically grown because
of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive features, and
which grows to a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet or less.
      P.   Shade tree. For the purposes of these zoning regulations, a shade
tree is a deciduous tree which has a mature crown spread of fifteen (15) feet
or greater in Wayne County, Michigan, and has a trunk with at least five (5)
feet of clear stem at maturity.
      Q.   Vine. A plant with a flexible stem supported by climbing, twining,
or creeping along the surface, and which may require physical support to reach
maturity.
   Loading space, off-street. An off-street space which is safely and
conveniently located on the same lot as the building or buildings being served,
for the temporary parking of delivery vehicles while loading and unloading
merchandise and materials.
   Lot or zoning lot. For the purposes of enforcing these zoning regulations, a
lot is defined as a piece of land under single ownership or control that is at
least sufficient in size to meet the minimum requirements for use, coverage,
area, setbacks, and open space as required herein. "Single" ownership may
include ownership by an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an
incorporated association, joint tenancy, or any similar entity. A lot shall
have frontage on a dedicated road or, if permitted by the regulations set forth
herein, on an approved private road. A lot may consist of:
      A.   A single lot of record.
      B.   A portion of a lot of record.
      C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or portion thereof.
      D.   A condominium lot.
      E.   A piece of land described by metes and bounds.
   Lot area, net. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot,
exclusive of any abutting public street right-of-way or private road easements,
or the area of any lake. The net lot area shall be used in determining
compliance with minimum lot area standards.
   Lot area, gross. The net lot area plus one-half (½) of the area of any
public right-of-way area or private road easement immediately adjacent to or
abutting the lot.
   Lot, contiguous. Lots adjoining each other.
   Lot, corner. A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets, provided that the streets intersect at an angle of not more than one
hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
   Where a lot is on a curve, if the tangents through the extreme point of the
street lines of such lot make an interior angle of not more than one hundred
thirty-five (135) degrees, it shall be considered a corner lot. In the case of
a corner lot with a curved street line, the corner is that point on the street
lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents described above
(see illustration). A tangent is a straight line extended from the outer edges
of a curve which intersect to form a corner. 
   For the purposes of this definition, the "street" lot line shall be the line
separating the lot from the street or road right-of-way.
   Lot coverage. The part or percent of the lot that is occupied by buildings
or structures.
   Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front street line and rear
lot line, measured along the median between the side lot lines.
   Lot, double frontage or through lot. A lot other than a corner lot having
frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of
double frontage lots, one street shall be designated as the front street for
all lots in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If
there are existing buildings in the same block fronting on one (1) or both of
the streets, the required minimum front yard setback shall be observed on those
streets where buildings presently front.
   Lot, flag. A lot which is located behind other parcels or lots fronting on a
public road, but which has a narrow extension to provide access to the public
road.
   Lot, interior. Any lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) lot line
fronting on a street.
   Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as follows:
      A.   Front lot line. In the case of a lot not located on a corner, the
line separating said lot from the public or private road right-of-way. In the
case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, the front lot line shall be that
line that separates said lot from the right-of-way for the road which is
designated as the front on the plat, or which is designated as the front on the
site plan review application or request for a building permit, subject to
approval by the plan commission or building official.
      B.   Rear lot line. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line. In the case of irregular, triangular, wedge-
shaped, or lots that are pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet in
length, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
      C.   Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.
A side lot line separating a lot from a road right-of-way is an exterior side
lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
interior side lot line.
   Lot of record. A parcel of land, the dimensions and configuration of which
are shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the offices of the Wayne County
Register of Deeds, or accepted by the Wayne County Department of Equalization,
or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, and accuracy of which is
attested to by a land surveyor (registered and licensed in the State of
Michigan) and likewise so recorded with the Wayne County Register of Deeds. A
lot of record may also be identified by attachment to a Sidwell or tax parcel
identification number.
   Lot width. The straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two (2) points where the minimum front yard setback line intersects the
side lot lines.
   Lot access drive. Any private street designed to provide access from a
public street or road to a mobile home park, apartment or condominium complex,
or other private property development.
   Marginal access road. See secondary access drive.
   Massage parlor or massage establishment. See adult regulated uses.
   Master plan. The Master Plan is a document which is prepared under the
guidance of the City plan commission and consists of graphic and written
materials which indicate the general location for streets, parks, schools,
public buildings and all physical development of the City. Specifically, it
refers to the "Master Plan" adopted by the plan commission in December 1985, or
as may be amended.
   Mezzanine. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of
any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-third of the floor
area of the story in which the level or levels are located.
   Mini-warehouse. A building or group of buildings, each of which contains
several individual storage units, each with a separate door and lock and which
can be leased on an individual basis. Mini-warehouses are typically contained
within a fenced, controlled-access compound.
   Mobile home. See dwelling, mobile home.
   Mobile home park. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person
upon which three (3) or more mobile homes are located on a continual
nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose
regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building,
structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use
incident to the occupancy of a mobile home, subject to conditions set forth in
the Mobile Home Commission rules and Michigan Public Act 419 of 1976, as
amended.
   Mobile home lot. An area within a mobile home park which is designated for
the exclusive use of a specific mobile home.
   Mortuary or funeral home. An establishment where the dead are prepared for
burial or creation and where wakes or funerals may be held.
   Motel. A building or group of buildings occupied as a more or less temporary
abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals in rooms
consisting of a minimum of a bedroom and bath, occupied for hire, in which
provision is not usually made for cooking within the rooms, and which provides
customary hotel services such as maid service, linen service, telephone and/or
desk service, and the use of furniture. Motels typically provide exterior
entrances and on-site parking for each unit. A motel may also include
conference room or banquet facilities, an attached dining room, and/or an
unattached standard restaurant.
   Natural features. Natural features shall include soils, wetlands,
floodplain, water bodies and channels, topography, trees and other types of
vegetative cover, and geologic formations.
   Neighborhood newspaper distribution station. A place where newspapers are
distributed to carriers for home delivery, designed to serve the immediate
residential neighborhoods in which it is located. Such facility shall not
exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet in area.
   Nonconformity. Any structure, lot, or use of any lot, land or structure,
which does not conform at the time of adoption of these zoning regulations or
any amendment thereto, to the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
   Nuisance. Any offensive, annoying, or disturbing practice or object which
prevents the free use of one's property, or which renders its ordinary use or
physical occupation uncomfortable. Nuisance commonly involves continuous or
recurrent acts which give offense to the senses, violate the laws of decency,
obstruct reasonable and comfortable use of property, or endangers life and
health.
   Nursery, day nursery, or nursery school. See child care center.
   Nursery, plant material. A space, building, and/or structure, or combination
thereof, where live trees, shrubs, and other plants used for gardening and
landscaping are propagated, stored, and/or offered for sale on the premises.
   Nursing home, convalescent home, or rest home. A home for the care of the
aged, infirm, or those suffering from bodily disorders, wherein two (2) or more
persons are housed or lodged and furnished with nursing care. Such facilities
are licensed in accordance with Michigan Public Acts 139 of 1956, as amended.
   Occupancy, change of. A discontinuance of an existing use and the
substitution of a use of a similar or different kind or class, or, the
expansion of a use.
   Occupied. Used in any way at the time in question.
   Office. A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
   Open-air business. Any business that is conducted primarily out-of-doors.
Unless otherwise specified herein, open-air business shall include:
      A.   Retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including but not
limited to: trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, and
lawn furniture.
      B.   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products, including
fruits, vegetables, and Christmas trees.
      C.   Various outdoor recreation uses, including but not limited to:
tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf,
golf driving ranges, and amusement parks.
      D.   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, playground
equipment, and similar uses.
   Open space. That part of a zoning lot, including courts and/or yards, which
is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, and is accessible to
all residents upon the zoning lot.
   Outdoor dining. A designated outdoor space on private property that acts as
additional seating/service area for a restaurant or bar/tavern/lounge. When
such areas are on public property they are regulated by Article 15, Chapter 9
of the Code of Ordinances.
   Outdoor storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk
material, or merchandise in the same place for more than twenty-four (24)
hours.
   Outlot. A parcel of land which is designated as an "outlot" on the recorded
plat, and which is usually not intended to be used for the same purposes as
other lots in the plat.
   Parcel. A continuous area, tract, or acreage of land that has not been
divided or subdivided according to the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Act and has frontage on a public street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-29.png]
Lot & Double Frontage (or Through Lot)
   Parking lot, off-street. An area on private property, or on public property,
which provides vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles
for maneuvering, so as to provide safe and convenient access for entrance and
exit and for parking of more than three (3) vehicles.
   Parking space. An area of definite length and width as designated in these
zoning regulations for parking an automobile or other vehicle, and which is
fully accessible for such purposes.
   Parking space, residential. Each required residential space shall be a
minimum size of ten (10) feet × twenty (20) feet and shall be constructed with
concrete or plant-mixed bituminous asphalt. Building a one-car garage with an
open parking space adjacent to the garage is prohibited. All residential off-
street parking spaces shall be enclosed within a garage, or if open, located at
the rear most area of the lot. Off-street parking access shall be from a
driveway that enters onto the property from the front yard or side yard.
   Performance guarantee. A financial guarantee to ensure that specific
improvements, facilities, or work required by these zoning regulations will be
completed in compliance with the ordinance, regulations, and approved plans and
specifications of the development.
   Pergola. A freestanding structure with an open trellis-style roof, that is
open on all sides.
   Permeable pavers. Pavers which are designed and installed, per
manufacturer’s specification, in a way that allows water to pass through them
and infiltrate into the ground.  
   Person. An individual, trustee, executor, fiduciary, corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization, or other legal entity acting as a unit.
   Personal fitness center. A facility which provides indoor exercise
facilities, such as exercise machines and weight-lifting equipment, usually in
a structured physical activity program supervised by professional physical
fitness instructors. As defined herein, "personal fitness center" shall not
include court sports facilities or spectator seating for sports events. A
personal fitness center may or may not be enclosed within a gym.
   Previous [pervious] surface. A surface that permits full or partial
absorption of stormwater.
   Pet. A domesticated dog, cat, bird, gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, turtle,
fish, rabbit, or other similar animal that is commonly available and
customarily kept for pleasure or companionship.
   Pool or billiard hall. An establishment wherein the substantial or
significant portion of all useable floor area is devoted to the use of pool or
billiard tables.
   Planned unit development. A planning or construction project involving the
use of special zoning requirements and review procedures which are intended to
provide design and regulatory flexibility, so as to encourage innovation in
land use planning and design and thereby achieve a higher quality of
development than might otherwise be possible.
   Planner, City. The city planner is the person designated by the plan
commission to advise the City Council, City plan commission, and City staff on
planning, zoning, land use, housing, and other related planning and development
issues.
   Plan commission. The Plan Commission of the City of Dearborn as organized
under Public Act No. 207, the Public Acts of 1921 of the State of Michigan, as
amended, pursuant to 2-376 to 388.
   Pre-release adjustment center. An establishment which provides shelter,
supervisory and social services to convicts in a pre-release parole preparation
program, as authorized by the State Corrections Commission or by the Federal
Bureau of Prisons.
   Principal use. See use, principal.
   Private street or road. See road.
   Property line. The line separating a piece of property from the street
right-of-way and the lines separating a parcel of property from the parcels
next to it. See also lot line.
   Public lodging house. A commercial establishment or place in which five (5)
or more members of the public, whether travelers or not, are charged for or are
provided sleeping quarters in the form of cots or beds in the same room.
   Public safety official. The public safety official refers generally to the
departments or persons who perform police, firefighting, and other public
safety functions for the City.
   Public utility. Any persons, firm, corporation, municipal department, or
board, duly authorized to furnish to the public under government regulations
any of the following: electricity, gas, steam, communications services, cable
television services, transportation services, water, sewer service, or sewage
treatment.
   Recreational land. Any public or privately owned lot or land that is
utilized for recreation activities such as, but not limited to, camping,
swimming, picnicking, hiking, nature trails, boating, and fishing.
   Recreational vehicle. "Recreational vehicles" shall include the following:
      A.   Travel trailer. A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation
uses, and which may be identified as a "travel trailer" by the manufacturer.
Travel trailers generally include self-contained sanitary, water, and
electrical facilities.
      B.   Pickup camper. A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or
truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a
temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation
uses.
      C.   Motor home. A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human
habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and
capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes
generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
      D.   Folding tent trailer. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use.
      E.   Boats and boat trailers. "Boats" and "boat trailers" shall include
boats, floats, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on
the highway.
      F.   Other equipment. Other recreational equipment includes snowmobiles,
jet skis, all terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus the
normal equipment used to transport them on the highway.
   Recognizable and substantial benefit. A clear benefit, both to the ultimate
users of the property in question and to the community, which would reasonably
be expected to accrue, taking into consideration the reasonably foreseeable
detriments of the proposed development and uses. Such benefits may include:
long-term protection or preservation of natural resources and natural features,
historical features, or architectural features; or, elimination of or reduction
in the degree of nonconformity in a nonconforming use or structure.
   Recycling center. A facility at which used material is separated and
processed prior to shipment to others who will use the materials to manufacture
new products.
   Recycling collection station. A facility for the collection and temporary
storage of recoverable resources, prior to shipment to a recycling center for
processing.
   Reference level. For any building within ten (10) feet of the front lot
line, the reference level is the official established sidewalk grade opposite
the center of the front of the building. For any building more than ten (10)
feet from the front lot line, or where no sidewalk grade is established, the
reference level is the mean elevation of the finished grade of the ground
across the front of the building. When the mean finished grade about any
portion of a building varies five (5) feet or more from that of the front, such
mean may be taken as the reference level for such portion of such building.
   Regional newspaper distribution centers. A place where newspapers are
distributed to carriers for home delivery, designed to serve multiple
communities.
   Restaurant. A restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is
the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and
whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-
through, fast food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof,
as defined below:
      A.   Restaurant, carry-out. A carry-out restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/
or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-
to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises.
      B.   Restaurant, drive-in. A drive-in restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves delivery of prepared food so
as to allow its consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises,
but outside of an enclosed building.
      C.   Restaurant, drive-through. A drive-through restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves the delivery of the prepared
food to the customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through
window, for consumption off of the premises.
      D.   Restaurant, fast-food. A fast-food restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery
of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for
consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands
inside the structure or out, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a
motor vehicle at the site.
      E.   Restaurant, standard. A standard restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves either:
         1.   The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to
customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building, or
         2.   The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line
and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building.
      F.   Bar/lounge/tavern. A bar or lounge is a type of restaurant which is
operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale
of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of
a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so
designated or operated.
   Retention basin. A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of
stormwater runoff.
   Right-of-way. The strip of land over which an easement exists [to] allow
facilities such as streets, roads, highways, and power lines to be built.
   Road. Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than a
public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to any
land, lot or parcel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard,
drive lane, place, court, or any similar designation. Various types of roads
are defined as follows:
      A.   Private road. Any road which is to be privately maintained and has
not been accepted for maintenance by the City, Wayne County, the state or the
federal government, but which meets the requirements of these zoning
regulations or has been approved as a private road by the City under any prior
ordinance.
      B.   Public road. Any road or portion of a road which has been dedicated
to and accepted for maintenance by the City, Wayne County, state or the federal
government.
      C.   Arterial road. A road which carries high volumes of traffic and
serves as an avenue for circulation of traffic onto, out of, or around the
City. An arterial road may also be a major thoroughfare.
      D.   Collector street. A road whose principal function is to carry
traffic between minor and local roads and arterial roads but may also provide
direct access to abutting properties.
      E.   Cul-de-sac. A road that terminates in a vehicular turnaround.
      F.   Major thoroughfare. An arterial road which is intended to service a
large volume of traffic for both the immediate area and the region beyond, and
may be designated as a thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent
term to identify those roads comprising the basic structure of the roads plan.
Any road with an existing or proposed right-of-way width of one hundred twenty
(120) feet, and any road proposed as a major thoroughfare in the master plan
shall be considered a major thoroughfare.
      G.   Local street. A road whose principal function is to provide access
to abutting properties and is designed to be used or is used to connect minor
and local roads with collector or arterial roads.
      H.   Minor road. A road whose sole function is to provide access to
abutting properties.
   Room. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a
multiple-family district, a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom,
equal to at least eighty (80) square feet in area. A room shall not include the
area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways
and storage. Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and
including a "den," "library," or other extra room shall count such extra room
as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density.
   Rooming house. See boarding house.
   Secondary access drive. Any private road that is generally parallel to and
adjacent to an arterial road and that is designed to provide access to abutting
properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of
the through traffic on the arterial road and so that the flow of traffic on the
arterial road is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number of
abutting properties.
   Second-hand resale store. Any building, structure, premises, or part thereof
used for the sale of used or second-hand goods of any kind. Second-hand resale
store shall not include:
      A.   Boutique resale stores; or
      B.   Any store whose principle purpose is to deal in new goods, but which
occasionally accepts used goods for resale incidental to the sale of new goods,
including but not limited to books, music, antiques, jewelry, clothing, or
sports equipment, subject to the following limitations:
         1.   No more than twenty-five (25) percent of sales floor area or
customer-accessible product is dedicated to the sale of second-hand goods,
pursuant to an approved floor plan and/or racking plan; and
         2.   The store only takes delivery of second-hand goods within the
interior of the building, and does not provide for outdoor or after-hours drop-
off of used goods, except that oversized goods may occasionally be accepted
through an exterior door during business hours.
   Semitrailer. A trailer, which may be enclosed or not enclosed, having wheels
generally only at the rear, and supported in front by a truck tractor or towing
vehicle.
   Service truck. A pick-up truck or van that is used in conjunction with a
repair or maintenance business, such as a plumbing, electrical, or carpentry
business.
   Setback. The distance between a front, side or rear lot line or setback
measurement line and the nearest supporting member of a structure on the lot.
The minimum required setback is the minimum distance between a front, side or
rear lot line or setback measurement line and the nearest supporting member of
a structure in order to conform to the required yard setback provisions of
these zoning regulations (see definition of yard).
   Setback measurement line. A line drawn parallel to the centerline of the
road on the zoning map from which the front setback shall be measured.
   Shed. A type of accessory building on the same zoning lot as a primary
residence which measures between 61 cu. ft - 1,000 cu. ft. and is used
exclusively for the storage of household goods and possessions of the owner.
The maximum width between two walls of a shed shall not exceed twelve (12) ft.
and the maximum height of any part of the shed roof shall not exceed ten (10)
ft.
      Shippers' container. An empty industrial, standardized reusable vessel
that was:
      A.   Originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the
packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or
commodities, and/or
      B.   Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car,
and/or
      C.   Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for
movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.png]
   Shopping center. A grouping of retail businesses and service uses on a
single site with common parking facilities.
   Short-term rental or short-term rental unit (STR). The rental of a dwelling
or dwelling unit, either wholly or partly, for compensation for periods of 30
consecutive days or less, by persons other than the permanent resident or
owner, and when the permanent resident or owner has obtained a short-term
rental permit issued by the Director or their designee.
   Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, or placard which uses words, numbers,
figures, graphic designs, logos or trademarks for the purpose of informing or
attracting the attention of persons. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition
of "sign" includes interior and exterior signs which are visible from any
public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or public property, but not signs which
are primarily directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is
located. Various types of signs and sign-related terms are defined and
regulated by the sign regulations of the City Code.
   Site plan. A plan, prepared to scale, as required in Section
32.02, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a
site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site
development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   Sky glow. The brightening of the night sky attributable to man-made light
sources which obscure stars, the moon, and other natural phenomena.
   Smoking lounge. Any establishment, which, as one of its business activities,
even if incidental to its primary activities, promotes the smoking of tobacco
products or other legal substances on its premises. This term includes, but is
not limited to: cigar lounges, hookah cafes, tobacco lounges, tobacco clubs or
tobacco bars.
   Special event. An occurrence or noteworthy happening of seasonal, civic, or
religious importance, which is organized and sponsored by the City of Dearborn
or by a nonprofit Dearborn community group, congregation, organization, club or
society, and which offers a distinctive service to the community, such as
public entertainment, community education, civic celebration, or cultural or
community enrichment. Special events typically run for a short period of time
(less than two (2) weeks) and are unlike the customary or usual activities
generally associated with the property where the special event is to be
located.
   Special land use. Special land uses are uses, either public or private which
possess unique characteristics and therefore cannot be property classified as a
use permitted by right in a particular zoning district.
   After due consideration of the impact of each such proposed use upon the
neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the proposed
location, such special land uses may be permitted following review and
approval, subject to the terms of these zoning regulations.
   Specially designated distributor's establishment. A retail establishment of
less than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet of usable retail space,
or any retail establishment where more than ten (10) percent of the usable
retail space is utilized for the distribution of alcoholic liquor, licensed by
the State Liquor Control Commission to distribute alcoholic liquor, or other
than beer and wine under twenty (20) percent by volume, in the original package
for consumption off the premises.
   Specially designated merchant's establishment. A retail establishment of
less than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet of usable retail space,
or any retail establishment where more than ten (10) percent of the usable
retail space is utilized for the distribution of alcoholic liquor, licensed by
the State Liquor Control Commission to sell beer and wine for consumption off
the premises.
   Specified anatomical areas. See adult regulated uses.
   Specified sexual activities. See adult regulated uses.
   Stable, private. A private stable is an enclosed building intended for the
keeping of horses or other large domestic animals, for the noncommercial use of
the residents of the principal residential use on the site.
   Stable, public. A public stable is an enclosed building intended for the
keeping of horses or other domestic animals, in which any such animals are kept
for remuneration, hire, or sale.
   State-licensed residential facility. Any structure constructed for
residential purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant to
Public Act 116 of 1973, or Public Act 218 of 1979. These acts provide for the
following types of residential structures:
      A.   Adult foster care facility. A residential structure that is licensed
to provide room, board and supervised care, but not continuous nursing care,
for unrelated adults over the age of seventeen (17), in accordance with Public
Act 218 of 1979, as amended, and the Adult Foster Care Administrative Rules as
administered by the Michigan Department of Social Services. The following four
(4) types of adult foster care homes are provided for by these rules:
         1.   Family home. Private residence for six (6) or fewer adults.
Licensee must live in the home, and local zoning approval is not required prior
to issuance of a license.
         2.   Adult foster care small group home. Residence for twelve (12) or
fewer adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning
approval is required prior to issuance of a license only if seven (7) or more
residents will live in the home.
         3.   Adult foster care large group home. Residence for thirteen (13)
to twenty (20) adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local
zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license.
         4.   Congregate facility. Residence for more than twenty (20) adults.
      B.   Foster family home. A private residence that houses four (4) or
fewer foster children, up to age nineteen (19), under constant child care and
supervision. Under Public Act 116 of 1973, a foster family home does not
require local zoning approval before being licensed by the Department of Social
Services.
      C.   Foster family group home. A private residence that houses more than
four (4) but less than seven (7) minor children, up to age nineteen (19), under
constant care and supervision. Under Public Act 116 of 1973, a foster family
group home requires local zoning approval before being licensed by the
Department of Social Services.
      D.   Orphanage. Residence for the housing of more than seven (7) minor
children, up to age nineteen (19), under constant care and supervision. Under
Public Act 116 of 1973, a foster family group home requires local zoning
approval before being licensed by the Department of Social Services.
      E.   Child care organizations. A governmental or nongovernmental
organization for thirty (30) or fewer children having as its principal function
receiving minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision,
notwithstanding that educational instruction may be given. Child care
organization includes organizations commonly described as child caring
institutions, child placing agencies, children's camps, children's campsites,
children's therapeutic group homes, child care centers, day care centers,
nursery schools, parent cooperative preschools, foster homes, group homes, or
child care homes. Child care organization does not include a governmental or
nongovernmental organization that does either of the following:
         1.   Provides care exclusively to minors who have been emancipated by
court order under section 4(3) of 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.4.
         2.   Provides care exclusively to persons who are 18 years of age or
older and to minors who have been emancipated by court order under section 4(3)
of 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.4, at the same location.
   Story. That portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine as
defined herein, included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor or roof next above it (see illustrations). A mezzanine
shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than one-half (½) of the area
of the story underneath, or, if the vertical distance from the floor next below
the mezzanine to the floor above it is twenty-four (24) feet or more.
   A basement shall be deemed a full story when the vertical distance from the
average grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from the
average grade to the ceiling.
   Story, half. The uppermost story lying under a pitched roof, the usable
floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area of the
uppermost full story. The usable floor area of a half (½) story shall be at
least two hundred (200) square feet with a minimum clear height of seven (7)
feet, six (6) inches.
   Street. See road.
   Street lot line. A dividing line between the street and a lot, also known as
the right-of-way line.
   Structural addition. Any alteration that changes the location of the
exterior walls or area of a building.
   Structure.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. The definition of structure does not include concrete flatwork or other
walking surfaces such as asphalt or paving bricks. Structures include, but are
not limited to, principal and accessory buildings, towers, storage containers/
lockers, decks, fences, privacy screens, walls, antennae, swimming pools,
signs, gas or liquid storage facility, and a mobile home.
   Subdivision plat. The division of a tract of land for the purpose of sale or
building development, in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act, Michigan
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, and the Dearborn Subdivision Control
Regulations.
   Substance abuse treatment facility. Any establishment used for the
dispensing, on an in-patient or out-patient basis, of compounds or prescription
medicines directly to persons having drug or alcohol abuse problems. A
generally recognized pharmacy or licensed hospital dispensing prescription
medicines shall not be considered a substance abuse treatment facility.
   Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market
value of the structure either, (1) before the improvement or repair is started,
or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the
damage occurred. Substantial improvement occurs when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not however include any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a state inventory of historic places.
   Swimming pool. Any permanent, nonportable structure or container located
either above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than
twenty-four (24) inches, intended for swimming or bathing. A swimming pool
shall be considered an accessory structure for purposes of computing lot
coverage.
   Temporary use or building A use or building permitted to exist for a limited
period of time under conditions and procedures as provided for in these zoning
regulations.
   Theater. An enclosed building used for presenting performances or motion
pictures which are observed by paying patrons from seats situated within the
building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-33.png]
Basic Structural Terms
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-35.png]
Basement and Story
   Thoroughfare, major. See road.
   Toxic or hazardous waste. Waste or a combination of waste and other
discarded material (including, but not limited to, solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous material) which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to the following if improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed:
      A.   An increase in mortality, or
      B.   An increase in serious irreversible illness, or
      C.   Serious incapacitating, but reversible illness, or
      D.   Substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment.
   Transition zone. A transition zone generally refers to a zoning district, an
arrangement of lots or land uses, a landscaped area, or similar means of
providing a buffer between land uses or districts.
   Truck terminal. A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed
agricultural products, natural minerals, or other resources, are delivered for
immediate distribution or to be amalgamated or divided for delivery in larger
or smaller units to other points, or for distribution, amalgamation, or
division involving transfer to other modes of transportation.
   Underlying zoning. The zoning classification and regulations applicable to
the property immediately preceding the approval of an application to designate
a parcel planned unit development.
   Uniformity ratios. The ratio of luminance in the brightest-lit spots
compared to that in the dimmest areas (max./min.).
   Use. The purpose for which land, lots, or buildings thereon is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
      A.   Use, accessory. See accessory use, building, or structure.
      B.   Use, conditional. See conditional use.
      C.   Use, permitted. A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and standards of such district.
      D.   Use, principal. The main use of land and buildings and the main
purpose for which land and buildings exist.
      E.   Use, special land. See special land use.
   Utility trailer. A small trailer that is designed to be pulled by an
automobile, van, or pick-up truck.
   Variance. A modification of the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals when strict enforcement of the zoning
ordinance would cause practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship owing to
circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.
   Veterinary hospital. See clinic, veterinary.
   Wall, obscuring A structure of definite height and location to serve as an
opaque screen in carrying out the requirements of these zoning regulations.
   Warehouse. A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials. See
also distribution center.
   Warren Business District Improvement Authority. This district is located in
the north east portion of Dearborn and generally includes properties fronting
Warren Avenue from Greenfield to Wyoming, with additional properties in close
proximity to Warren Avenue along certain side streets as shown in the map
below. The full legal description of this business district can be found in the
“Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan” as approved by City Council
Resolution No. 12-675-15, along with any subsequent amendments as approved by
City Council.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7143.png]
 
   Wholesale sales. The sales of goods generally in large quantities and
primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
   Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in these
zoning regulations. The minimum required setback is the minimum depth of a
front, rear or side yard necessary to conform to the required yard setback
provisions of these zoning regulations (see illustrations).
      A.   Yard, front. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line or
setback measurement line (where appropriate) and the nearest line of the
principal building. Unless otherwise specified, on corner lots and through lots
there shall be maintained a front yard along each street frontage.
      B.   Yard, rear. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the nearest line on the principal building unoccupied from the ground
upward (except as hereinafter specified). On corner lots, the rear yard may be
opposite either street frontage, but there shall only be one rear yard.
      C.   Yard, side. An open space between a principal building and the side
lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which
shall be the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to
the nearest point on the principal building and unoccupied from the ground
upward (except as hereinafter specified).
   Zoning administrator. The City official(s) authorized to administer the
zoning regulations on a day-to-day basis, including but not limited to
processing applications, granting ministerial approvals, maintaining the
records of plan commission actions, sending notices of public hearings, and
similar work and may include the city planner, the director of building and
safety department, or the building inspector as may be designated by this
ordinance.
   Zoning Compliance Certificate. A certificate stating that a structure or
structures comply with specified zoning standards as submitted on approved
documents.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 1.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 94-609, 10-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-
624, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 95-628, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 95-624, 3-7-1995; Ord. No.
97-710, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 02-918, 11-19-2002; Ord. No. 03-962, 5-20-2003;
Ord. No. 03-969, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 04-1008, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-1016, 9-21-
2004; Ord. No. 08-1194, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 08-1184, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-
1185, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-1186, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 10-275, 6-21-2010;
Ord. No. 11-1306, 1-4-2011; Ord. No. 1319, 4-4-2011; Ord. No. 12-1362, 9-11-
2012; Ord. No. 14-1417, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 14-1445, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 15-
1478, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-1482, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 17-1567, 1-31-2107; Ord.
No. 17-1601, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 20-1690, 12-8-2020; Ord. No. 24-1822, 8-20-
2024; Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024; Ord. No. 25-1839, 5-20-2025; Ord. No. 25-
1845, 7-15-2025)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-37.png]
Open Space Terms
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.png]
Open Space Yard Requirements
ARTICLE 2.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 2.01. - Administrative regulations.
   A.   Scope of regulations. No structure or tract of land shall hereafter be
used or occupied, and no structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered,
or moved, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Uses not
expressly permitted are prohibited. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are
contrary to federal, state or local laws or ordinances are prohibited.
   However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued
in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this ordinance, Feb. 11,
1993, and construction is begun within six (6) months of the effective date,
said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved
plans. Furthermore, upon completion the building may be occupied under a
Certificate of Occupancy for the use for which the building was originally
designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of
Article 3.00 concerning nonconformities. Any subsequent text or map amendments
shall not affect previously issued valid permits.
   B.   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare.
   C.   Relationship to other ordinances or agreements. This ordinance is not
intended to abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, permit,
easement, covenant, or other private agreement previously adopted, issued, or
entered into and not in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance.
   However, where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or requirements than other such ordinances, rules,
regulations, permits, easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the
requirements of this ordinance shall govern.
   D.   Vested right. Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or
construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of
any particular use, district, zoning classification, or permissible activities
therein. Furthermore, such rights as may exist through enforcement of this
ordinance are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary for the preservation or protection of public
health, safety, and welfare.
   E.   Continued conformity with yard and bulk regulations. The owner of a
building or the property on which it is located shall maintain all required
setbacks, open space, and other minimum yard and bulk requirements for as long
as the building is in existence.
   No portion of a lot used in complying with the provisions of this ordinance
in connection with an existing or planned building, shall again be used to
qualify or justify any other building or structure existing or intended to
exist at the same time.
   F.   Division and consolidation of land. No zoning lot shall hereafter be
divided into two (2) or more zoning lots and no portion of any zoning lot shall
be sold, unless all zoning lots resulting from each such division or sale
conform with all regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located, and further as provided for in City Ordinance, Section
17.5-11.
   G.   Unlawful buildings, structures, site designs and uses. A building,
structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of adoption of
this ordinance shall not be made lawful solely by adoption of this ordinance.
In case any building, or part thereof, is used, erected, occupied or altered
contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, such building or use shall be
deemed an unlawful nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or
abated by any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has been
made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Public expenditures toward
abating any such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land.
   H.   Voting place. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed
to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a public election.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.01, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 10-1267, 5-3-2010)
Sec. 2.02. - Allowable uses.
   Only the following uses of land, buildings, or structures shall be allowed
in the City:
   A.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this ordinance, Feb.
11, 1993.
   B.   Uses for which a building permit had been issued in accordance with
Section 21.07.
   C.   Permitted uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to the
requirements specified.
   D.   Conditional and Special Uses in the applicable zoning districts,
subject conditions and requirements specified.
   E.   Temporary uses subject to the requirements specified in Section
2.07.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.02, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.03. - Accessory buildings and structures.
   A.   General requirements. 
      1.   Timing of construction. No accessory building, structure, or use
shall be constructed or established on a parcel unless there is a principal
building, structure, or use being constructed or already established on the
same parcel of land.
      2.   Site plan approval. If submission of a site plan for review and
approval is required, then the site plan shall indicate the location of
proposed accessory buildings, structures, or uses.
      3.   Placement of heating and cooling equipment. Accessory uses such as
central air conditioning units and heat pumps shall not be installed in the
side yard unless a site plan for location has been approved by a building
official. A minimum three (3) foot side yard is required for installation
purposes.
      4.   Conformance with lot coverage standards. Accessory buildings and
permanent structures which actually cover a portion of the lot shall be
included in computations to determine compliance with maximum lot coverage
standards, where applicable.
      5.   Location in proximity to easements or rights-of-way. Accessory
buildings, structures, or uses shall not be located within a dedicated easement
or right-of-way, except as permitted in the regulations for essential services.
      6.   Use of accessory structures. Attached and detached accessory
buildings or structures in residential districts shall not be used as dwelling
units or for any business, profession, trade or occupation. One (1) private
garage shall be permitted per residential lot. Except as otherwise provided in
this Zoning Ordinance, any such garage shall be used primarily for the storage
of vehicles and for incidental household storage only.
      7.   Appearance. Accessory buildings and structures shall be designed and
constructed to be compatible with the design and construction of the principal
building on the site.
      8.   Applicability of other codes and ordinances. Accessory buildings and
structures shall be subject to all other applicable codes and ordinances
regarding construction, installation, and operation.
      9.   Application for Zoning Compliance Certificate.  A Zoning Compliance
Certificate is required for the installation of a shed. In all cases, an
application for a Zoning Compliance Certificate to construct a shed shall be
filed with the building official. The application shall be accompanied by a
site plan, along with drawings or other information required by the building
and safety department which illustrate the dimensions, setbacks, height, and
design of the proposed shed.
      10.   Garages. 
         (a)   Intent. A garage is intended to provide off-street vehicular
parking and incidental household storage for the occupants of the residence to
which it is accessory. It is not to be used as habitable space or for
commercial purposes. It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance to promote
public health, safety, and welfare by establishing standards for garages
consistent with the goal of complying with ADA requirements for unobstructed
access to sidewalks and minimizing off-street parking congestion, neighborhood
overcrowding, fire hazards, and other conditions detrimental to public safety
and quality of life. The following sections recognize the types of activities
that are consistent with garage use, and prohibit those activities which would
convert the garage to habitable space or commercial use.
         (b)   Conversion. No garage shall be converted into habitable space
without permits. For the purposes of this ordinance, "habitable space" shall be
defined "as space within a structure for living, sleeping, or cooking." Factors
demonstrating conversion include unauthorized renovations which require permits
or permanent enclosure of the garage by installation of a framed wall, and/or
enclosure by brick, siding or other materials. Occasional use of a garage for
social gatherings, such as parties, which does not involve physical conversion
of the garage, is permitted.
         (c)   Garage doors. A garage shall have an opaque vehicular access
overhead retractable door which allows vehicles to enter and exit the building
freely and without obstruction. Garage doors of a different style, such as
carriage doors, which are consistent with the architectural design of the home
and not otherwise inconsistent with the intent of this ordinance may be
permitted subject to a compatibility review for accessory buildings as provided
by Section
2.03(A)(7) of the Zoning Ordinance. In addition to a permitted garage door, a
garage may have a service door (solid/hinged, sliding or French doors) not
exceeding eight (8) feet in width for allowing entry into the garage.
      All garage doors are subject to the requirements of the building code.
         (d)   Sleeping. In no event shall any garage be used for sleeping
purposes, nor shall a garage have any opening into a room used for sleeping
purposes.
         (e)   Heat. No open flame heaters shall be used or installed.
         (f)   Permitted utilities. Installation of electrical or plumbing
service is not permitted except as follows: a) a faucet or utility sink is
allowed as permitted by Code; b) basic electrical service incidental to the use
of the garage for minor repairs or hobbies is permitted; c) no bathroom
facilities are permitted.
         (g)   Cooking Prohibited. No cooking of any kind shall occur in any
garage.
         (h)   Lease of garages. No garage may be leased to any person
separately from the owner or tenant of the principal residence. No garage shall
be leased to any business or used for any commercial purpose whatsoever.
         (i)   Commercial storage. Storage of materials, inventory or machinery
used in a commercial business or enterprise is not allowed.
         (j)   Off-street parking. Any use of a garage which impedes the
ability of the occupants of the home to meet the residential parking
requirements set forth in Section
4.01(B)(2) of the Zoning Ordinance is prohibited.
         (k)   Public Service Day. Any use of a garage which impedes the
ability of the occupants of the home to meet the parking requirements set forth
in Section
18-358 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances, entitled "Public Service Day", is
prohibited.
   B.   Attached accessory buildings. Unless otherwise specified in this
Article, accessory buildings or structures which are attached to the principal
building (such as an attached garage, breezeway, or workshop) shall be
considered a part of the principal building for the purposes of determining
conformance with area, setback, height, and bulk requirements. The floor area
of a garage attached to a principal residence shall not exceed twenty (20)
percent of the total area of the residence or seven hundred (700) square feet,
whichever is greater.
      1.   Attached garages. A garage attached to a one (1) family residence
shall not be considered part of the principal building for purposes of
determining conformance with the combined side yard setback requirement if the
garage and residence meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Minimum lot width: Sixty (60) feet.
         (b)   Maximum height of house and garage: One (1) story/twenty (20)
feet.
         (c)   Minimum side setback (each side): Four (4) feet.
         (d)   Minimum setback to front of garage: Four (4) feet behind the
front of the residence.
   C.   Detached accessory buildings. 
      1.   Location. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in a
front yard or a required side yard; except that the following accessory uses
may be permitted in the front or side yards of commercial or industrial
districts with appropriate landscaping, subject to the approval of the planning
commission: buildings for parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses, and
transformer pads.
      2.   Setbacks. Detached accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setback requirements:
         (a)   Front yard setback. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
front setback requirements for the district in which they are located. However,
in no case shall an accessory building be located closer to the front lot line
than the principal building.
         (b)   Side yard setback The accessory building shall comply with the
side yard setbacks for the district which it is located, except that the
minimum side yard setback for accessory buildings in single-family districts
shall be eighteen (18) inches for lots equal to or less than thirty-five (35)
feet in width. The area shall be maintained with all the following conditions:
hard-surfaced, maintenance-free and sloped that water runoff has no impact on
adjoining property and gutters shall be installed on the accessory building.
         (c)   Rear yard setback. Accessory buildings shall be located no
closer than three feet to the rear lot line. Where the rear lot line is
coterminous with an alley right-of-way line, the accessory building may be
located within one foot of the rear lot line.
         (d)   Distance from other buildings. The primary purpose of a garage
in a residentially-zoned district is for the storage of vehicles. A detached
garage shall be located in the rear yard in a location such that the resident
can freely access and park a vehicle in each bay of the garage. The
accessibility of the garage bays shall be determined by the building official.
For fire prevention purposes, if the accessory building is less than ten (10)
feet from the principal structure, then protective materials with at least one
(1)-hour fire rating are required in the exterior wall(s) of the principal
structure that is closer than ten (10) feet to the principal structure.
         (e)   Setback on corner lots. Accessory buildings on a corner lot
shall comply with the front setback requirements on any side that faces a
street, if there is at least one (1) house in the same block that fronts on
said street. If there are no houses fronting on the street, then the corner
house shall provide a minimum setback of three (3) feet on said side street.
   
      3.   Size and lot coverage. Detached accessory buildings shall not cover
more than seven hundred (700) square feet.
         (a)   Permitted lot coverage on a single family residential lot may be
increased up to five (5) percent solely to accommodate the construction of a
twenty (20) foot wide by twenty (20)-foot deep detached garage if the home and
all other structures that count toward lot coverage were constructed prior to
1993. Any existing garage or shed may not be retained in conjunction with this
provision.
      4.   Height.
         (a)   Detached accessory buildings in residential districts shall not
exceed one (1) story and sixteen (16) feet in height. The roof pitch shall be
less than or equal to the roof pitch of the principle structure.
         (b)   Detached accessory buildings in nonresidential districts shall
comply with the maximum height standards for the district in which they are
located.
      5.   Limitation. In addition to a garage, each residential lost is
permitted one (1) shed).
   D.   Accessory structures.
      1.   General requirements. Accessory structures (for example, swimming
pools, freestanding solar panels, tennis courts, antennas) require a building
permit and review for zoning compliance. Accessory structures shall be located
in the rear yard and shall comply with height, yard setbacks, and lot coverage
requirements for accessory buildings, unless otherwise permitted in this
ordinance.
      2.   Limitation. Exclusive of fences, decks air conditioning units, and
storage lockers/containers up to 60 cu. ft., (subsections (b), (c), (f), and
(g), below) the number of detached accessory structures shall not exceed three
(3) per property, unless approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. All accessory
structures shall require Zoning Board of Appeals approval, except for the
following:
         (a)   Pergolas and gazebos subject to the regulations in subsection 3.
and 4. below.
         (b)   Fences and privacy screens which comply with Section
2.19 of this ordinance.
         (c)   Decks.
         (d)   Hot-tub or spas.
         (e)   Above/in-ground swimming pools.
         (f)   Central air conditioning units and heat pumps, subject to the
approval of the building official.
         (g)   Storage lockers/containers up to 60 cu. ft. in size located on a
deck, porch, patio or other paved surface (maximum of two (2) per property).
      3.   Pergolas and gazebos. Pergolas and gazebos that do not comply with
all of the conditions listed in subsection 4. below are subject to the standard
restrictions on lot coverage (Section
29.02); setbacks (Section
2.03C); appearance (Section
2.03A.7); and a maximum height of sixteen (16) feet, the maximum permitted
floor area based on lot size per the table below:
   Lot Size                Maximum Floor Area
   Less than 5,000 s.f.             200 s.f.
   5,000—10,000 s.f.                300 s.f.
   Greater than 10,000 s.f.             400 s.f.
          (a)   Parking of any type of vehicle under a pergola or gazebo shall
be prohibited.
         (b)   The use of a pergola or gazebo for storage purposes shall be
prohibited.
         (c)   Pergolas and gazebos may not be located in a driveway.
      4.   Seasonal pergolas and gazebos. Seasonal pergolas and gazebos are
defined as those that meet all of the conditions and requirements listed below.
They shall be located in the rear yard and comply with all yard setback
requirements listed in subsection C.2.(a)-(c). Seasonal pergolas and gazebos do
not require a building permit or zoning review. A seasonal pergola or gazebo:
         (a)   Shall not be erected before March 1 and shall be removed by
November 30 each calendar year. If the structure consists of a frame covered by
a removable cloth or canvas surface, the framing structure may remain up
between November 30 and March 1 provided that the cloth or canvas covering is
fully removed during those months.
         (b)   Shall not exceed 192 sq. ft.
         (c)   Shall not exceed a maximum height of sixteen (16) feet.
         (d)   Shall be prefabricated.
         (e)   Shall be anchored or attached to grade in accordance with
product specifications.
         (f)   Shall not be used for storage or contribute to harborage for
rodents/vermin.
         (g)   Shall not be used for parking of any type of vehicle under the
structure.
         (h)   May be located in a driveway, provided it is still within the
rear yard.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 93-575, 11-3-1993; Ord. No. 95-
626, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 02-883, 5-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-925, 12-3-2002; Ord. No.
04-1009, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-1010, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-1011, 8-4-2004; Ord.
No. 02-883, 5-15-2002; Ord. No. 06-1081, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 07-1127, 6-4-
2007; Ord. No. 08-1171, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 08-1172, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 09-
1214, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 11-1319, 4-4-2011; Ord. No. 12-1367, 10-9-2012; Ord.
No. 13-1414, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 14-1431, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 19-1646, 4-23-
2019; Ord. No. 20-1691, 12-8-2020)
Sec. 2.04. - Lawful use of a structure as a dwelling unit.
   A.   Incompletely constructed structures. Any incompletely constructed
structure which does not meet the requirements of the Building Code or this
Ordinance shall not be issued a Certificate of Occupancy and shall not be used
as a dwelling. For the purposes of this section, a basement which does not have
a residential structure constructed above it shall be considered an
incompletely constructed structure.
   B.   Caretaker residence. No dwelling shall be erected in a commercial or
industrial district, except for the living quarters of a watchman or caretaker
and his/her immediate family. Any such living quarters shall consist of a
structure which is permanently affixed to the ground, constructed in accordance
with the adopted Building Code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom,
and kitchen facilities. In no case shall such living quarters be used as a
permanent single-family residence by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker
and his/her immediate family.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.04, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.05. - Residential design standards.
   Any residential structure, including manufactured dwellings and mobile homes
not located in mobile home parks, shall be erected or constructed only if in
compliance with the following residential design standards. This section shall
not apply to any applications for permits which were submitted prior tot he
effective date of this section. The City Planning Division shall have the
authority to determine if the following requirements are being complied with.
   General requirements.
      1.   Area and bulk regulations. Any residential structure, including any
mobile home dwelling unit, shall comply with the requirements specified in
Article 29.00. Mobile homes shall comply with all regulations normally required
for site-built housing in the zoning district in which it is located, unless
specifically indicated otherwise herein.
      2.   Foundation. Any residential structure, including a mobile home,
shall be placed on a permanent foundation to form a complete enclosure under
the exterior walls. The foundation shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted Building Code of the City. A mobile home shall be securely anchored to
its foundation in order to prevent displacement during windstorms. The wheels,
tongue and hitch assembly, and other towing appurtenances, shall be removed
before attaching a mobile home to its permanent foundation.
      3.   Other regulations. Residential structures shall be constructed in
compliance with applicable state, federal, or local laws or ordinances. Mobile
homes shall comply with the most recent regulations specified by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Mobile Home Construction
and Safety Standards (24 CFR 3280), as amended.
      4.   Use. Mobile homes and other structures shall be used only for the
purposes permitted in the zoning district in which they are located.
      5.   Attachments. Any exterior attachments or extensions onto a dwelling
unit, such as entry steps and storage buildings, shall comply with the adopted
Building Code of the City.
      6.   Utility connections. All residential structures shall be connected
to the public sewer and water systems.
      7.   Design quality for infill development. The design quality of new and
substantially expanded or renovated existing residential structures in
established neighborhoods can have a substantial impact on the character,
quality, and stability of those neighborhoods. To ensure that all new and
substantially renovated residential structures constitute an improvement to the
area they shall be subject to a design quality review based on the following
requirements. The following requirements are in addition to, not in place of,
other applicable requirements in this section.
         (a)   Applicability. New homes and substantial expansions/renovations
of existing homes that exceed the threshold for legal nonconformity for
improvements and modernization set forth in Dearborn Zoning Ordinance section
3.05.C.2 are subject to design quality review per this section.
         (b)   Procedure. Review of these requirements will be carried out as
part of the standard zoning compliance review required for permitting.
            (1)   Specific design guidelines.
               a.   Front entry: For two story homes, the peak height of the
roof over the front entry shall be below the midpoint height of the main roof.
For one story homes, the peak height of the roof over the front entry shall be
below the peak height of the main roof.
               b.   Roofs.
                  i.   Roof shapes: no more than two roof shapes shall be
permitted on the front elevation (gable, hip, gambrel, studio, A frame, etc.)
                  ii.   Roof pitch: main roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 5:
12, except where the specific architectural style dictates otherwise (i.e.,
French provincial, Italianate, etc.)
               c.   Dormers.
                  i.   Dormers shall not make up more than 50% of the roof area
of the front half of the home.
               d.   Exterior materials.
                  i.   Primary exterior materials (making up more than 25% of
the façade) shall consist of no more than three materials.
                  ii.   Secondary exterior materials (making up less than 25%
of the façade) shall be made up of no more than three materials.
                  iii.   E.F.I.S. and stucco shall only be permitted as
secondary exterior materials. Their use as primary exterior materials on homes
is prohibited.
                  iv.   Glare/reflection: the reflection from exterior surfaces
shall be no greater than from white semi-gloss exterior enamel.
      8.   Attached garages. Attached garages shall only be permitted if they
meet the following standards:
         (a)      Lot has a minimum width of forty-five (45) feet.
         (b)   Exceptions:
            (1)   Corner lots with the garage entry off the side yard facing
the side street.
            (2)   Where the proposed configuration is consistent with the
dominant pattern of existing development in the immediate area (as in many
existing condominium communities).
            (3)   Side loaded garages designed to blend into the front façade
of the home in such a way as to not compromise the standards in the design
quality section.
      9.   Driveways. Driveways are required and permitted on residential lots
accessory to homes primarily for the purpose of providing access to off-street
parking in a garage or the rear yard. Residential driveways shall meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   Standard driveways (driveways providing direct access to parking
in a garage or rear yard):
            (1)    Minimum driveway width: ten (10) feet (may be reduced to
nine (9) feet on lots less than fifty (50) feet in width).
            (2)    Maximum driveway width in the front yard: twelve (12) feet
for a driveway going to a single bay attached garage or to any size garage or
parking pad in the rear yard, twenty (20) feet for a driveway going to an
attached two bay garage with doors facing the street.
         (b)   Circular driveways (an extra driveway generally providing for a
drop-off area near the front door to the home):
            (1)   Shall not exceed the front yard and total impervious surface
limits in this section.
            (2)   Only permitted on lots with a front yard of a minimum width
of seventy-five (75) feet and minimum depth of thirty-five (35) feet.
            (3)   Maximum drive width: twelve (12) feet.
            (4)   Shall only be permitted one additional curb cut, one entrance
from the street must also be the main driveway to the garage.
               a.   Exception: In the case of a side yard loaded garage on a
corner lot, the circular drive may have two curb cuts to the front yard. The
curb cuts shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way
line of the side street.
            (5)   Minimum required side yard setback: three (3) feet.
            (6)   Circular drive design must permit a full-size vehicle to
travel its length without leaving driveway pavement.
         (c)   Driveways may be constructed out of permeable pavers if they are
rated for vehicle weight per manufacturers’ specification.
      10.   Standards for Mobile Homes & Manufactured Dwellings. The dimensions
and placement of mobile homes or manufactured dwellings located outside of a
mobile home park shall be comparable to typical dimensions and placement of
site-built housing in the vicinity. Therefore, a mobile home or manufactured
dwelling shall be located on the lot so that the minimum width of the front
elevation is no less than thirty-four (34) feet and the minimum dimension along
any side or rear elevation is no less than sixteen (16) feet. If there are any
extensions or additions off of the front of the mobile home or manufactured
dwelling, the minimum width of any such secondary front elevation shall be
sixteen (16) feet. Such dimensions shall be measured from the outer extremities
and shall include additions to the main body of the mobile home or manufactured
dwelling, such as living or recreation rooms, garages, carports, utility rooms,
and the like, the front portions of which are within ten (10) feet of the front
of the main body of the mobile home or manufactured dwelling.
      11.   Roof overhang.  Residential structures shall be designed with
either a roof overhang of not less than six (6) inches on all sides or with
window sills and roof drainage systems to concentrate roof drainage at
collection points along the sides of the dwelling.
      12.   Cantilevers. Cantilever areas shall be included as part of the
calculation for lot coverage and shall comply with the lot coverage and setback
requirements listed in Section 29.02 of the Dearborn Zoning Ordinance.
      13.   Exterior doors. Residential structures shall conform with Chapter
5, Article II, of the Dearborn City Code, entitled “Building Code,” regarding
design standards for the number of exterior doors.
      14.   Lot combinations. The size of the originally platted lot or site
condominium lot in an established development largely defines the consistent
character and development pattern for a neighborhood. The combination of lots
to create larger single home sites can have the effect of disrupting the
character and orderly development of the area. As such lot combinations that
meet any of the following criteria require approval by the Planning Commission.
Approval of any lot combination meeting the criteria shall be contingent upon
site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission. Any site plan
modifications will require approval by the Planning Commission.
         (a)   Lot combinations where the resulting lot would exceed twice the
size of the largest of the constituent lots as established in the plat or
master deed.
         (b)   Lot combinations where the resulting lot would exceed twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet.
         (c)   To approve such a lot combination the Planning Commission must
find that the proposed combination of lots would result in the development of
the land in such a manner as to be compatible with surrounding land uses and
development and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of the subdivision plat,
site condominium documents, city master plan and zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.05, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 95-626, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 01-859,
3-5-2002, amended 6-28-2004; Ord. No. 18-1626, 9-24-2019; Ord. No. 24-1822, 8-
20-2024)
Sec. 2.06. - Reserved.
Sec. 2.07. - Temporary structures and uses.
   General requirements. Temporary buildings and structures shall comply with
the following requirements:
      1.   Temporary structures used for nonresidential purposes. Temporary
buildings for nonresidential use, including semitrucks/trailers and concrete
batch plants, shall be permitted only when the intended use is by a contractor
or builder in conjunction with a construction project, and only after review
and approval by the building official. Such temporary structures shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the construction project and prior to a
request for a Certificate of Occupancy for the project.
      2.   Permits. Pursuant to the adopted Building Code, approval from the
building official shall be required for a permit for a temporary structure. Any
such permit shall specify a date for removal of the temporary structure, but
the period of approval shall not exceed one (1) year.
      3.   Use as an accessory structure. A temporary building or structure
shall not be used as an accessory building or structure, except as permitted
herein.
      4.   Special events and other temporary uses. The city council may grant
temporary use of land and structures for special events and other temporary
uses, as defined in
Article 1.00 of this ordinance, subject to the following general conditions:
         (a)   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
         (b)   The applicant shall specify the exact duration of the temporary
use.
         (c)   Electrical and utility connections shall be approved by the
building official.
         (d)   The City may require a performance bond to assure proper
cleanup.
   The following conditions apply to specific temporary uses:
      5.   Conditions which apply to specific temporary uses. 
         (a)   Carnival or circus.
            — Maximum duration. Ten (10) days.
            — Operator or sponsor. Nonprofit entity
            — Location. Shall not be located in or adjacent to any developed
residential area except on church, school or park property.
            — Subject to the provisions of City Ordinance, Chapter 12.
         (b)   Sidewalk display and sale of bedding plants. 
            — Maximum duration. Thirty (30) days.
            — Location. In commercial districts only.
            — Sidewalk coverage. Shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent
the width of the sidewalk.
            — Subject to the provisions of City Ordinance, Chapter 12.
Cross reference— Restrictions on sidewalk sales, Section
12-144, City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances.
         (c)   Christmas tree sales. 
            — Maximum duration. Forty-five (45) days.
            — Clean-up. Stumps, branches, and other debris shall be completely
removed from site. Leftover trees shall be removed within one (1) week after
Christmas.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.07, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.08. - Uses not otherwise included within a district.
   A.   General requirements. A land use which is not cited by name as a
permitted use in a zoning district may be permitted upon determination by the
city planner that such use is clearly similar in nature and compatible with the
listed or existing uses in that district. In making such a determination, the
city planner shall consider the following:
      1.   Determination of compatibility. In making the determination of
compatibility, the city planner shall consider specific characteristics of the
use in question and compare such characteristics with those of the uses which
are expressly permitted in the district. Such characteristics shall include,
but are not limited to, traffic generation, types of service offered, types of
goods produced, methods of operation, and building characteristics.
      2.   Conditions by which use may be permitted. If the city planner
determines that the proposed use is compatible with permitted and existing uses
in the district, the city planner shall then decide whether the proposed use
shall be permitted by right, as a Special Use, or as a permitted accessory use.
The proposed use shall be subject to the review and approval requirements for
the district in which it is located.
      3.   Plan Commission determination. In the event that the city planner is
unable to decide if a use should be considered a permitted use in a particular
zoning district, then the determination shall be made by the plan commission,
which may elect to resolve the case by initiating an amendment to the zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Uses listed in another district. No use shall be permitted in a
district under the terms of this section if the use is specifically listed as a
use permitted by right or as a Special Use in any other district.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.08, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.09. - Yard and bulk regulations.
   General regulations. All lots, buildings, and structures shall comply with
the following general yard and bulk regulations unless specifically stated
otherwise in this ordinance:
      1.   Minimum lot size. Every building hereafter erected on a lot or
parcel of land created subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, Feb.
11, 1993, shall comply with the lot size, lot coverage, and setback
requirements for the district in which it is located.
   No yards in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, Feb. 11,
1993, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less
than, the minimum yard requirements of this ordinance.
      2.   Number of principal uses per lot. Only one (1) principal building
shall be placed on a lot of record or site in Single-Family Residential
Districts.
      3.   Projections into required yards. Fire escapes, fire towers,
chimneys, platforms, balconies, boiler flues, and other projections shall be
considered part of the building, subject to the setback requirements for the
district in which the building is located. The following table identifies
permitted projections in required yards:
PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS
                                          All   Interior  Corner  Side  Court
Projections                               Yards Rear      Side    Yard  Yard
                                                Yard      Yard
Air conditioning equipment shelters       —   X         X       X     X
Access drives                             X     —       —     —   —
Arbors and trellises                      X     —       —     —   —
Awnings and canopies                      X     —       —     —   —
Bay windows                               X     —       —     —   —
Decks, if not enclosed                    —   X         —     —   —
Eaves, overhanging                        X     —       —     —   —
Emergency electrical generators*          —   X         —     —   —
Fences *                                  X     —       —     —   —
Flagpoles                                 X     —       —     —   —
Gardens                                   X     —       —     —   —
Hedges                                    X     —       —     —   —
Laundry drying equipment                  —   X         X       —   —
Light standards, ornamental               X     —       —     —   —
Parking, off street *                     X     —       —     —   —
Paved terraces and open porches *         —   X         —     —   —
Porches, unenclosed with or without proof X     —       —     —   —
*
Approved signs *                          X     —       —     —   —
Stairways, open unroofed                  X     —       —     —   —
Steps                                     X     X         X       X     X
Television or radio towers or antennas    —   X         X       X     X
Trees, shrubs, and flowers                X     —       —     —   —
Walls (see Fences) *                      X     —       —     —   —
Window air conditioning units             X     —       —     —   —
 
* see additional regulations in this ordinance X = permitted
   Notes Related to Table 
      1.   Architectural features. Bay windows, window sills, belt courses,
cornices, eaves, overhanging eaves, and other architectural features may
project into a required side yard not more than two (2) inches for each one (1)
foot of width of such side yard, and may extend into any front or rear yard not
more than twenty-four (24) inches.
      2.   Terraces and porches. Open paved terraces, porticos, decks, porte
cocheres, and open porches not more than four (4) feet in height may project
into a required rear yard up to ten (10) feet, provided that the unoccupied
portion of the rear yard has a depth of at least twenty-five (25) feet.
      3.   Access drives and walkways. Access drives may be placed in the
required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory
or attached structures. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement serving a
like function, shall be permitted in any required yard, providing the pavement
is no higher than six (6) inches above grade.
      4.   Porches, unenclosed with or without a roof. Porches and similar
permanently unenclosed ground-story projections may extend into a required yard
not more than ten (10) feet, but not nearer in any case than ten (10) feet to a
front or rear lot line, or nearer than three (3) feet to any side yard lot
line. A front porch roof structure shall be compatible to the structures in the
immediate vicinity per Section
2.05(A) 7, Compatibility.
      5.   Unobstructed sight distance. No fence, wall, structure, or planting
shall be erected, established, or maintained on any lot which will obstruct the
view of drivers in vehicles approaching an intersection of two (2) roads or the
intersection of a road and a driveway (see diagram). Fences, walls, structures,
or plantings located in the triangular area described below shall not be
permitted to obstruct cross-visibility between a height of thirty (30) inches
and six (6) feet above the lowest point of the intersecting road(s).
   Trees. Trees shall be permitted in the triangular area provided that limbs
and foliage are trimmed so that they do not extend into the cross-visibility
area or otherwise create a traffic hazard. Landscaping, except required grass
or ground cover, shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the edge
of any driveway or road pavement within the triangular area.
   Unobstructed sight area 
   The unobstructed triangular area is described as follows:
      — The area formed at the corner intersection of two (2) public right-of-
way lines, the two (2) sides of the triangular area being twenty-five (25) feet
in length measured along abutting public rights-of-way lines, and third side
being a line connecting these two (2) sides, or
      — The area formed at the corner intersection of a public right-of-way and
a driveway, the two (2) sides of the triangular area being ten (10) feet in
length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the driveway, and the
third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides.
      6.   Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins
an alley for the purposes of applying lot area and setback requirements, one-
half (½) of the width of said alley shall be considered a part of the lot.
However, if a portion of the lot is occupied by an alley currently in use
(i.e., not vacated), then such area shall not be used in lot area computations
related to the landscaping standards.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.09, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 95-626, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 02-884,
4-16-2002; Ord. No. 08-1173, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 11-1307, 1-4-2011)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.png]
Unobstructed Sight Distance
Sec. 2.10. - Streets, roads, and other means of access.
   A.   Intent. Unimpeded, safe access to parcels of land throughout the City
is necessary to provide adequate police and fire protection, ambulance
services, and other public services, and to otherwise promote and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public. The standards and specifications set
forth herein are determined to be the minimum standards and specifications
necessary to meet the above stated intentions.
   B.   Public access required. The front lot line of all lots shall abut onto
a publicly dedicated road right-of-way.
   C.   Driveway dimensions. Driveways providing access to residential,
commercial or industrial properties shall comply with the dimensional standards
specified in
Article 4.00.
   D.   Access across residential district land. No land which is located in a
residential district shall be used for a driveway, walkway, or access purposes
to any land which is located in a nonresidential district, unless such access
is by way of a public road.
   E.   Service roads. If the plan commission determines that proposed or
anticipated development will result in an excessive number of entrance or exit
drives onto a public road, thereby creating potentially hazardous traffic
conditions and diminishing the carrying capacity of the road, the commission
may permit or require construction of service roads across abutting parcels and
generally parallel to the arterial street to allow traffic to circulate from
one parcel to another without re-entering the public road. The front edge of
any such secondary access drive shall be located no closer to the road than the
future right-of-way line. Such secondary access drive shall conform to the
minimum specifications established by the city engineer.
   F.   Performance guarantee. To assure completion of a private road or
service road in conformance with the requirements set forth herein, the
building official or zoning administrator may require the applicant or owner to
provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with § 2.17.
(Ord. No. 93-553, Section 2.10, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.11. - Grading regulations.
   A.   Intent and scope of requirements. Compliance with the grading
regulations set forth herein shall be required as follows:
      1.   Intent. Grading regulations are established to control the
excavation and filling of land, to assure adequate drainage away from
structures and to a natural or established drainage course, and to assure
protection of trees on sites where grading is to take place. The regulations
set forth herein also establish procedures and requirements for grading
permits, inspection of finished grading operations, and penalties for violation
of the grading regulations.
      2.   Scope of application. A permit shall be required in all instances
where grading, excavating, filling, stockpiling, or other alteration to the
land are proposed. Filling shall include the dumping of soil, sand, clay,
gravel, or other material on a site. However, where minor alterations to the
land which do not affect the storm drainage pattern are proposed, a grading
permit shall not be required.
   B.   Grading plan. 
      1.   Grading plan. In the event that a grading permit is required, the
applicant shall first submit a grading plan for review and approval by the city
engineer and building official. Grading plans may be submitted in conjunction
with a site plan review, or may be submitted as a separate plan. Such plans
shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer.
      2.   Grading plan standards. At a minimum, grading plans shall show grade
elevations adjacent to existing and proposed structures and at the nearest side
of structures on adjacent properties, and sufficient existing and proposed
elevations on the site to be altered and on as much of the adjacent property as
is necessary to establish the proposed surface water drainage pattern. If
excavation or filling is proposed, the amount of material to be excavated or
filled shall be indicated on the grading plan. All elevations shall be based on
City of Dearborn Lake Survey datum. Elevations and location of benchmarks used
for determining elevations shall be shown on the plan.
      3.   Subdivision grading plans. For any proposed subdivision, a grading
plan prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall be
submitted with the preliminary subdivision plan. The grading plan shall show
the topography of the area to be platted, the existing drainage pattern, and
the proposed surface water drainage pattern. Drainage easements shall be
provided across private property where necessary for handling surface drainage
from adjacent properties.
   C.   Grading standards. 
      1.   Slope away from buildings. All buildings and structures shall be
constructed at an elevation which provides a sloping grade away from the
building or structure, thereby causing surface water to drain away from the
walls of the building to a natural or established drainage course. Unless
insufficient space exists on a site, a minimum five (5) percent slope away from
all sides of a building or structure shall be provided for a minimum distance
of ten (10) feet.
      2.   Runoff onto adjacent properties. New grades shall not be established
that would permit an increase in the runoff of surface water onto adjacent
properties, except through established drainage courses.
   D.   Review, inspection, and approval procedures. Grading plans shall be
reviewed by the city engineer and building official with final approval by the
building official. In the event that the grading plan is submitted in
conjunction with a site plan submission, the plan commission shall review the
grading plan as a part of normal site plan review. The building official shall
issue a grading permit after the determination has been made that the
requirements set forth herein and in other applicable ordinances have been
complied with.
   For residential properties, compliance with a grading plan and permit shall
be verified by the building official after visual on-site inspection. The city
engineer shall be responsible for verifying compliance with grading plans and
permits for nonresidential uses. Before final inspection and issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, the rough grading must be completed; final grading
shall be completed within six (6) months after a Certificate of Occupancy has
been issued.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.11, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.12. - Lighting.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable
regulations to direct the location, design, illumination level and use of
outdoor lighting to minimize its undesirable effects. Specifically, this
section is intended to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of
the City by:
      1.   Creating well-maintained, vibrant and attractive residential and
business neighborhoods.
      2.   Supporting the Master Plan's various character areas such as Great
Neighborhoods, Main Street Michigan Avenue and Destination Commercial
Districts, as well as supporting the purposes and recommendations of various
area specific plans and special plans adopted in support of orderly development
of the City.
      3.   Maintaining safe night-time driver performance on public streets by
minimizing lighting glare.
      4.   Encouraging lighting that provides security but protects the privacy
of adjacent properties.
      5.   Allowing lighting that is not unduly intrusive or a nuisance to
nearby residents, property occupants, and drivers.
      6.   Eliminating artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily
contributes to sky glow and energy consumption.
   B.   Lighting plan. The following information shall be included for all site
plan reviews. Where site plan review is not required, one (1) or more of the
following items may be required by the Zoning Administrator prior to lighting
installation to verify compliance with this section:
      1.   A plan showing the location and type of all existing and proposed
light fixtures.
      2.   A photometric plan which includes lighting levels at ground level
based on no greater than a twenty-five (25) feet on-center grid and shall
project twenty-five (25) feet onto adjacent properties or to the setback limit
line, whichever is greater. Illumination levels shall also be measured for all
surrounding streets at the public right-of-way.
      3.   Manufacturer's specifications and cut-sheets for all proposed
lighting fixtures and lamps (bulbs), including mounting heights.
   C.   Site lighting. 
      1.   Type. All site lighting, including, but not limited to, free-
standing, canopy, pole, building mounted, window/window frame/window opening
mounted (visible from outside the building), and landscape, shall be fully
shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare and illumination.
      2.   Intensity. The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed ten
(10) foot-candles within any part of the site and one and one-half (1.5) foot-
candles at any lot line. Exceptions:
         a.   Where a site abuts or faces a residential zoning district or
residential use, a maximum of one-half (0.5) foot-candles is permitted at the
lot line of the site.
         b.   Approved outdoor sales areas and the areas under fuel station
canopies may have up to a maximum of twenty (20) foot-candles of illumination
within the interior of the site so long as they meet the applicable lighting
intensity limits listed above at the lot lines.
      3.   Uniformity ratios. In order to maintain uniformity in light levels
across a development and prevent or minimize dark areas, the ratio of maximum
to minimum lighting levels on a given lot is measured in foot-candles at ground
level, and shall not exceed a ratio of fifteen-to-one (15:1).
      4.   Height. Except as otherwise noted below or in this section, light
fixtures shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.
         a.   Fixtures for nonresidential uses that are located in a
residential zoning district or within two hundred (200) feet of such a district
shall not exceed the following light source to ground level height limits:
            i.   Twenty-two and one-half (22.5) feet, including a two and one-
half (2.5)-foot base, for parking lots.
            ii.   Twenty (20) feet for sidewalks and pathways.
         b.   Fixtures attached to ground poles for residential uses shall not
exceed eight (8) feet.
         c.   Fixtures in commercial or industrial zoning districts (not within
two hundred (200) feet of a residential zoning district): The Planning
Commission may, as part of a site plan review, permit fixtures up to the
maximum building height permitted in the district based upon a finding that the
proposed lighting configuration would not have negative off-site impacts.
      5.   Hours. All site lighting fixtures shall be turned off one (1) hour
after close of business, unless needed for safety and security (typically this
would be entrance, walkway and parking lot lighting). In such case, the
lighting shall be reduced to the minimum level necessary for that purpose.
      6.   Fixtures. 
         a.   All outdoor fixtures, including building mounted fixtures, shall
be full cut-off, shielded fixtures.
         b.   Poles for lighting fixtures shall be of a fixed height.
Adjustable poles are prohibited.
         c.   The Planning Commission may, as part of a site plan review,
approve decorative fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures based upon a
finding that there would be no off-site glare or illumination and that the
proposed fixtures will improve the appearance of the site.
   D.   Architectural lighting. When buildings and structures are to be
illuminated, the Zoning Administrator shall approve a design for illumination
using the following standards:
      1.   Direction of lights. Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located,
aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building façade.
Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets or properties,
and light shall not trespass onto surrounding properties.
      2.   Façade lighting. Lighting fixtures mounted on the building or in/
around windows and designed to "wash" the façade with light are permitted.
      3.   Accent lighting. 
         a.   Commercial zoning districts. Lighting may be allowed as an
architectural detail in commercial zoning districts, provided that exposed
bulbs shall be shielded. The Zoning Administrator may approve internally
illuminated architectural bands or similar shielded accents upon determining
that such accents would not cause off-site glare or light pollution and such
lighting is not used to the extent that it constitutes a sign.
         b.   Residential zoning districts. Lighting shall be prohibited in the
front yard of lots located in residential zoning districts unless it is a
temporary display. A temporary display is permitted for sixty (60) consecutive
days and must be disassembled and removed from the structure within that
timeframe.
      4.   Landscape lighting. The illumination of landscaping shall not
generate light levels and glare beyond the landscaping area.
   E.   Other lighting. 
      1.   Indirect illumination of signs, canopies, bollards and buildings is
permitted provided the resulting lighting does not violate other provisions of
this section related to maximum lighting levels within and at the lot line of
the site or any applicable sections of the sign ordinance.
      2.   Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall run underground, not
overhead.
      3.   The use of a laser light source, search lights or any similar high
intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited.
      4.   Lighting shall not consist of or have the appearance of movement or
flashing.
   F.   Exemptions. The following site lighting fixtures are exempt from the
provisions of this section:
      1.   Porch lights: Single or double bulb residential light fixtures
utilizing standardly configured light bulbs having a maximum output equivalent
to a one hundred fifty-(150)-watt incandescent light bulb. Such fixtures shall
not create glare onto adjacent properties and roadways so as to create a
nuisance or safety concern.
      2.   Streetlights located within a public right-of-way.
      3.   Lighting necessary for street and utility construction or
emergencies.
      4.   Lighting necessary for baseball, softball, football and soccer
fields, or similar uses that cannot reasonably comply with the standards and
provide sufficient illumination of the recreational field for safe use. The
fixtures shall be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the
primary playing or performance area. Lights shall be extinguished within one
(1) hour of the completion of the event.
      5.   Government facilities, parks and open areas, public utility
facilities, and uses where sensitive or dangerous materials are located may
submit a Site Security Plan to the Zoning Administrator requesting outdoor
lighting that deviates from the standards in this section. The Plan shall be
approved, or approved with conditions, upon finding:
         a.   The lighting is necessary for adequate protection of the public;
         b.   The condition, location, or use of the land, or history of
activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it
are in danger of theft or damage, or members of the public are at risk for
harm; and
         c.   The deviations from this section shall not have a adverse effect
on the neighboring areas.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.12, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 17-1566, 1-31-2017)
Sec. 2.13. - Dumping, filling and excavation.
   The dumping of waste or other materials, grading, excavating, filling, and
similar "earth changes" shall be subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Dumping of waste, junk, or similar materials. The use of land for the
storage, collection or accumulation of used construction materials, or for the
dumping or disposal of refuse, ash, garbage, rubbish, waste material or
industrial byproducts shall not be permitted in any district.
   B.   Excavation. The excavation or continued existence of unprotected holes,
pits, or wells which constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger
or menace to the public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. However,
this restriction shall not apply to excavations for which a permit has been
acquired, provided such excavations are properly protected with fencing, guard
rails, and warning signs. Excavations which may be permitted if proper permits
are acquired include excavation related to construction of a driveway, walk, a
permitted wall, or building or part thereof, or movement of soil within the
boundaries of a parcel for the purposes of preparing a site for building
construction or another permitted use.
   C.   Dumping of soil, sand, clay, gravel or similar material. The dumping or
filling with soil, sand, clay, gravel or similar earthen material (excluding
waste, junk, or contaminated material) on any lot or parcel of land shall not
occur unless the plans for such dumping or filling have first been reviewed and
appropriate permits issued by the building official. Land within a drainage
easement shall not be filled unless approved by the city engineer.
   D.   Removal of soil, sand or similar materials. Approval of the zoning
administrator shall be required prior to the removal of topsoil, sand, gravel,
or similar earthen material from any site in the City. A permit shall be issued
only upon finding that such removal will not cause stagnant water to collect or
leave the surface of the land in an unstable condition or unfit for the growing
of turf and other land uses permitted in the district in which the site is
located.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.13, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.14. - Trash removal and collection.
   Standards for siting and screening of trash dumpsters. Dumpsters may be
permitted or required as accessory to any use other than single- and two-family
residential uses, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Location. Dumpsters shall be permitted in the side and rear yard
provided that no dumpster shall extend closer to the front of the lot than any
portion of the principal structure, and provided further that the dumpster
shall not encroach on a required parking area, is clearly accessible to
servicing vehicles, and is enclosed within a building whenever practicable.
Dumpsters shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in which
they are located. Dumpsters shall be located as far as practicable from any
adjoining residential district.
   B.   Concrete pad. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad along with
the proper foundation as referenced in current Michigan Building Code. The
concrete pad should extend a minimum of ten feet in front of the dumpster
enclosure.
   C.   Screening. Dumpsters shall be screened from view from adjoining
property public streets and thoroughfares. Dumpsters shall be screened on three
(3) sides with a permanent building or decorative wall, not less than six (6)
feet in height or at least six (6) inches above the height of the enclosed
dumpster, whichever is taller. The fourth side of the dumpster screening shall
be equipped with an opaque lockable gate that is the same height as the
enclosure around the other three (3) sides. Plastic slats within chain link
fencing shall be prohibited.
   D.   Bollards. Bollards (concrete-filled metal posts) or similar protective
devices shall be installed as needed to prevent damage to the screening wall
and to limit the gate swing.
   E.   Site plan requirements. The location and method of screening of
dumpsters shall be shown on all site plans.
   F.   When a change of use (reoccupancy) generates additional volume or
changes the nature of trash, particularly food waste, or when trash on a site
is creating an on-going nuisance, the staff shall have the authority to deviate
from the above requirements in order to ensure that the goal of managing trash
and waste is carried out in such a way as to best serve public safety, health
and welfare. Such deviations shall be the minimum required to meet that goal
and shall not be granted in the case of new property developments. All such
deviations shall be approved by the Sanitation Division Superintendent, Senior
Planner, and Building Official in accordance with the standards set forth in
section
32.02E, 1 through 18 (standards for site plan approval).
(Ord. No. 92-885, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.14, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 04-
1012, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 15-1477, 9-22-2015)
Sec. 2.15. - Safety provisions.
   A.   Public service access. All structures shall be provided with adequate
access for fire, police, sanitation, and public works services.
   B.   Fire protection. All structures shall be provided with adequate fire
protection, including adequate water supply for firefighting purposes, adequate
internal fire suppression system, use of fire walls and fire-proof materials,
and other fire protection measures deemed necessary by the fire chief or
building official.
      1.   Fire protection systems. The fire chief or building official shall
have the authority to require fire protection systems installed in any zoning
district.
      2.   Site development standards. To facilitate fire protection during
site preparation and construction of buildings, consideration shall be given to
the following:
         (a)   Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed prior to
construction above the foundation. Hydrants shall be spaced to provide adequate
fire fighting protection for all buildings and uses, subject to applicable
codes and review by the city officials.
         (b)   Prior to construction of buildings and other large structures,
an improved roadbed shall be provided to accommodate access of heavy
firefighting equipment to the immediate job site at the start of construction.
The roadbed shall be maintained until all construction is completed or until
another means of access is constructed and be constructed in accordance with
the requirements of the fire department if so required.
         (c)   Free access from the street to fire hydrants and to outside
connections for standpipes, sprinklers, or other fire extinguishing equipment,
whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided and maintained at all times.
         (d)   The building permit holder shall provide scheduled cleanup of
scrap lumber, paper products, corrugated cardboard and other debris.
Construction debris shall be disposed of in accordance with methods approved by
the building official.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.15, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.16. - Exemptions.
   (A)   Essential services. Essential services, as defined in
Article 1.00, shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state, federal,
and local ordinances and laws, it being the intention hereof to exempt such
essential services from those regulations governing area, height, placement,
and use of land in the City which would not be practical or feasible to comply
with.
   Although exempt from certain regulations, proposals for construction of
essential services shall still be subject to site plan review, it being the
intention of the City to achieve efficient use of the land and alleviate
adverse impact on nearby uses or lands. Essential services shall comply with
all applicable regulations that do not affect the basic design or operation of
said services.
   B.   Exemptions to height standards. The height limitations of this
ordinance shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, public monuments,
wireless transmission towers, water towers, and flag poles, provided that the
following requirements are complied with:
      1.   Wind-driven energy devices. The maximum height of wind-driven energy
devices shall be thirty-five (35) feet, provided that the device is set back
from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the device. Such
devices shall be located in the rear yard of a residential district, and shall
be subject to the regulations in the City Code.
      2.   Antennas in residential districts. Private television antennas, pole
antennas, and other private communication antennas or towers shall be permitted
in residential districts as follows:
         (a)   Antennas with a wind-resistance surface of seven (7) square feet
or less shall be located in the rear yard or on a rooftop, provided that
freestanding antenna towers shall be set back from all property lines a
distance equal to the height of the tower. Such antennas shall comply with the
height standards for the district in which they are located, except as
hereinafter provided.
         (b)   Antennas with a wind-resistance surface of over seven (7) square
feet shall be located in the rear yard only, and shall be subject to the
setback and height standards for the district in which they are located. Any
such antenna shall be located to obscure its view from adjacent properties and
roads, to the maximum extent possible.
         (c)   Notwithstanding the above requirements, open element and
monopole antennas shall be permitted in residential districts, provided they do
not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
         (d)   Satellite dish antennas shall be subject to the regulations in
Section
2.21.
      3.   Antennas in nonresidential districts. Antennas with a wind-
resistance surface of seven (7) square feet or less shall be permitted on the
rooftop of any building or in the rear of a nonresidential district provided
that the antenna complies with the height standard for the district in which it
is located, and is obscured from view from adjacent properties and roads, to
the maximum extent possible. A freestanding antenna may be located in the side
yard if its visibility from adjacent properties is obscured.
      4.   Variances. Variances from height standards may be sought from the
zoning board of appeals. In considering such a request, the zoning board of
appeals shall consider, at minimum, the character of the surrounding uses, the
height of surrounding structures, the potential to obscure light or view to or
from existing buildings or surrounding properties, and potential detriment to
the use or value of surrounding properties.
   C.   City Facilities and Use of City-Owned Property.
      1.   The use of City-owned property is distinct from other land uses in
that the location of City facilities is driven by the objective of providing
efficient and equitable delivery of public services and amenities.
      2.   It is therefore the intention of this article to exempt City
facilities from zoning regulations when they would not be practical or feasible
to comply with or when they conflict with meeting a community need or benefit.
      3.   Although exempt from certain regulations, City facilities shall
comply with all applicable regulations that do not affect the basic design or
operation of said services, and shall be located and designed in a way that
alleviate adverse impacts on adjacent property.
      4.   City facilities are defined as land, buildings, or structures that
are owned and/or operated for a municipal purpose. City facilities include but
are not limited to: parks, recreation and community centers, libraries, fire
stations, service yards, and open space/green space.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.16, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 22-1746, § 2.16, 5-24-22)
Sec. 2.17. - Sidewalks.
   Sidewalks shall be subject to the requirements in Chapter 17, Article V, of
the City Code, and the following regulations:
   General requirements. 
      1.   Location and width. Required City sidewalks shall be five (5) feet
in width and shall be located one (1) foot off the property line in the road
right-of-way, except where the planned right-of-way is greater in width than
the existing right-of-way, in which case the sidewalk shall be located one (1)
foot inside the planned right-of-way. The plan commission may modify this
requirement in consideration of the location of utilities, existing
landscaping, or other site improvements in cases where site plan approval is
provided by the plan commission.
      2.   Design standards. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete in
accordance with established engineering standards for the City pursuant to
construction and maintenance of sidewalks.
      3.   Alignment with adjacent sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be aligned
horizontally and vertically with existing sidewalks on adjacent properties. The
plan commission may modify this requirement if existing adjacent sidewalks are
not constructed in conformance with the standards set forth herein.
      4.   Maintenance. The owner of the property which fronts on the sidewalk
shall be responsible for maintenance of the sidewalk, including patching
cracked or deteriorated pavement, snow removal, and removal of glass and other
debris. The property owner shall be liable for damages in the event that a
person is injured while using a sidewalk that said property owner has not
properly maintained.
      5.   Permits. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to
secure any required permits from City, county or State of Michigan agencies to
allow sidewalk construction in the road right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.17, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.18. - Performance guarantee.
   A.   Intent and scope of requirements. To insure compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and any conditions imposed thereunder, the City
may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the City to insure
faithful completion of improvements, in accordance with Section 4e of the City
or Village Zoning Act, Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended. Improvements for
which the City may require a performance guarantee include, but are not limited
to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and drainage.
   B.   General requirements. The performance guarantee shall meet the
following requirements:
      1.   The performance guarantee shall be in the form of a cash deposit,
certified check, surety bond, or performance bond which names the property
owner as the obligor and the City as the obligee.
      2.   The performance guarantee shall be submitted at the time of issuance
of the permit authorizing the activity or project. If appropriate based on the
type of performance guarantee submitted, the City shall deposit the funds in an
interest-bearing account in a financial institution with which the City
regularly conducts business.
      3.   The amount of the performance guarantee shall be sufficient to cover
the estimated cost of the improvements for which the performance guarantee is
required. The applicant shall provide an itemized schedule of estimated costs
to complete all such improvements. The exact amount of the performance
guarantee shall be determined by the zoning administrator.
      4.   The entire performance guarantee, including interest accrued, shall
be returned to the applicant following inspection by the building official and
a determination that the required improvements have been completed
satisfactorily. The performance guarantee may be released to the applicant in
proportion to the work completed on various elements, provided that a minimum
of ten percent shall be held back on each element until satisfactory completion
of the entire project.
   C.   Unsatisfactory completion of improvements. Whenever required
improvements are not installed or maintained within the time stipulated or in
accordance with the standards set forth in this ordinance, the City may
complete the necessary improvements itself or by contract to an independent
developer, and assess all costs of completing said improvements against the
performance bond or other surety, including any interest accrued on said bond
or surety. Prior to completing said improvements, the City shall notify the
owner, site plan review applicant, or other firm or individual responsible for
completion of the required improvements.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.18, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.19. - Reserved.
Sec. 2.20. - Concrete Zoning Compliance Certificate.
   Review and approval procedures. 
   Application for Zoning Compliance Certificate. Concrete shall be shown on
the site plan, which shall be reviewed in accordance with normal site plan
review procedures. In all cases, an application for a Zoning Compliance
Certificate to install concrete flatwork shall be filed with the building
official. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, along with
drawings or other information required by the building and safety department
which illustrate the dimensions and depths for the proposed concrete flatwork.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.20, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 95-626, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 02-920,
11-19-2002)
Sec. 2.21. - Satellite dish antennas.
   Satellite dish antennas may be permitted as an accessory structure in any
zoning district, subject to the provisions of Section
2.03 and to the following conditions:
   A.   Roof-mounted antennas. Roof-mounted dish antennas up to ten (10) feet
in diameter shall be permitted in commercial and industrial districts only,
provided that the antennas comply with the height standards for the district in
which they are located.
   B.   Ground-mounted antennas. Ground-mounted antennas up to eight (8) feet
in diameter shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Maximum height permitted shall be twelve (12) feet.
      2.   The satellite dish structure shall be securely mounted and anchored
to a pole and secured in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer
and the Building Code.
      3.   Any person who proposes to construct a satellite dish antenna having
a dish diameter larger than three (3) feet on any lot or parcel of land must
first obtain a permit from the building and safety department. The person
seeking the permit, if not the owner of the lot or parcel of land, must provide
evidence to the building and safety department that the owner of the lot or
parcel of land has no objection to its construction and assumes all liability
for its construction, operation and use.
      4.   The building and safety department shall issue a permit provided the
applicant complies with all the provisions of this ordinance and submits a
written application upon forms provided by the building and safety department,
along with a site plan showing the exact location and dimensions of the
proposed satellite dish and the proposed landscaping.
      5.   The applicant shall present any license or permit required by any
federal, state or local agency pertaining to the ownership, construction or
operation of a satellite dish antenna.
      6.   The applicant must comply with the provisions of City Ordinance,
Chapter 9, Licenses and Fees. The permit fee shall cover the costs of reviewing
the construction plans and specifications, inspecting the final construction
and processing the application.
      7.   Satellite dish antennas shall comply with setback requirements for
the district in which they are located, and shall not be permitted in front or
side yards.
      8.   All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground.
      9.   The surface of the dish shall be painted or treated as not to
reflect glare from sunlight, and shall not be used as any sign or message
board. All installations shall employ, to the extent possible, materials and
colors that blend the surroundings.
      10.   The site of the antenna shall be screened from view through the
planting of evergreens of sufficient concentration to reasonably conceal the
antenna. Alternative screening is acceptable if approved by the director of the
building and safety department.
      11.   Any ground-mounted antenna shall be so located and designed to
withstand a wind force of one hundred (100) miles per hour.
      12.   If a true hardship or practical difficulty exists on a particular
lot or parcel of land such that compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance is impossible because satellite sight lines are blocked, then a
variance may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals to the extent necessary
to permit reasonable reception, after consideration of the following factors
and standards:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause and exceptional hardship;
         (b)   The safety of the property owner and the surrounding property
owners;
         (c)   The variance shall be the minimum necessary to afford relief to
the applicant;
         (d)   "Reasonable reception", as used in this Section, does not mean
perfect reception from each satellite of the many satellites in space;
         (e)   Conditions may be attached to the granting of the variance which
are in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 2.21, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 2.22. - Emergency electrical generators.
   Emergency electrical generators ("generator") may be permitted as
projections into rear yards in residential districts subject to Section
2.09 and to the following conditions:
   A.   Location. The generator may be located only in the rear yard pursuant
to a site plan approved by the Residential Services Department. The generator
must be permanently located on its own concrete slab that is not used or
designed to be used for any purpose other than as a concrete slab for the
generator.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.png]
   B.   Use. The generator is to be used only in emergencies where the normal
power source to the residence has been disrupted. As soon as normal power has
been restored, the owner shall cease operation of the generator.
   C.   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Residential
Services Department prior to the commencement of any construction or
installation of a generator.
   D.   Final Inspection. As soon as construction or installation of a
generator has been completed, the property owner must obtain a final inspection
by the city to ensure compliance with all terms and conditions of this article,
and the generator shall not be used prior to receiving final inspection
approval.
   E.   Fuels. Acceptable fuels include natural gas, propane, gasoline or
diesel. Connections made to a natural gas line of a residence must be in
accordance with all applicable building codes. Other fuel sources must meet all
state and local code requirements.
   F.   Maintenance. Property owners are responsible for keeping the generator
within all applicable code requirements. Automatic maintenance exercise testing
is limited to not more than fifteen (15) minutes each week, Monday-Friday,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
   G.   Noise. All generators shall comply with the residential decibel level
standards set forth in Dearborn Zoning Ordinance Section
8.02, including during the automatic maintenance exercise test, except that a
generator in a rear yard used during an emergency pursuant to subsection B of
this section will not be subject to the decibel regulations during the
emergency.
(Ord. No. 11-1307, 1-4-2011)
ARTICLE 3.00 - NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 3.01. - Intent.
   Nonconformities are uses, structures, buildings, or lots which do not
conform to one or more provisions or requirements of this ordinance or a
subsequent amendment, but which were lawfully established prior to the time of
adoption of the ordinance or amendment. Such nonconformities are not compatible
with the current or intended use of land in the district in which they are
located. Therefore, it is the intent of this ordinance to permit such
nonconformities to continue under certain conditions, but to discourage their
expansion, enlargement, or extension. Accordingly, the purpose of this section
is to establish regulations that govern the completion, restoration,
reconstruction, extension, and/or substitution of nonconformities, and to
specify the circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities shall be
permitted to continue.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.02. - General requirements.
   A.   Continuation of nonconforming uses and structures. Any lawful
nonconformities established on or before the effective date of this ordinance
or subsequent amendment may be continued and shall not be considered to be in
violation of this ordinance, provided that, unless otherwise noted in this
Article, the building and land involved shall neither be structurally altered,
nor enlarged unless such modifications conform to the provisions of this
ordinance for the district in which it is located. Nothing in this ordinance
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged
with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
   B.   Buildings under construction. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this
ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in plans, construction, or
designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon
which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual
construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials
in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or
removal of an existing structure has begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
such work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
   C.   Recording of nonconforming uses and structures. The city shall be
responsible for maintaining records of nonconforming uses and structures as
accurate as is feasible, and for determining legal nonconforming uses and
structures in existence on the effective date of this ordinance. Failure on the
part of a property owner to provide the city with necessary information to
determine legal nonconforming status may result in denial of required or
requested permits.
   D.   Establishment of a conforming use or structure. In the event that a
nonconforming principal use or structure is superseded by a conforming
principal use or structure on a site, the nonconforming use or structure shall
be immediately and permanently removed.
   E.   A change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing
nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises shall not alter the
nonconforming status of a nonconforming building, structure, use, or lot,
provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming
uses.
   F.   Exceptions and variances. Any use for which a special exception or
variance has been granted as provided in this ordinance shall not be deemed a
nonconformity.
   G.   Unlawful nonconformities. No nonconformity shall be permitted to
continue in existence if it was unlawful at the time it was established.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.03. - Nonconforming lots of record.
   The following regulations shall apply to any nonconforming lot of record or
nonconforming lot described in a deed or land contract executed and delivered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto:
   A.   Use of nonconforming lots. Any lot of record existing at the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that now fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district shall be considered a nonconforming lot. A principal building and
customary accessory buildings for a permitted use may be erected on any
nonconforming lot of record, provided all other standards are met, such as
setbacks, minimum floor area, maximum height and access requirements.
   B.   Variance from area and bulk requirements. If the use of a nonconforming
lot requires a deviation from the area or bulk requirements, then such use
shall be permitted only if a variance is granted by the zoning board of
appeals.
   C.   Nonconforming contiguous lots under the same ownership. If two (2) or
more lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontage in single ownership
are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, and if
all or part of the individual lots do not meet the requirements established for
lot width and area, the lots involved shall be considered to be an individual
parcel for the purposes of this ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be
used, occupied, or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width
and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of
a parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area less than the
requirements stated in this ordinance. These provisions shall not apply to
contiguous lots in single ownership where each of the lots is occupied by a
dwelling unit.
   D.   Combination of nonconforming lots. Upon application to the city
planner, they may permit the combination, in whole or in part, of nonconforming
lots of record into building sites less than the size requirements established
by this ordinance, provided that the combination of lots reduces the degree of
nonconformity and results in a parcel which is capable of accommodating a
structure that is in conformance with the building area, setback, and side yard
requirements of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.04. - Nonconforming uses.
   Where, at the effective date of this Article or amendment thereto, lawful
use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the provisions of
this Article as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations outlined within this
section of the ordinance.
   A.   Applicability. The following regulations shall apply to any
nonconforming use includes nonconforming uses of open land and nonconforming
uses operating within existing buildings and structures.
   B.   Increase in nonconformity prohibited. Except as specifically provided
in this section, a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, or
extended to occupy a greater area of land. A nonconforming use shall not be
permitted to make any physical modifications to a building, structure, or
property that results in the use operating in a more intensive manner.
   C.   Permitted improvements. On any structure devoted in whole or in part to
any nonconforming use, work may be done to an extent not exceeding fifty (50)
percent of the estimated value of the structure, as determined by the most
recent assessment of the market value of the structure for purposes of
taxation, provided that the gross floor area of the structure is not increased.
   D.   Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if
one (1) or more of the following conditions exist, and which shall be deemed to
constitute an intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the
nonconforming use:
      1.   Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property, have
been disconnected.
      2.   The property, buildings, or grounds have fallen into disrepair.
      3.   Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming use
have been removed.
      4.   Removal of equipment or fixtures which are necessary for the
operation of the nonconforming use.
      5.   Other actions, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, constitute
an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the
nonconforming use.
   E.   Substitution. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming
use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that the Planning Commission, either by general rule
or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is
equally appropriate or more appropriate in the district than the existing
nonconforming use; in permitting such change, the Planning Commission may
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and
intent of this ordinance.
   F.   Those alleged nonconforming uses which cannot be proved to have been
lawfully established shall be declared illegal and shall be discontinued
following the effective date of this section.
   G.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.05. - Modification to nonconforming single-family residential
structures.
   A.   Intent. It is hereby the intent of the City of Dearborn to classify
single-family homes with nonconforming setbacks as a benign nonconformity. As
such, the city will permit additional flexibility for existing single-family
homes that do not meet current setback requirements in order to encourage
continued improvement and maintenance of Dearborn’s housing stock.
   B.   Expansion of Nonconforming Residential Structures. Existing single-
family residential structures may be permitted to extend upward and/or along an
existing nonconforming side or rear setback subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The proposal does not result in an enlargement of an existing
dimensional nonconformity (i.e. the degree of nonconformity cannot be further
increased).
      2.   The proposal is compliant with all other ordinance requirements,
including but not limited to, those outlined in Article
29.00 and section
2.05.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.06. - Modification to nonconforming structures or sites.
   No nonconforming structure or site shall be enlarged, extended, or
structurally altered, nor shall any nonconformity be changed to a different
nonconformity which increases the intensity of use or nonconformity, except as
specifically permitted by the following regulations.
   A.   Increase in nonconformity prohibited. Except as specifically provided
in this section, no person may engage in any activity that causes an increase
in the extent of any nonconformity including but not limited to:
      1.   Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions, such
as setback requirements, height limitations, density requirements, or other
requirements in the district in which the property is located.
      2.   Greater nonconformity with respect to site requirements, such as
landscaping, paving, screening, or other requirements that apply to how a
property is developed.
   B.   Required repairs. Repairs or maintenance deemed necessary by the
building official to keep a nonconforming building structurally safe and sound
are permitted.
   C.   Alterations that decrease nonconformity. Any nonconforming structure or
site may be altered if such alteration serves to decrease the nonconforming
nature, subject to the limitations in Section
3.06.D. below.
   D.   Additional permitted improvements. Additional repairs, improvements, or
modernization of nonconforming structures or sites, beyond what is required to
maintain the safety and soundness of a structure, shall not result in any of
the following conditions:
      1.   Enlargement of any existing dimensional nonconformity (construction
of a building addition along an existing nonconforming setback line is
prohibited, any addition shall not be placed within the required setback).
      2.   Expansion of a nonconforming use.
      3.   Creation of any new nonconformity.
      4.   An increase in gross floor area (excluding basements) of more than
thirty-eight (38) percent.
      5.   Expansion of a structure or use that is nonconforming per the
parking requirements in Article 4 unless the new parking requirement is met.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.07.   Damage by fire or other catastrophe.
   Any nonconforming structure or structure housing a nonconforming use that is
damaged by fire, flood, or other means in excess of fifty (50) percent of the
structure's precatastrophe fair market value (as determined by the city
assessor) shall not be rebuilt, repaired, or reconstructed, except in complete
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. In the event that the damage
is less than fifty (50) percent of the structure's precatastrophe fair market
value, the structure may be restored to its precatastrophe status. Such
restoration shall take place only upon approval of the director of building and
safety and in full compliance shall be completed within one (1) year from the
date of catastrophe.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 3.08.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them:
      Effective date. Whenever this Article refers to the "effective date," the
reference shall be deemed to include the effective date of any amendments to
this ordinance if the amendments created a nonconforming situation.
      Nonconforming building. A building or portion thereof which was lawfully
in existence at the effective date of this ordinance, February 11, 1993, or
amendments thereto, that does not meet the limitations on building size,
location on a lot, or other regulations for the district in which such building
is located.
      Nonconforming lot. A lot which was lawfully in existence at the effective
date of this ordinance, February 11, 1993, or amendments thereto, that does not
meet the minimum area or lot dimensional requirements of the district in which
the lot is located.
      Nonconforming sign. A sign which was lawfully in existence on the
effective date of this ordinance, February 11, 1993, or amendments thereto,
that does not conform to one (1) or more regulations set forth in the
ordinance.
      Nonconforming use. A use which was lawfully in existence at the effective
date of this ordinance, February 11, 1993, or amendment thereto, and which does
not now conform to the use regulations of this ordinance for the zoning
district in which it is now located.
      Structural nonconformity. A nonconformity that exists when the height,
size, or minimum floor space of a structure, or the relationship between an
existing building and other buildings or lot lines, does not conform to the
standards of the district in which the property is located. Also sometimes
referred to as a dimensional nonconformity.
(Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)
ARTICLE 4.00 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 4.01. - Off-street parking requirements.
   A.   Scope of off-street parking requirements. Compliance with the off-
street parking regulations shall be required as follows:
      1.   General applicability. For all buildings and uses established after
the effective date of this ordinance, Feb. 11, 1993, off-street parking shall
be provided as required in this Section. However, where a building permit has
been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance and construction has
been diligently carried on, compliance with the parking requirements at the
time of issuance of the building permit shall be required.
      2.   Change in use or intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure,
or lot is changed, parking facilities shall be provided as required by this
ordinance for the new use, regardless of any variance which may have been in
effect prior to change of use.
   If the intensity of use of any building, structure, or lot is increased
through the addition of dwelling units, increase in floor area, increase in
seating capacity, or through other means, additional off-street parking shall
be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
      3.   Existing parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities in
existence on the effective date of this ordinance, Feb. 11, 1993, shall not
thereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further
reduced below the requirements for the use being served as set forth in this
ordinance.
   An area designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to
any other use unless equal facilities are provided elsewhere in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance.
      4.   Additional off-street parking. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
deemed to prevent voluntary establishment of off-street parking facilities to
serve an existing use of land or buildings, or to prevent provision of
additional parking facilities beyond what is required by the ordinance,
provided all such parking conforms with the regulations herein.
   B.   General requirements. In all zoning districts, off-street vehicle
parking facilities shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed:
      1.   Location. 
   (a)   Proximity to building or use being served. Except as otherwise
permitted for collective use of off-street parking, off-street parking shall be
under the same ownership and located on the same lot or parcel as the building
or within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve,
measured from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of
the parking.
      1.   Collective/Shared Parking. Required parking may be located on a lot
or parcel that is under different ownership from the building it serves or is
not contiguous to the building site, if a written easement that provides for
continued use and maintenance of the parking is filed with the Wayne County
Register of Deeds and a copy is submitted to the City Planner, PMDS, and
Corporation Counsel. Both the grantor and the grantee of the easement are
required to comply with the parking requirements of this section. If the
parking easement is terminated, the grantee's Certificate of Occupancy shall be
automatically revoked. The grantor and grantee are required to notify the City
within ten (10) days of a parking easement termination.
   (b)   Within yards. Off-street parking in commercial and office districts
may be located in a front, side, or rear yard, provided that all landscaping
and berm requirements in
Article 5.00 are met, and provided further that off-street parking shall not be
permitted within twenty (20) feet of a parcel zoned or used for residential
purposes, nor within twenty (20) feet of the traveled portion of any road
right-of-way, unless screening is provided according to
Article 6.00. In cases where the lot or parcel has a depth of 120 feet or less
the following exceptions shall apply:
      1.   Off-street parking may be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the
traveled portion of any road right-of-way so long as one of the following
alternatives is used to separate and screen the parking from the road:
         a.   A curbed landscape island or planter with a minimum depth of five
(5) feet is provided between the parking and the road right-of-way; or
         b.   A three (3) foot tall decorative fence or wall is provided
between the parking and the road right-of-way, with an appropriate setback for
access to the parking. The fence or wall shall be designed to be compatible and
complimentary to the buildings on the site and on the surrounding sites.
   Off-street parking in multiple-family and industrial districts may be
located in a side or rear yard or non-required front yard, provided that all
landscaping and berm requirements in
Article 5.00 are complied with, and provided further that off-street parking
serving an industrial use shall not be permitted within twenty (20) feet of a
residential district.
      2.   Residential parking. When thirty (30) foot to thirty-five (35) foot
width lots were platted in the City, typically, residents had no more than one
(1) car per single-family residence and many residents used streetcars or buses
as their sole means of transportation. On thirty (30) foot to thirty-five (35)
foot width lots, problems have arisen because of the number of motor vehicles
currently utilized per family and the lack of places to park them. Therefore,
it is imperative that when new homes are constructed adequate off-street
parking be provided. Off-street parking spaces for new construction in Single-
Family Residential Districts shall consist of a driveway and a garage, shall
allow for two (2) cars to be parked side by side and shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve. Off-street parking spaces for existing
homes in Single-Family Residential Districts shall consist of a parking strip,
driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the premises
they are intended to serve. No parking shall be permitted on lawns or other
unpaved areas on residential lots, with the exception of approved parking
areas.
      3.   Control of off-street parking. It shall be unlawful to park or store
commercial or recreational vehicles or offer for sale any motor vehicle or
recreational vehicle on private property. Where required parking is permitted
on land other than on the same lot as the building or use being served, the
land on which the parking is located shall be under the same ownership and
control as the lot occupied by said building or use.
      4.   Access to parking. Each off-street parking space for new
construction shall open directly onto an aisle or driveway of sufficient width
and design as to provide safe and efficient access to or from a public street
in a manner that will least interfere with the smooth flow of traffic. Access
to off-street parking which serves a non-residential use shall not be permitted
across land that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
      5.   Collective use of off-street parking. Off-street parking for
separate buildings or uses may be provided collectively subject to the
following:
         (a)   The total number of spaces provided collectively shall not be
less than the sum of spaces required for each separate use. However, in the
case of a site plan for development within the Planned Unit Development Mixed
Use District, the plan commission may reduce the total number of required
spaces by up to forty (40) percent upon making the determination that the
parking demands of the uses will be met. In other nonresidential districts, the
zoning board of appeals upon recommendation of the Plan Commission may modify
the total number of required spaces for a use by up to forty (40) percent upon
making the determination that the parking demands of the uses being served do
not overlap.
         (b)   The collective off-street parking shall not be located farther
than three hundred (300) feet from the building or use being served without
crossing a major thoroughfare.
         (c)   An easement or other formal written agreement assuring the
continuing joint usage of said common parking for the combination of uses or
buildings must be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned and
submitted to the city planner and city attorney for approval.
      6.   Storage, sale and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise,
sale of motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles
are prohibited in required off-street parking lots or areas. Emergency service
shall be permitted.
      7.   Duration. Except when land is used as permitted storage space in
direct connection with a legitimate business, a forty-eight (48) hour time
limit for parking in nonresidential off-street parking areas shall prevail,
provided that it shall be unlawful to permit the storage of wrecked,
inoperable, unlicensed, or junked vehicles in any parking area in any district
for any period of time.
      8.   Parking structures. Parking structures shall be permitted subject to
the following standards:
         (a)   Any parking structure shall comply with the required setbacks
for the district in which it is located.
         (b)   Parking structures shall be designed as integral elements of the
overall site plan, taking into account the relationship to the principal
building and other structures on the site.
         (c)   The facade of the parking structure shall be compatible in
design, color, and type of material to the principal building(s) on the site
and comply with
Article 5.00.
         (d)   Landscaping shall be placed around the parking structure in
accordance with an approved landscape plan. Such landscaping shall be
compatible with the overall landscape plan for the entire site.
   C.   Minimum number of spaces required. The following standards shall be
used in determining the required number of parking spaces:
      1.   Definition of floor area. For the purposes of determining the
required number of parking spaces, "floor area" shall be measured in accordance
with the definitions provided in
Article 1.00.
      2.   Units of measurement.   
         (a)   Fractional spaces. When calculations for determining the
required number of parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction
of less than one-half (½) is disregarded, while a fraction of one-half (½) or
more shall be counted as one (1) full space.
         (b)   Employee parking. Parking spaces required for employees shall be
based on the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one (1) time.
      3.   Uses not cited. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street parking for the most similar use stated shall be
determined by the City Planner.
      4.   Parking during construction. Temporary off-street parking shall be
provided for workers during construction at a rate of one space per employee.
Temporary gravel surfacing may be permitted for such temporary parking subject
to approval of the director of building and safety and city engineer. Temporary
parking areas must be abandoned and returned to an acceptable state in
accordance with the approved site plan prior to the issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy.
      5.   Parking for the physically handicapped. Each parking lot that serves
a building, except single- and two-family dwelling units, shall have a number
of level parking spaces, identified by an above-grade sign placed six (6) feet
above grade which indicates the spaces are reserved for physically handicapped
persons. Parking for the handicapped shall comply with the State of Michigan
Barrier-Free Rules, Michigan Public Act No. 1 of 1966, as amended, and the
adopted City Building Code. The number of barrier-free spaces required is as
follows:
Total Parking In Lot Required Number of
                     Barrier-Free Spaces*
Total Parking In Lot Required Number of
                     Barrier-Free Spaces*
Up to 25             1
26 to 50             2
51 to 75             3
76 to 100            4
101 to 150           5
151 to 200           6
201 to 300           7
301 to 400           8
401 to 500           9
501 to 1,000         2% of total
Over 1,000           20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
 
* City of Dearborn Ord. Section
18-726.
      6.   Use of loading space. Required loading space shall not be counted or
used for parking requirements.
      7.   Modification of minimum requirements. In the case of a site plan for
development within the Planned Unit Development District, the plan commission
may modify a numerical standard for off-street parking. In other nonresidential
districts, the zoning board of appeals may reduce a standard for a particular
site, based upon evidence that another standard would be more reasonable
considering the level of current or future employment and/or level of current
or future customer traffic.
      8.   Cumulative nature of parking requirements. If two (2) or more uses
share a common parking area, or if approved multiple uses exist within a single
building or site, the required minimum requirement shall be the sum of the
required spaces for each individual use.
      9.   Minimum number of spaces for each use. The amount of required off-
street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the schedule which
follows.
      10.   Credit for public parking. Where public parking lots directly abut
or are within one hundred (100) feet of a site proposed for occupancy, such
public parking areas may be credited to the amount of off-street parking
required by this ordinance, provided no other land use has claimed credit for
the same public park lot.
   SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
Land Use Required No. of  Per Each Unit of
         Parking Spaces   Measure as Follows
Land Use                                   Required No. of   Per Each Unit of
                                           Parking Spaces    Measure as Follows
(A)  RESIDENTIAL USES
(1)  Single Residential Dwellings          2.0               Dwelling unit (may
                                                             be in garage)
                                                             Efficiency unit,
         Multiple-Family Housing and       1.0               PLUS
(2)  (a) Attached Single-Family Housing    1.5               1 bedroom unit,
         Developments                      2.0               PLUS
                                                             2 bedroom unit or
                                                             larger unit
     In addition, multiple-family and attached single-family developments shall
     be required to provide supplemental guest off-street parking equal to at
     least twenty percent (20%) of the spaces required by the above standards.
     (b) Two-Family                        2.0               Dwelling Unit
(3)  Senior Apartments - Use same standards as for multiple-family housing.
     Housing for Elderly:                  0.5               Dwelling unit,
(4)  Elderly Housing Complex, Congregate   1.0               PLUS
     Housing, Dependent Housing Facilities                   Employee
(5)  Child Care Organizations              1.0               400 sq. ft. of GFA
     Should units revert to general occupancy, the requirements for multiple-
     family housing shall be complied with.
(B)  INSTITUTIONAL OR PUBLIC USES
(1)  Churches, Temples, and                THE GREATER OF:
                                                             Seat,
                                         0.3                 
                                         OR                6 lineal ft. of
     Places of Worship                     1.0               pews in the main
                                                             hall.
                                                             Teacher,
                                           1.0               administrator, or
(2)  Child Care Centers                                    other employee,
                                           1.0               PLUS
                                                             400 sq. ft. of
                                                             usable floor area
     In addition, sufficient area shall be set aside for dropping-off and
     picking-up children in a safe manner that will not result in traffic
     disruption.
                                                             Person who may
                                           0.5               legally occupy the
                                                           premises at one
(3)  Fraternities, Dormitories                             time, based on the
                                                           occupancy load of
                                           1.0               local codes, Plus
                                                             Per Employee
                                                             Bed, PLUS
                                           1.0               150 sq. ft. of
                                           1.0               usable floor area
(4)  Hospitals, Sanitariums                                occupied by
                                                           outpatient
                                           1.0               services, PLUS
                                                             Per employee
     Homes for the Aged,                   0.5               Bed, PLUS
(5)  Convalescent Homes, and               1.0               Per Employee
     Children's Homes
                                           1.0               300 sq. ft. of
(6)  Museum, Library, Cultural                             usable floor
     Center, or Similar Facility           1.0               space, PLUS
                                                             Employee
(7)  Public Utility Use                    1.0               Employee
(8)  School, Elementary and Junior High    2.0               Classroom
     In addition, additional spaces shall be provided as required for any
     auditorium or public meeting space. If no auditorium or public meeting
     space exists, then 1.0 space per classroom shall be provided in addition
     to required spaces for teachers, administrators, and other employees.
                                                             Teacher,
                                                             administrator, or
                                                             other employee,
                                                             PLUS
                                           1.0               Student who may
(9)  School, Senior High                                   legally occupy the
                                           0.2               school at one
                                                             time, based on the
                                                             occupancy load
                                                             established by
                                                             local codes
                                                             Every 3 employees
                                           1.0               and members of the
(9a) Colleges and Universities                             staff,
     PLUS                                  1.0               Every 3 full-time
                                                             students not
                                                             residing on campus
     In addition, additional spaces shall be provided as required for any
     auditorium, stadium, or other public meeting spaces.
                                           THE GREATER OF:     
                                           0.3               Seat, OR
(10) Stadiums, Sports Arenas               1.0               6 lineal fee of
                                           1.0               benches, PLUS
                                                             Employee
                                           THE GREATER OF:     
     Theaters and Auditoriums              0.3               Seat,
(11) with Fixed Seating                    OR                  
                                           1.0               6 lineal feet of
                                                             benches
                                                             Person who may be
                                           0.3               legally admitted
                                                           at one time based
(12) Theaters and Auditoriums,                             on the occupancy
     without Fixed Seating                                 load established
                                           1.0               by local code,
                                                             PLUS
                                                             Employee
(C)  BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL USES
                                           1.0               400 sq. ft. of
(1)  Animal Hospitals and                                  usable floor
     Commercial Kennels                    1.0               area, PLUS
                                                             Employee
                                                             Employee, PLUS
     Auto and Vehicle Repair or            1.0               Service or repair
(2)  Service Facilities, Bump Shop         3.0               bay, PLUS
                                           1.0               800 sq. ft. of
                                                             usable floor area
     Each service or repair bay shall count as are space.
                                           1.5               Fuel pump station
     Auto or Vehicle Service/                                
(3)  Filling Station                       2.0               Service or repair
                                           1.0               bay, PLUS
                                                             Employee
     In addition, off-street parking shall be provided for convenience stores
     and other uses operated in conjunction with an auto service station, based
     on the standards set forth herein.
                                           5.0               Per wash lane,
(4)  Auto Wash, Automatic                  15.0 stacking     PLUS
                                           spaces            Per wash lane
                                                             Washing stall in
                                           3.0 stacking      addition to the
(5)  Auto Wash, Self Service                               spaces stall
                                           2.0 drying spaces itself, PLUS
                                                             Washing stall
(6)  Banks, Financial Institutions         1.0               150 sq. ft. of
                                                             usable floor area
     In addition, financial institutions with drive-in windows shall provide 6
     stacking spaces for each window.
(7)  Barber/Beauty Shops                   6.0               1,000 sq. ft. of
                                                             gross floor area
(7a) Beauty School                         1.0               75 sq. ft. of
                                                             gross floor area
     Each separate chair, dryer, tanning beech, wash basin, work station, etc.
     shall be considered a station.
                                                               
                                                             Person who may be
                                           THE GREATER OF:   legally admitted
                                           0.5               at one time based
     Dining Halls, Exhibition                              on the occupancy
(8)  Halls, Assembly Halls                                 load established
     without Seats                                         by local codes,
                                           1.0               PLUS
                                           OR                Employee
                                           1.0                 
                                                             100 sq. ft. of
                                                             usable floor area
                                                             150 sq. ft. of
                                                             usable floor area
(9)  Dry Cleaning Pick-Up Station          1.0               or a minimum of 10
                                                             spaces, whichever
                                                             is greater
(10) Furniture and Appliance Sales         1.0               600 sq. ft. of
     Household Equipment Repair Shops                        usable floor area
     Hotel, Motel, or Other                1.0               Occupancy unit,
(11) Lodging                               1.0               PLUS
                                                             Employee
     In addition, spaces shall be provided as required for restaurants, bars,
     assembly rooms, and other affiliated uses.
     Laundromats and Coin-Operated                           Washing and/or
(12) Cleaners                              0.5               dry-cleaning dry
                                                             machine
(13) Lumber Yard                           2.5               Employee
     In addition, additional spaces shall be provided as required for enclosed
     retail space.
                                                             10 storage units,
                                                             equally
                                           1.0               distributed
                                                           throughout the
                                                           storage area,
(14) Mini-Warehouses, Self-Storage                         PLUS
     Establishments                        2.0               Manager's or
                                                           caretaker's
                                           1.0               quarters, PLUS
                                                             50 storage units
                                                             located at the
                                                             project office
                                                             50 sq. ft. of
(15) Mortuaries, Funeral Homes             1.0               floor area in the
                                                             parlor area
(16) Reserved
                                                             200 sq. ft. of
                                                             usable floor area
                                           1.0               exclusive of
                                                           service areas,
(17) Motor Vehicle Sales (New)             3.0               PLUS
                                                           Auto service stall
                                           1.0               in the
                                                             service area, PLUS

                                                             Employee
     Each service stall shall count as are space. All parking required above
     shall be exclusive from parking for vehicles being offered for sale.
(18) Motor Vehicle Sales (Used)            2.5               Per employee
                                                             150 sq. ft. of
(19) Open Air Business                     1.0               land area being
                                                             used for display
     In addition, spaces shall be provided for as required for retail sales
     within a building.
                                                             300 sq. ft. of
                                           1.0               usable floor area,
(20) Personal Service                        
     Establishments                        1.0               Not Otherwise
                                                             Specified PLUS
                                                             Employee
(21) Radio, Cable or Television            1.5               Employee
     Station or Studio
(22) Standard Restaurants, Bar/Lounge/     1.0               90 sq. ft. of GFA
     Tavern, and Cafes
     Parking for that portion used principally for dining shall be based on the
     requirements for "Restaurants, Standard."
(23) Restaurants, Carry-Out                1.0               180 sq. ft. of GFA
                                           1.0
                                           12.0              90 sq. ft. of GFA,
(24) Restaurants, Fast-Food                stacking spaces   PLUS
     Drive-In, Drive-Through               (5                per drive-through
                                           minimum before    window
                                           order speaker)
     Shopping Centers under 15,000 sq.
(25) ft., and Retail Stores and Services   1.0               200 sq. ft. of GFA
     Not Otherwise Specified
(26) Shopping Centers 15,000—300,000 sq. 1.0               220 sq. ft. GFA
     ft.
(27) Shopping Centers over 300,000 sq. ft. 1.0               300 sq. ft. GFA
     The parking requirements for restaurants located in a shopping center
     shall be computed separately and added to the parking requirements for the
     other uses.
     Wholesale Sales Stores,               1.0               1,000 sq. ft. of
(28) Showroom of a Plumber,                                usable floor
     Electrician, or Similar Trade         1.0               area, Sales, PLUS
                                                             Employee
                                                             10 RV storage
                                           1.0               spaces, PLUS
(29) Recreational Vehicle Storage Facility 2.0               Manager's or
                                                             caretaker's
                                                             quarters
(30) Food Truck Park                       1.0               180 sq. ft. of
                                                             dining areas
(D)  OFFICE USES
(1)  Business and Professional Offices,    1.0               300 sq. ft. of GFA
     except as Otherwise Specified
(2)  Medical Offices                       1.0               180 sq. ft. of GFA
(E)  INDUSTRIAL USES
(1)  Contractor or Construction Use        3.0               Employee
     Manufacturing Establishments,
     Commissary Kitchens or Establishments                   750 sq. ft. of
     for Industrial production,                              gross floor area,
(2)  Processing, Assembly, Research,       1.0               or per employee,
     Compounding, Preparation, Cleaning,   0.5               whichever is
     Servicing, Testing, Repair, plus                        greater
     Accessory Business Offices and
     Storage Facilities
(3)  Wholesale and Warehouse               1.0               1.500 sq. ft. of
     Establishments                                          gross floor area
(F)  RECREATIONAL USES (Public and Private)
(1)  Arcades                               2.0               Machine, PLUS
                                           1.0               Employee
(2)  Archery Facilities                    2.0               Target
(3)  Softball, Baseball Fields             25.0              Playing field
(4)  BMX Course                            50.0              Course
(5)  Bowling Establishments                5.0               Lane
     Additional spaces shall be provided as required for restaurants, bars, and
     other affiliated uses.
                                                             Person who may be
                                           0.5               legally admitted
     Dance Halls, Health Spas, Skating                     at one time based
(6)  Rinks, Personal Fitness Center and                    on the occupancy
     Similar Indoor Recreation Uses                        load of local
                                           1.0               codes, PLUS
                                                             Employee
(7)  Football and Soccer Fields            30.0              Field
(8)  Golf Course, Public or                6.0               Golf hole, PLUS
     Private                               1.0               Employee
     Additional spaces shall be provided as required for clubhouse, restaurant,
     pro shop, or other affiliated facilities.
(9)  Golf Course, Miniature                3.0               Golf hole, PLUS
     or Par 3                              1.0               Employee
     Additional spaces shall be provided as required for clubhouse, restaurant,
     pro shop, or other affiliated facilities.
(10) Golf Driving Range                    1.0               Tee
(11) Pools Rooms                           3.0               Table
                                                             Persons who may be
                                           0.5               legally admitted
                                                           at one time based
(12) Private Clubs and Lodges                              on the occupancy
                                                           load of local
                                           1.0               codes, PLUS
                                                             Employee
                                           THE GREATER OF:     
     Stadium, Sports Arena, or             0.3               Seat,
(13) Similar Assembly Space                OR                  
     with Fixed Seating                    1.0               6 lineal feet of
                                                             benches
                                                             Person who may be
                                           0.3               legally admitted
     Swimming Pool Clubs,                                  at one time based
(14) Swimming Pools                                        on occupancy load
                                                           established by
                                           1.0               local code, PLUS
                                                             Employee
                                                             Person permitted
     Tennis Clubs and Court-               1.0               based on the
(15) Type Recreation Uses                                  capacity of the
                                           1.0               courts, PLUS
                                                             Employee
     Additional spaces shall be provided as required for restaurants, bars, pro
     shops, and other affiliated facilities.
 
   D.   Layout and construction. All off-street parking facilities containing
four (4) or more spaces, except those serving single-family residences, shall
be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Review and approval requirements. Plans for the construction of any
parking lot in conjunction with a new development shall be submitted for review
and approval according to the normal site plan review procedures. Plan for
expansion of an existing parking lot that is not associated with other new
development shall be submitted to the director of building and safety for
review and approval prior to the start of construction. Upon completion of
construction, a parking lot must be inspected and approved before a Certificate
of Occupancy can be issued for the parking lot and for the building or use the
parking is intended to serve.
   Plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet equal to
one (1) inch. Plans shall include typical pavement cross-sections and indicate
existing and proposed grades, drainage, water mains and sewers, surfacing and
base materials, and the proposed parking layout. The plans shall conform to the
construction and design standards established by the director of the department
of public works.
   In the event that required parking cannot be constructed because of cold or
inclement weather, a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the
director of building and safety provided the applicant first deposits a
performance guarantee in accordance with
Article 8.00.
      2.   Dimensions. Off-street parking shall be designed to conform with the
following standards:
   MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE STANDARD (All Dimensions in Feet)
 
Angle      Maneuvering Aisle  Parking Space  Stall Depth
           Width              Width          to Wall
0 degrees  14.0               23.0           9.0
(parallel) (Note 3)           (Note 1)
Up to 53° 14.0               9.0            20.0
           (Note 3)           (Note 2)
54 to 74° 16.0               9.0            20.0
           (Note 3)           (Note 2)
75 to 90° 20.0               9.0            20.0
           (Note 3)
 
   FOOTNOTES TO OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE STANDARDS
      1.   Parallel spaces shall provide a three (3) foot marked maneuvering
area between stalls.
      2.   Limited to one (1) way access aisles.
      3.   Internal circulation routes used by trucks shall provide adequate
maneuver area notwithstanding such may be wider than the minimum requirements
herein, to permit unobstructed access to loading areas, dumpsters and other
areas of the site as dictated by the nature of the use and site.
      3.   Stacking spaces. Stacking spaces shall be provided as required in
the schedule of off-street parking. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten
(10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length, shall not extend into any public
right-of-way or private access easement, and shall be distinctly separated from
on-site parking so as not to interfere with ingress and egress to parking
spaces.
      4.   Ingress and egress. All spaces shall be provided with adequate
access by means of clearly defined maneuvering lanes and driveways. Spaces
backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. Entrances and exits from
off-street parking lots shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the
nearest point of any property zoned for single-family residential use.
      5.   Surfacing and drainage. Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall
comply with City engineering standards and shall be subject to review and
approval by the director of the department of public works. All off-street
parking areas, access lanes, driveways and other vehicle maneuvering areas
shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material.
   Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and driveways shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not be
permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an
approved drainage plan.
      6.   Curbs, wheel chocks. A curb of at least six (6) inches in height
shall be installed to prevent motor vehicles from being driven or parked so
that any part of the vehicle extends within two (2) feet of abutting landscaped
areas, sidewalks, streets, buildings, or adjoining property. In lieu of a curb,
wheel chocks may be provided to prevent vehicles from extending over grass
areas, setback lines, or lot lines. A freeway type guardrail is prohibited from
use in lieu of curbs or wheel chocks.
      7.   Lighting. All parking areas, driveways, and walkways shall be
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using
such areas, in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section
2.12. All lighting shall be confined within and directed onto the parking area
only.
      8.   Buildings. No building or structure shall be permitted on an off-
street parking lot, except for a maintenance building/attendant shelter, which
shall not be more than fifty (50) square feet in area and not more than fifteen
(15) feet in height.
      9.   Signs. Accessory directional signs shall be permitted in parking
areas in accordance with City sign regulations. The plan commission, upon
review and recommendation of the public safety official, may require the
posting of traffic control signs as it deems necessary to promote vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
      10.   Screening and landscaping. All off-street parking areas, except
those serving single- and two-family residences, shall be screened and
landscaped in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Article 5.00.
      11.   Striping. To facilitate movement and to help maintain an orderly
parking arrangement, all parking spaces shall be clearly striped. Except for
parallel parking spaces, each stall shall be delineated with four (4) inch wide
double lines twenty-four (24) inches apart. The width of the parking stall may
be computed from the centers of the double striping.
      12.   Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained free of dust,
trash, and debris. Surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signage, lane
marking, space striping, and related appurtenances shall be maintained in good
condition.
      13.   Driveways. The minimum driveway width for one (1), two (2), and
three (3) family residential properties shall be nine (9) feet, except for lots
with frontage that exceeds forty-nine (49) feet the driveways shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 4.01, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 95-625, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 02-888,
4-16-2002; Ord. No. 03-967, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 04-996, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-
1013, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 08-1190, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 08-1191, 12-1-2008; Ord.
No. 09-1215, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 15-1491, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 15-1500, 11-24-
2015; Ord. No. 15-1508, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 16-1542, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 17-1588,
7-18-2017; Ord. No. 17-1602, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 17- 1572, - -2017; Ord. No.
25-1839, 5-20-2025; Ord. No. 25-1845, 7-15-2025)
Sec. 4.02. - Loading space requirements.
   A.   Scope of loading space requirements. Compliance with the loading space
regulations set forth herein shall be required in order to avoid interference
with the public use of streets, alleys, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks,
and other public areas.
      1.   General applicability. On the same premises with every building, or
part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing,
display and sale of goods, including department stores, wholesale stores,
markets, hotels, hospitals, mortuaries, laundries, dry cleaning establishments,
and other uses involving the receipt or distribution of materials, merchandise,
or vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for loading
and unloading as required in this Section.
      2.   Change in use or intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure,
or lot is changed, loading space shall be provided as required by this
Ordinance for the new use, regardless of any variance which may have been in
effect prior to change of use.
   B.   General requirements.   
      1.   Location. Required loading space shall be located to the rear or
side of the building being served such that it is screened from view from
adjoining roads. Loading/unloading operations shall not interfere with
vehicular traffic circulation on streets, alleys, or within off-street parking
areas. Loading/unloading areas shall not be placed in required fire lanes.
      2.   Dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, each required loading space
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and fifty (50) feet in length,
with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet.
      3.   Surfacing and drainage. Loading areas shall be hard-surfaced with
concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material. Loading areas shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Grading, surfacing, and drainage
plans shall be subject to review and approval by the director of the department
of public works. Surface water shall not be permitted to drain onto adjoining
property, a public easement, a public right-of-way or into the City sanitary
sewer system, except in accordance with a City-approved drainage plan.
      4.   Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of
motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles is
prohibited in required loading space.
      5.   Use of loading space. A required loading space shall be dedicated to
loading and unloading purposes and shall not be counted or used for required
parking.
      6.   Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
individual loading spaces serving businesses on separate lots provided that all
of the following conditions are fulfilled:
         (a)   Each business served shall have direct access to the central
loading area without crossing a public street or alley.
         (b)   Total loading space provided shall meet the minimum requirements
specified herein, in consideration of total floor area of all businesses served
by the central loading space.
         (c)   No building served shall be more than three hundred (300) feet
from the central loading area.
      7.   Minimum loading space. The amount of required loading space shall be
determined in accordance with the schedule which follows. In a Planned Unit
Development District, the plan commission may modify the minimum requirements.
In other districts, the zoning board of appeals may reduce or modify the
standards upon making the determination that another standard would be more
appropriate considering of the number or type of deliveries expected or
experienced for a particular use or site.
 
SCHEDULE OF LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Gross Floor Area           Number of Loading Spaces
0—5,000 sq. ft.          See Note 1
5,001—20,000 sq. ft.     1 space
20,001—100,000 sq. ft.   2 spaces
100,001 [sq. ft.] and over 3 spaces, plus 1 space for each 100,000 sq. ft. in
                           excess of 100,000 sq. ft.
 
   FOOTNOTE TO SCHEDULE OF LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
      (1)   Establishments containing less than five thousand (5,000) square
feet of gross floor area shall provide adequate loading space that is
accessible by motor vehicle, but which does not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic. The size of any such loading space shall be based on the
types of delivery vehicles typically utilized by the establishment (such
delivery vehicles are not to exceed forty (40) feet in total length). On-site
parking lot maneuver lanes, adjacent on-street parking areas, and adjacent
public alleys may be considered loading space for the purposes of meeting this
requirement so long as loading vehicles are only present for short periods of
time and during times of day that do not substantially disrupt the designated
uses of these areas or violate the performance standards in
Article 8.00.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 4.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 08-1189, 12-1-2008)
Sec. 4.03. - Bicycle parking requirement.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of these bicycle parking requirements are to:
      1.   Encourage bicycle travel as an additional mode of transportation for
residents and visitors;
      2.   Ensure that safe and convenient bicycle parking spaces are provided
for bicyclists;
      3.   Address the need for short-term bicycle parking; and
      4.   Improve the City's multi-modal transportation options.
   B.   Applicability. 
      1.   Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for any new building or
any addition or enlargement of fifty (50) percent or greater.
      2.   Bicycle parking regulations apply to: (a) multi-family residential
structures; (b) community and civic facilities; and (c) commercial buildings in
all zoning districts.
   C.   Bike spaces required. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following schedule, with fractional requirements of one-
half (0.5) or greater being rounded up:
 
Land Use                           Required No. of Bicycle Parking Spaces
Multiple-Family Housing            0.25 spaces per dwelling unit
Community and Civic Facilities     2 spaces plus 5% of auto parking
                                   requirement
Land Uses in O-S, B-A, B-B, and B- 2 spaces plus 5% of auto parking
C zoned districts.                 requirement
 
   D.   Site requirements. 
      1.   In order to address a wide range of building configurations and site
design characteristics, bicycle parking may be provided in a variety of
locations but shall be visible from the roadway, sidewalk or building entrance
so that it provides sufficient security from theft and damage.
      2.   Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to a concrete pad. The
inverted "U" style racks or equivalent are required.
      3.   Bicycle parking shall not interfere with pedestrian and vehicle
circulation. A clear area of at least thirty-six (36) inches between bicycles
and other existing and potential obstructions must be provided.
   E.   Long-term bicycle parking. Bicycle storage rooms, bicycle lockers, or
other secure storage spaces inside or outside of the building may be provided
and shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances.
   F.   In all cases this ordinance shall not require in excess of twenty (20)
bicycle parking racks and no fewer than two (2) spaces (one (1) rack).
   G.   Waiver. The City Planner may authorize a reduction or waiver of bicycle
parking spaces if the site requirements listed in Section
4.03(D) cannot be met.
   H.   Exemption. 
      1.   Buildings that are located within two hundred (200) feet of City-
owned or County-owned bicycle parking are not required to provide bicycle
parking.
      2.   The following uses are exempt from this ordinance: Senior housing,
industrial uses; utilities; vehicle sales and services; parking lots; and child
or day care centers.
(Ord. No. 17-1568, 1-31-2017)
ARTICLE 5.00 - LANDSCAPING
Sec. 5.01. - Intent and scope of requirements.
   A.   Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the City, improves
property values and alleviates the impact of noise, traffic, and visual
distractions associated with certain uses. Screening provides protection for
less intensive uses from noise, light, traffic, litter and other impacts of
more intensive, nonresidential uses. These provisions are intended to set
minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and
landscape screening, for the protection and enhancement of the City's
environment. More specifically, the intent of these provisions is to:
      1.   Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use
areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way, and
      2.   Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the
neighborhoods which abut nonresidential areas, parking areas, and other
intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health, safety and welfare,
   B.   Scope of application. No site plan shall be approved unless it shows
landscaping consistent with the requirements of this Article. A building permit
shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and
approved, and a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions
set forth in this section have been met or a performance guarantee has been
posted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 2, Section
2.18.
   C.   Minimum requirements. The requirements in this Article are minimum
requirements, and under no circumstances shall they preclude the developer and
the City from agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
   D.   Design creativity. Creativity in landscape design is recommended.
Accordingly, required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, at
random, or in groupings, depending on the designer's desired visual effect and,
equally important, the intent of the City to coordinate landscaping on
adjoining properties.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.01, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 16-1562, 12-13-2016)
Sec. 5.02. - General landscaping requirements.
   A.   General site requirements. All undeveloped portions of the site shall
conform to the following general landscaping standards, except where specific
landscape elements, such as a greenbelt, berms, or screening are required:
      1.   All unpaved portions of the site shall be planted with turf grass,
ground cover, shrubbery, or other similar high quality, live plant material,
which shall extend to any abutting street pavement edge. Grass areas in the
front yard of all types of uses shall be planted with sod and/or turf grass
seed and maintained so that no grass area encroaches upon a paved area greater
than two (2) inches.
      2.   A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted on the
unpaved open portions of nonresidential parcels where specific landscaping
requirements do not appear later in this Article. The total number of trees
required shall be determined at the time of site plan review, based on the
overall appearance of the site and the amount of landscaping provided elsewhere
on the site. Required trees may be planted at uniform distances, at random, or
in groupings.
         (a)   For existing structures, whenever in this ordinance a planting
is required, it shall be planted to completion within three (3) months from the
date of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, and no later than November 30
of the same year if the certificate is issued between April 1 and September 30.
If the certificate is issued between October 1 to March 31, the planting shall
be completed no later than the ensuing May 31. Plantings shall be maintained
free of weeds and refuse, in order to safeguard the permanence and health of
the plant materials and to provide a screen to abutting properties. Spacing, as
required by this ordinance, shall be provided in any planting.
         (b)   For new construction, the landscaping shall be completed no
later than eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the original
building permit. For construction in progress at the time of enactment of this
ordinance, the landscaping shall be completed within six (6) months from the
effective date of this ordinance if the original building permit was issued
more than one (1) year prior to the effective date of this ordinance. If the
original building permit was issued less than one year prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, the landscaping shall be completed no later than
eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the original building
permit. The Property Maintenance and Development Services Department (PMDS) may
require the posting of a performance guarantee as provided by Section
2.18 of the Dearborn Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
      4.   Landscape improvements adjacent to or within easements, street
rights-of-way or any other public places shall be installed pursuant to
Dearborn Code of Ordinances, Sections
17-241 through
17-257 and maintained so that no grass area encroaches upon a paved area
greater than two (2) inches
      5.   In order to encourage species diversification in landscaping and to
minimize tree loss caused by species-specific disease, a variety of tree
species shall be required as specified in the schedule:
 
Required Number of Trees Minimum Number of Species
5—30                   2
31—60                  3
60—100                 4
More than 100            5
 
   B.   Landscaping adjacent to roads and rights-of-way. Landscaping shall be
required adjacent to roads and rights-of-way and shall comply with the
following plan requirements:
      1.   Minimum requirements. Landscaping shall be required adjacent to a
road or right-of-way and shall consist of a landscaped area with a minimum
depth of ten (10) feet, which shall be located on private property contiguous
to the road right-of-way, excluding openings for driveways and sidewalks.
Through lots and corner lots shall provide such landscaping along all adjacent
road right-of-way.
The Planning Commission may permit all or a portion of the landscaped area to
be located within the road right-of-way or elsewhere within the front setback
area, provided that the plan commission finds that the following conditions
exist:
         (a)   Such relocation of the landscaped area is consistent with the
intent of this section.
         (b)   Relocation of the landscaped area is justified because of the
physical characteristics of the site, the location of existing easements,
sidewalks, or landscaping, the configuration of existing parking, the need to
maintain emergency vehicle access, or because of other public health or safety
concerns.
         (c)   Such relocation of the landscaped area will not result in less
landscaped area than would be required if the landscaped area had been located
on private property contiguous to the road right-of-way.
         (d)   Such relocation of the landscaped area will not jeopardize
traffic safety or the general planning of the City.
      2.   Required plantings. 
 
Type           Requirements
Deciduous tree 1 per 35 linear
               feet of road frontage
Shrubs         6 per 35 linear
               feet of road frontage
 
For the purposes of computing length of road frontage, openings for driveways
and sidewalks shall not be counted. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform
distances, at random, or in groupings.
      3.   Encroachment into the public rights-of-way. Landscaping shall not
become a safety hazard by obscuring the visibility and accessibility of
drivers, bicyclists or pedestrians. New landscaping adjacent to roads and
rights-of-way shall comply with the following minimum clearance requirements:
         (a)   Trees shall comply with the following minimum lateral clearance
requirements, as measured from the center of the tree:
            • To edge of road: Five (5) feet.
            • To edge of fire hydrant: Five (5) feet.
            • To edge of vehicular accessway or sidewalk: Five (5) feet.
         (b)   Trees shall comply with the following minimum vertical clearance
requirements, as measured from any horizontal projection (tree limbs, branches,
etc.) over:
            • Roadway surfaces: Fourteen (14) feet.
            • Sidewalk surfaces: Seven (7) feet.
            • Bicycle path surfaces: Ten (10) feet.
         (c)   Shrubs shall comply with the following minimum lateral clearance
requirements, as measured from the edge of the shrub:
            • To edge of road: Five (5) feet.
            • To edge of fire hydrant: Five (5) feet.
            • To the edge of a sidewalk or multi-use trail: One (1) foot.
            • Trees located in the public easement (between the street and
sidewalk) shall be exempt from the lateral clearance requirements.
         (d)   In addition to meeting these clearance requirements, trees and
shrubs shall be cut or trimmed to not obstruct the public right-of-way or
obscure vehicular and pedestrian sightlines.
      4.   Alternatives. In cases where the non-residential lot or parcel has a
depth of one hundred twenty (120) feet or less, the required landscaped area
with minimum depth of ten (10) feet adjacent to roads or rights-of-way will not
apply so long as one (1) of the following alternatives is used to separate and
screen the interior of the site from the road or right-of-way:
         (a)   Masonry or concrete landscape planters with a minimum width of
five (5) feet and a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches shall be provided
adjacent to the road or right-of-way. The planters shall be designed to be
compatible and complementary to the buildings on the site and on adjacent
sites. Planters shall consist of vegetation that is maintained in a healthy
growing condition without weeds.
         (b)   Masonry or concrete circular landscape planters with a minimum
volume of forty-two (42) gallons and a minimum size of thirty-two (32) inches
by twenty (20) inches (diameter × height) shall be provided adjacent to the
road or right-of-way. The circular planters shall be of a number and of a
design to be compatible and complementary to the buildings on the site and on
the adjacent sites. Planters shall consist of vegetation that is maintained in
a healthy growing condition without weeds.
         (c)   A three (3)-foot tall decorative fence or wall shall be provided
adjacent to the road or right-of-way. The fence or wall shall be designed to be
compatible and complementary to the buildings on the site and on the adjacent
sites.
   C.   Berms. Berms shall be required to conform to the following standards:
      1.   Dimensions. Required berms shall be measured from the grade of the
parking lot or first ground adjacent to the berm, and shall be constructed with
slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for each three (3) feet horizontal
[thirty-three (33) percent slope], with at least a two (2)-foot flat area on
top. Berms may undulate in height, subject to review and approval of berm
design as shown on the site plan. The maximum height of required berms shall be
three (3) feet.
      2.   Protection from erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with sod
and/or turf grass seed, ground cover, or other similar high quality live plant
material to protect it from erosion so that it retains its height and shape.
The use of railroad ties, cement blocks, and other types of construction
materials to retain the shape and height of a berm shall be prohibited.
      3.   Required plantings. 
         (a)   Berms located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels. Berms
located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to roads in Section
5.02(B).
         (b)   Berms used for screening other than in the front yard. Berms
used for screening other than in the front yard shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements for Screening in Section
5.02(E).
      4.   Measurement of berm length. For the purpose of calculating required
plant material, berm length shall be measured along the exterior edges of the
berm.
   D.   Greenbelts. Greenbelts shall be required to conform to the following
standards:
      1.   Measurement of greenbelt length. For the purposes of calculating
required plant material, greenbelt length shall be measured along the exterior
edges of the greenbelt.
      2.   General planting requirements. 
         (a)   Grass or ground cover requirements. Turf grass, ground cover, or
other similar high quality live plant materials shall be planted over the
entire greenbelt area, except where paved walkways are used.
         (b)   Tree and shrub requirements. Except where the greenbelt is used
for screening, a minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be
planted for each forty (40) linear feet or portion thereof of required
greenbelt, or, alternatively, eight (8) shrubs may be substituted for each
required tree. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, at random,
or in groupings.
         (c)   Distance from sidewalk. Plant materials other than turf grass
shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet from the right-of-way line where
the greenbelt abuts a public sidewalk.
         (d)   Setback from property line. Plant materials other than turf
grass shall be placed no closer than four (4) feet from the property line or
fence line.
      3.   Greenbelts used for screening. Greenbelts used for screening shall
be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for screening in Section
5.02(E).
   E.   Screening. 
      1.   General screening requirements. Unless otherwise specified, wherever
an evergreen or landscaped screen is required, screening shall consist of
closely-spaced evergreen plantings [i.e., no farther than fifteen (15) feet
apart] which can be reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier that
is at least six (6) feet above ground level within three (3) years of planting.
Deciduous plant materials may be used provided that a complete visual barrier
is maintained throughout the year.
      2.   Screening of equipment. Mechanical equipment such as air
compressors, pool pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps, satellite dish
antennas, and similar equipment located in multi-family, business and
industrial zoning districts shall be screened on at least three (3) sides when
directly abutting a single-family use. Required screening shall exceed the
vertical height of the equipment being screened by at least six (6) inches
within two (2) years of planting in all multi-family, business and industrial
zoning districts.
   F.   Landscaping of rights-of-way. Public rights-of-way located adjacent to
required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with turf grass or
similar high quality live ground cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or
occupant of the adjacent property as if the rights-of-way were part of the
required landscaped areas or greenbelts.
   Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in the road right-of-way without first
obtaining written approval from the agency which has jurisdiction over the
road.
   Trees and shrubs shall be planted no closer to the edge of the road pavement
than the distances specified in the following chart:
 
Setback
Trees   5 feet (measured from center of tree)
Shrubs  5 feet (measured from perimeter of shrub)
 
   G.   Maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers. No landscaping
shall be established or maintained on any parcel or in any parking lot which
will obstruct the view of drivers. Accordingly, all landscaping shall comply
with the provisions concerning unobstructed sight distance set forth in Section
2.09.
   H.   Potential damage to utilities and public facilities. In no case shall
landscaping material be planted in a way which will interfere with or cause
damage to underground utility lines, public roads, or other public facilities.
Species of trees whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways,
sewers, or other utilities shall not be planted closer than fifteen (15) feet
from any such roadways, sewers, or utilities. Trees shall be set back from
overhead utility lines by a minimum distance of five (5) feet.
   I.   Landscaping of divider medians. Where traffic on driveways, maneuvering
lanes, private roads, or similar vehicle accessways is separated by a divider
median, the median shall be curbed and have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. A
minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each
thirty-five (35) linear feet or portion thereof of median. Trees may be planted
at uniform distances, at random, or in groupings, but in no instance shall the
center-to-center distance between trees exceed seventy (70) feet. If the median
is less than ten (10) feet in width, the median may be landscaped or paved as
per the applicant's site plan.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 02-889, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 09-
1242, 9-21-2009; Ord. No. 16-1562, 12-13-2016)
Sec. 5.03. - Specific landscaping requirements for zoning districts.
   A.   Requirements for commercial, office, and industrial districts. All lots
or parcels of land located in office, commercial, or industrial zoning
districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site landscaping. At least six (6) percent of the site shall
be maintained as landscaped open area. All such open areas shall conform to the
general site requirements in Section
5.02A., except where specific landscape elements are required.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All commercial,
office, and industrial developments shall comply with the requirements for
landscaping adjacent to the road or road right-of-way in Section
5.02B.
      3.   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three (3)
feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with Section
5.02B. The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the
road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is
constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with Section
5.02F.
      4.   Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required wherever
a nonresidential use in a commercial, office, or industrial district abuts
directly upon land zoned for residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall
comply with the requirements in Section
5.02E. If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements in
Article 6.00 shall be complied with.
   B.   Requirements for residential uses in residential "A" and "B" districts.
All new residential uses developed in the residential "A" and "B" zoning
districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
      1.   All undeveloped and unpaved portions of a site shall be planted with
sod, turf grass, ground cover, shrubs, and/or other similar high quality living
plant materials.
         (a)   Front yards shall be maintained so that no grass area encroaches
upon a paved area greater than two (2) inches.
         (b)   Front yards shall be maintained so that no grass area encroaches
upon a paved area greater than two (2) inches.
      2.   Planting beds shall consist of living plant materials and have a
border that is shaped by spade-cut edging or the following material:
            • Masonry Edging, composed of stone, brick or concrete.
            • Wood boards or landscape timbers.
            • Metal or plastic strip edging material.
      3.   The use of mulch, stone, gravel, and synthetic material shall be
limited to decorative accents within a planting bed.
      4.   Species suitability. Landscape materials native to Southeast
Michigan are required to be used to satisfy the requirements of this Article.
      5.   Except for turf grass, any new planting in the public easement
between the sidewalk and the street curb requires a permit from the Director of
Public Works in accordance with Section
17-249 and Section
17-250 of the Dearborn City Code.
      6.   Landscaped areas including grass and planting beds shall be
maintained in a healthy growing condition, free from weeds, debris and refuse.
      7.   Vegetable and fruit gardens shall be prohibited in the front yard.
      8.   Landscaping, including hardscape elements and outdoor furniture,
shall not prevent or unreasonably obstruct the use of adjacent property,
including a driveway or other means of access to the adjacent property.
Landscaping shall be set back at least three (3) feet from an adjoining
property, except for landscaping installed along a lawfully-existing perimeter
fence and landscaping that is set back at least eighteen (18) inches from the
adjoining property and measures no more than four (4) inches above the level of
the adjoining property.
      9.   Compliance with this subsection shall be enforced as part of City-
wide interval inspections of non-owner occupied dwellings.
   C.   Requirements for residential uses in residential "C", "D", and "E"
districts. All residential uses in the residential "C", "D", and "E" zoning
districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site landscaping. A minimum of two (2) deciduous or
evergreen trees, plus, four (4) shrubs shall be planted per dwelling unit.
Unless otherwise specified, required landscaping elsewhere in the multiple
family development shall not be counted in meeting these requirements for
trees.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All multiple-
family developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent
to the road or road right-of-way in Section
5.02B.
      3.   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
in multiple-family developments from view of the road, in which case the berm
shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in
accordance with Section
5.02B. The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the
road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is
constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with Section
5.02C.
      4.   Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required on all
sides of any multiple-family development, except on sides facing a road.
Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in Section
5.02E. A wall may be used instead of landscaping adjacent to nonresidential
districts, subject to the requirements in
Article 6.00.
      5.   Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater
than fifteen (15) spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping in Section
5.02F.
      6.   Privacy screen. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so that
rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public street, a landscaped privacy
screen shall be provided. The screen may consist of a combination of trees,
shrubs, and berming, subject to review by the plan commission.
   D.   Requirements for nonresidential uses in residential districts. All
nonresidential uses developed in residential zoning districts shall comply with
the following landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site landscaping. At least ten (10) percent of the site
shall be maintained as landscaped open area. All such open areas shall conform
to the general site requirements in Section
5.02A., except where specific landscape elements are required.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All
nonresidential developments located in residential districts shall comply with
the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road or road right-of-way in
Section
5.02B.
      3.   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three (3)
feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with Section
5.02B. The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the
road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is
constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with Section
5.02C.
      4.   Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required wherever
a nonresidential use abuts directly upon land zoned for residential purposes.
Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in Section
5.02E.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 16-1562, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 24-
1822, 8-20-2024)
Sec. 5.04. - Standards for landscape materials.
   Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the
following standards:
   A.   Plant quality. Plant materials used in compliance with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be nursery grown, free of pests and diseases, hardy in
Wayne County, in conformance with the standards of the American Association of
Nurserymen, and shall have passed inspections required under state regulations.
   B.   Nonliving plant material. Plastic and other nonliving plant materials
shall not be permitted. Water bodies, boulder groupings, landscape furniture,
and man-made landscape ornaments, singly or in combination shall not account
for more than fifteen (15) percent of the ground area to be landscaped.
   C.   Plant material specifications. The following specifications shall apply
to all plant material proposed in accordance with the landscaping requirements
of this ordinance:
      1.   Deciduous shade trees. Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of
one and three-quarter (1.75) inches in caliper measured six (6) inches above
grade with the first branch a minimum of four (4) feet above grade when
planted.
      2.   Deciduous ornamental trees. Deciduous ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of one and one-half (1.5) inches in caliper measured six (6) inches
above grade with a minimum height of four (4) feet above grade when planted.
      3.   Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet
in height when planted. Furthermore, evergreen trees shall have a minimum
spread of two and one-half (2.5) feet, and the size of the burlapped root ball
shall be at least ten (10) times the caliper measured six (6) inches above
grade.
      4.   Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when
planted. Low-rowing shrubs shall have a minimum spread of twenty-four (24)
inches when planted.
      5.   Hedges. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a
continuous, unbroken, visual screen within two (2) years after planting,
barring unusual growing conditions, such as drought or disease. Hedges shall be
a minimum of two (2) feet in height when planted.
      6.   Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in length
after one (1) growing season.
      7.   Ground cover. Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or
in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance
and reasonably complete coverage after one (1) complete growing season. Ground
cover shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, free from weeds,
debris and refuse.
      8.   Grass. Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as
permanent lawns in Wayne County. Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free
of weeds, pests, and diseases. Grass may be sodded, hydroseeded, plugged,
sprigged or seeded. When grass is to be established by a method other than
complete sodding or seeding, grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and
protection until complete coverage is otherwise achieved. Straw or other mulch
shall be used to protect newly seeded areas.
      9.   Mulch. Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum
of three (3) inches deep.
      10.   Undesirable plant material. Use of the following plant materials
(or their clones) is not encouraged because of susceptibility to storm damage,
disease, and other undesirable characteristics. Additional undesirable plant
materials may be identified, a list of which shall be maintained by the City.
         • American Willow.
         • Ash.
         • Box Elder.
         • Northern Catalpa.
         • Poplar.
         • Tree of Heaven.
         • Willow.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.04, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 16-1562, 12-13-2016)
Sec. 5.05. - Installation and maintenance.
   The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance
of landscape materials are required:
   A.   Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike
manner to ensure the continued growth of healthy plant material. Trees, shrubs,
hedges, and vines shall be generously mulched at the time of planting.
   Summary of Plant Material Specifications [1]
 
                 Minimum    Minimum Height     Minimum Spread Minimum Length
                 Caliper
Deciduous trees  1¾ in. [2]4 ft. first branch —            —
Ornamental trees 1½ in. [3]4 ft.              —
Evergreen trees  —        5 ft.              2½ ft.        —
Shrubs           —        2 ft.              2 ft.          —
Hedges           —        2 ft.              —            —
Vines            —        —                —            30 inches after
                                                              one season
 
Footnotes:   
[1] See Section
5.04 for detailed requirements.
[2] Measured six (6) inches above grade.
[3] Measured six (6) inches above grade.
   B.   Protection from vehicles. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles.
   C.   Off-season planting requirements. If development is completed during
the off-season when plants cannot be installed, the owner shall provide a
performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping in the
next planting season, in accordance with Section
2.18.
   D.   Maintenance. Landscaping required by this ordinance shall be maintained
in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All
unhealthy and dead plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice
from the zoning administrator, unless the season is not appropriate for
planting, in which case such plant material shall be replaced at the beginning
of the next planting season.
All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not limited to
benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be maintained in good
condition and neat appearance. Rotted, deteriorated, or damaged landscape
elements shall be repaired, replaced, or removed upon notice from the zoning
administrator.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.05, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 5.06. - Treatment of existing plant material.
   The following regulations shall apply to existing plant material:
   A.   Consideration of existing elements in the landscape design. In
instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its
development, the plan commission may permit substitution of such plant material
in place of the requirements set forth previously in this section, provided
such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this article and
the ordinance in general.
Existing hedges, berms, walls, or other landscape elements may be used to
satisfy the requirements set forth previously, provided that such existing
elements are in conformance with the requirements of this section.
   B.   Preservation of existing plant material. In the event that healthy
plant materials which are intended to meet the requirements of the ordinance
are cut down, damaged or destroyed during construction, said plant material
shall be replaced with the same species as the damaged or removed tree, in
accordance with the following schedule, unless otherwise approved by the zoning
administrator based on consideration of the site and building configuration,
available planting space, and similar considerations:
 
Caliper Measured 12 Inches Above Grade
Damaged Tree       Replacement Tree Replacement Ratio
Less than 6 inches 2½ to 3 inches  1 for 1
More than 6 inches 2½ to 3 inches  1 replacement tree for each 6 inches in
                                    caliper or fraction thereof of damaged tree
 
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.06, 2-2-1993)
Sec 5.07. - Modifications to landscape requirements.
   In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape
plan, and in consideration of the amount of existing plant material to be
retained on the site, the plan commission may modify the specific requirements
outlined herein, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the
intent of this Article and ordinance in general. in determining whether a
modification is appropriate, the plan commission shall consider whether the
following conditions exist:
   A.   The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be
better-achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements of the
ordinance, and
   B.   1.   Topographic features or other unique features of the site create
conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations would
result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape design, or
      2.   Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that required
landscaping would not enhance the site or result in the desired screening
effect.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 5.07, 2-2-1993)
ARTICLE 6.00 - WALLS
Sec. 6.01. - Obscuring wall standards.
   Where permitted or required by this ordinance, obscuring walls shall be
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Location. Required obscuring walls shall be placed inside and adjacent
to the lot line except in the following instances:
      1.   Where underground utilities interfere with placement of the wall at
the property line, the wall shall be placed on the utility easement line
located nearest the property line subject to approval of the city engineer.
      2.   Subject to plan commission approval, required walls in a
nonresidential district may be located on the side of an alley right-of-way
closest to the adjacent residential zone when mutually agreed upon by affected
property owners and residents. The continuity of the required wall shall be
considered by the plan commission in reviewing such requests.
      3.   Walls shall not extend closer to the front lot line than the
required front setback or the established front setback line whichever is
greater.
   B.   Corner clearance. Obscuring walls shall comply with the specifications
for maintenance of unobstructed sight distance for drivers, Section
2.09.
   C.   Substitution or waiver. 
      1.   As a substitute for a required obscuring wall, the plan commission
may, in its review of the site plan, approve the use of other existing or
proposed living or man-made landscape features (such as closely spaced
evergreens) that would produce substantially the same results in terms of
screening, durability, and permanence. Any such substitute screening shall
comply with the applicable requirements in Sections
2.09 and
5.02.
      2.   If a fence is approved by the plan commission as a suitable
substitute for a required obscuring wall, the fence shall be constructed of
redwood, cedar, or No. 1 pressure-treated wood. Chain link fences shall not be
permitted for screening purposes.
      3.   The zoning board of appeals may waive the requirements for an
obscuring wall upon making the determination that:
         (a)   The adjoining residential district is in transition and will
become nonresidential in the future, or
         (b)   Existing physical features provide adequate screening.
   D.   Wall specifications. Required walls shall be constructed of masonry
material that is architecturally compatible with the materials used on the
facade of the principal structure on the site, such as face brick, decorative
block, or poured concrete with simulated brick or stone patterns. Alternately,
walls may be constructed of precast steel-reinforced panels, anchored in place
by steel I-beam columns, provided that the pre-cast panels have a simulated
brick or stone pattern that is compatible with the architecture of the
principal structure and any adjoining screen walls on abutting property.
   E.   Wall requirements. For the uses and districts listed below, an
obscuring wall shall be provided as specified along property lines that abut a
residential district, except where landscaped screening is permitted by the
plan commission in lieu of a wall [see Section
5.02(E)]:
Proposed Use or District Wall Height Requirements
Proposed Use or District        Wall Height Requirements
P. Business Parking District    6.0 feet
Off-Street Parking (other than  6.0 feet
VP District)
Office Uses or Districts        6.0 feet
Commercial Uses or Districts    6.0 feet
Industrial Uses or Districts    6 foot minimum, up to 8 feet to completely
                                screen storage, loading, and service areas
Utility Buildings, Substations  6.0 feet
Service and Delivery Areas      6.0 feet
 
   F.   Maintenance. Walls required by this ordinance shall be maintained in a
neat and orderly appearance, structurally sound, free from paint, refuse, and
debris. Any wall found in a deteriorated condition shall be repaired and/or
replaced upon notice from the building and safety department.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 6.01, 2-2-1993)
ARTICLE 7.00 - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC USES
Sec. 7.01. - Intent and scope of regulations.
   Each use listed in this Article, whether permitted by right or subject to
approval as a special land use, shall be subject to the site development
standards specified, in addition to applicable standards and requirements for
the district in which the use is located. Where there is a combination of uses
proposed, the most restrictive standards shall be applied. These standards are
intended to alleviate the impact from a use that is of an area, intensity or
type, or that possesses characteristics that are unique or atypical for the
district in which the use is allowed. These standards are intended to assure
that such uses will be compatible with surrounding land uses and insure the
orderly development of the district. Compliance with these standards shall be
subject to site plan review. Unless otherwise specified, each use listed in
this Article shall be subject to all applicable yard, bulk and other standards
for the district in which the use is located.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 7.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 7.02. - Site development standards for nonresidential uses.
   A.   Automobile or vehicle sales. Automobile or vehicle sales operations
with repair facilities or outdoor sales space shall be subject to the following
requirements. These requirements shall apply to any operation involving the
sale, lease or rental of new or used vehicles, house trailers, recreational
vehicles, trucks, and other vehicles.
      1.   Grading, surfacing, and drainage. Outdoor sales lots, parking areas,
and other vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or
bituminous material, and shall be graded and drained so as to effectively
dispose of or retain surface waters. Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans
shall be subject to review and approval by the director of building and safety.
      2.   Driveway location. The nearest edge of any driveway serving an
outdoor vehicle sales area shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from any
street or road intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right-
of-way line).
      3.   Servicing of vehicles. All servicing of vehicles shall be subject to
the following requirements:
         (a)   Service activities shall be clearly incidental to the vehicle
sales operation.
         (b)   Vehicle service activities shall occur within a completely
enclosed building.
         (c)   Partially dismantled vehicles, damaged vehicles, new and used
parts, and discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
         (d)   Buildings containing the service operations shall be located a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential property line.
         (e)   There shall be no external evidence of the service operations,
in the form of dust, odors, or noise, beyond the interior of the service
building.
         (f)   Buildings should be oriented so that open bays, for automobile
washes, do not face onto adjacent thoroughfares unless screened by an adjoining
lot, building or obscuring wall per
Article 6.00.
      4.   Broadcasting devices prohibited. Devices for the outdoor
broadcasting of voice, telephone monitoring, music or any other amplified sound
shall be prohibited outside of any building.
      5.   Setbacks. Outdoor sales lots, parking areas, and other vehicle
maneuvering areas shall comply with the requirements for parking lots, as
specified in Section
4.01B.1.
      6.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall
be two (2) acres.
   B.   Automobile filling stations, automobile or vehicle service stations,
automobile repair garages. The following regulations shall apply to automobile
filling stations and automobile or vehicle service stations, including tire,
battery, muffler and undercoating shops:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall
be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
      2.   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width required for such uses
shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.
      3.   Minimum setbacks. Repair garages or other buildings shall comply
with the setback requirements for the district in which the use is located.
However, a minimum setback of forty (40) feet shall be maintained on all sides
that abut property that is zoned or used for residential purposes. Pump islands
and canopies shall comply with the following requirements:
 
Minimum Setback from Right-of-Way Line
Nearest Edge of Pump Island       25 feet
Nearest Edge of Unenclosed Canopy 20 feet
 
      4.   Minimum distances between uses. In all cases, there shall be a
minimum distance of at least five hundred (500) feet between such uses.
      5.   Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress drives shall be a minimum of
thirty-one (31) feet and a maximum of forty (40) feet in width. No more than
one (1) such drive or curb opening shall be permitted for every seventy-five
(75) feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) along any street. The nearest edge
of any such drive shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the
nearest point of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. Curb
openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would create a
safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in relation to other
ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the traffic generated by
other buildings or uses or its location near a vehicular or pedestrian
entrances or crossings.
      6.   Curbs. A curb of at least six (6) inches in height shall be
installed to prevent vehicles from being driven onto or parked with any part of
the vehicle extending within two (2) feet of abutting landscaped areas,
sidewalks, streets, buildings, or adjoining property.
      7.   Layout. All lubrication equipment, automobile wash equipment,
hoists, and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. Gasoline pumps
shall be located so that motor vehicles do not park on or extend over abutting
landscaped areas, sidewalks, streets, buildings, or adjoining property while
being served. Adequate vehicle parking and stacking spaces shall be provided as
required in
Article 4.00.
      8.   Outside storage. Inoperable, wrecked or partially dismantled
vehicles shall not be stored or parked outside for a period exceeding forty-
eight (48) hours. Unless enclosed within a masonry screening wall that is not
less than six (6) feet in height.
      9.   Vehicle sales and storage. The storage, sale, or rental of new or
used cars, trucks, trailers, and any other vehicles on the premises is
prohibited except in conformance with this ordinance.
      10.   Sales of nonautomotive products. Any retail sales of nonautomotive
products such as food products, dairy products, or similar goods and products
must be clearly accessory and ancillary to the principal use of the site and
building.
      11.   Food services and/or products. In the event any food services and/
or food products are available at retail as an accessory use, necessary
bathroom and toilet facilities shall be provided within the principal building
in accordance with the requirements of the City Plumbing Code standards.
   C.   Automobile wash or car wash establishment. The following regulations
shall apply to automobile wash or car wash establishments:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for automobile or
car wash establishments shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Layout. All washing activities shall be carried on within a fully
enclosed building. Vacuum activities shall be permitted in the rear yard only,
provided such activities are located at least twenty-five (25) feet from
adjacent residentially zoned or used property and the vacuum unit shall be
located within the building. Entrances and exits shall not face abutting
residentially zoned or used property. Adequate vehicle parking and stacking
spaces shall be provided as required in
Article 4.00 with a minimum of thirty-five (35) stacking spaces (including
interior stacking in the building) each consisting of a minimum of one hundred
sixty (160) square feet for each stacking space.
      3.   Entrances and exits. Sufficient space shall be provided on the lot
so that vehicles do not enter or exit the wash building directly from an
adjacent street or alley. All maneuvering areas, stacking lanes, and exit
aprons shall be located within the car wash property. Streets and alleys shall
not be used for maneuvering or parking by vehicles to be serviced by the
automobile wash.
      4.   Orientation of open bays. Buildings should be oriented so that open
bays, particularly for self-serve automobile washes, do not face onto adjacent
thoroughfares unless screened by an adjoining lot, building or obscuring wall
per
Article 6.00.
      5.   Exit lane drainage. Exit lanes shall be sloped to drain water back
to the wash building to drainage gates and not unto the public street.
      6.   Minimum distances between uses. In all cases, there shall be a
minimum distance of at least five hundred (500) feet between such uses.
   D.   Drive-in establishments. 
      1.   Setbacks. Buildings or other structures used for the purpose of a
drive-in establishment shall be set back a minimum of sixty (60) feet from any
street right-of-way line.
      2.   Location of driveways. Driveways serving drive-in establishments
shall provide direct access from a major thoroughfare or arterial road. The
nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer than
twenty-five (25) feet from any street or road intersection, as measured from
the nearest intersection right-of-way line.
      3.   Screening. An obscuring wall shall be provided along all property
lines abutting property that is zoned for residential, commercial, or office
use, subject to the requirements in
Article 6.00.
      4.   Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress drives shall be a minimum of
thirty-one (31) feet and a maximum of forty (40) feet in width. No more than
one (1) such drive or curb opening shall be permitted for every seventy-five
(75) feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) along any street. The nearest edge
of any such drive shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the
nearest point of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. Curb
openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would create a
safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in relation to other
ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the traffic generated by
other building or uses or its location near a vehicular or pedestrian entrances
or crossings.
   E.   Fast-food and drive-through restaurants. The following regulations
shall apply to fast-food and drive-through restaurants:
      1.   Minimum frontage. The site shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty
(150) feet of frontage on a major thoroughfare.
      2.   Location of driveways. Ingress and egress points shall be located no
closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets
(measured from the nearest right-of-way line). Points of vehicular ingress and
egress shall be limited to the thoroughfare having business-zoned frontage
only. The minimum distance between driveways providing off-site ingress or
egress shall be at least sixty-five (65) feet measured from the two (2) closest
driveway curbs.
      3.   Screening. An obscuring wall shall be provided along all property
lines abutting a residential zoning district subject to the requirements in
Article 6.00.
      4.   Noise. Any drive-up or drive-through speaker system shall comply
with the noise regulations listed in Chapter 13, Article II of the City of
Dearborn Code of Ordinances, and shall be located and oriented away from
adjacent or abutting residential properties.
      5.   Stacking spaces. A restaurant with a drive-through window shall
provide stacking spaces for each drive-through window as required in the
schedule of off-street parking, Section
4.01C.24.
      6.   Distance standard. A fast-food restaurant shall be located no closer
than seven hundred (700) feet to a school, or another fast food restaurant, the
distance being measured from the nearest property line of the fast food
restaurant to the school, or fast food restaurant.
      7.   Traffic study. An on-site and off-site traffic study shall be
required for drive-through restaurants as part of the special land use
application to understand the impacts on the capacity and safety of the
transportation system. The applicant must use the City's traffic engineer to
conduct the traffic study.
   F.   Funeral homes or mortuaries. The following regulations shall apply to
funeral homes and mortuaries:
      1.   Assembly area. An adequate assembly area shall be provided off-
street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. All maneuvering areas
and exit aprons shall be located within the site. Streets and alleys shall not
be used for maneuvering or parking of vehicles.
      2.   Screening. The service and loading area shall be obscured from
adjacent residential areas in accordance with
Article 6.00.
      3.   Caretaker's residence. A caretaker's residence may be provided
within the main building of the funeral home or as an approved accessory
building on the site, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
   G.   Group day care home, child care center. The following regulations shall
apply to group day care homes, child care centers, nursery schools, day
nurseries, and pre-schools:
      1.   Licensing. In accordance with applicable state laws, all child care
facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the Department of Social
Services and shall comply with the minimum standards required for such
facilities.
      2.   Outdoor play area. A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of outdoor
play area shall be provided and maintained per child, provided that the overall
area of the play area shall not be less than two thousand (2,000) square feet.
The outdoor play area shall be suitably fenced and screened from abutting
residentially zoned or used land by a greenbelt, which shall be landscaped in
accordance with
Article 5.00.
      3.   Frontage. Child care centers shall front onto a thoroughfare or
collector road that is constructed to City standards.
      4.   Setbacks. Child care centers shall have a minimum side yard setback
of at least twenty-five (25) feet.
   H.   Hospitals. The following regulations shall apply to hospitals:
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot area for a hospital site shall be ten (10)
acres.
      2.   Frontage and access. Hospitals shall front onto a major thoroughfare
and the main means of access to the hospital for patients, visitors, and
employees shall be via the thoroughfare. Secondary access to a hospital site
may be off of a residential street.
      3.   Setbacks. The principal building and all accessory buildings shall
be set back a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from any property line.
      4.   Screening. Ambulance, emergency entrance areas, and loading areas
shall be effectively screened from view from all adjacent residential uses by
the building design, landscaping, or a masonry wall.
      5.   State and federal regulations. Hospitals shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws,
including provisions of the Michigan Hospital Survey and Construction Act,
Public Act 299 of 1947, as amended.
   I.   Junk yards. The following regulations shall apply to junk yards:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for a junk yard shall be five
(5) acres.
      2.   Location. A parcel of land used for a junk yard shall abut only
nonresidential or noncommercial land uses or zoning districts.
      3.   Setbacks. A minimum setback of one hundred (100) feet shall be
maintained between the front property line and the portion of the lot on which
junk materials are placed or stored. All buildings, fencing, and junk materials
shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any road or highway
right-of-way line, and at least three hundred (300) feet from any property line
that abuts a residentially zoned or used district.
      4.   Screening. The entire junk yard site shall be screened with an eight
(8) foot obscuring masonry wall, constructed in accordance with
Article 6.00. The wall shall be uniformly painted and maintained in neat
appearance, and shall not have any signs or symbols painted on it.
      5.   Surfacing. All roads, driveways, parking lots, and loading and
unloading areas shall be paved and provide adequate drainage.
      6.   Regulated activities. All fluids shall be drained from vehicles and
disposed of in a proper manner prior to the vehicles being stored on the site.
      7.   Permits. All required City, county, state and federal permits shall
be obtained prior to establishing a junkyard.
   J.   Kennels. The following regulations shall apply to commercial kennels:
      Commercial kennels. Commercial kennels shall be subject to the following
standards:
         (a)   Any such kennel shall be subject to all permit and operational
requirements established by county and state regulatory agencies.
         (b)   The lot on which any such kennel is located shall have a minimum
lot area of one (1) acre. If more than four animals are housed in the kennel,
an additional one (1) acre shall be required for every additional ten (10)
animals (or fraction thereof).
         (c)   All animals, animal runs, and exercise areas shall be located
within an enclosed building and shall not be located in any required front,
side, or rear yard setback area, and shall be located at least one hundred
(100) feet from any dwellings or buildings used by the public on adjacent
property.
   K.   Mini-warehouses. The following regulations shall apply to mini-
warehouses:
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot area for mini-warehouses shall be two (2)
acres.
      2.   Permitted use. Mini-warehouse establishments shall provide for
storage only. All storage must be completely contained within an enclosed
building.
      3.   Site enclosure. The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall
be enclosed with a six (6) foot-high masonry wall, constructed in accordance
with
Article 6.00. A six (6) foot chain link fence may be permitted along property
lines that do not abut a residentially zoned district or residential use.
      4.   Orientation of open bays. Buildings must be oriented so that open
service bays do not face adjacent major thoroughfares or arterial roads unless
screened by an adjoining lot, building, or obscuring wall in compliance with
Article 6.00.
      5.   Exterior appearance. The exterior of any mini-warehouse shall be of
finished quality and design, compatible with the design of structures on
surrounding property.
      6.   Resident manager. A resident manager may be permitted on site with
the responsibility of maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance
with the conditions of the approval. The manager's residence shall conform with
the provision of this ordinance.
      7.   On-site circulation and parking. 
         (a)   All one-way driveways shall be designed with one (1) ten (10)
foot wide loading/unloading lane and one (1) fifteen (15) foot travel lane.
         (b)   All two-way driveways shall be designed with one (1) ten (10)
foot wide loading/unloading lane and two (2) twelve (12) foot travel lanes.
         (c)   The parking lanes may be eliminated if the driveway does not
serve storage units. Signs and painted lines shall be used to indicate parking
and traffic direction throughout the site.
   L.   Motels and hotels. The following regulations shall apply to motels or
hotels:
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot area for a motel or hotel shall be three
(3) acres.
      2.   Design. Each unit available for rental within a motel or hotel shall
contain a bath and at least one (1) bedroom and encompass a minimum gross floor
area of three hundred fifty (350) square feet.
      3.   Services. A motel or hotel shall provide customary motel services,
such as main service, linen service, telephone and/or desk service, and the use
of furniture.
   M.   Nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest homes, and orphanages. The
following regulations shall apply to nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest
homes, and orphanages:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for such facilities shall be
one (1) acre.
      2.   Frontage and access. Such uses shall front onto a major thoroughfare
and the main means of access to the site for residents or patients, visitors,
and employees shall be via the thoroughfare. In no case shall primary access to
a nursing home, convalescent home, or rest home be limited to a residential
street.
      3.   Setbacks. The principal building and all accessory buildings shall
be set back a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet from any property
lines.
      4.   Open space. Any such facility shall provide a minimum of five
hundred (500) square feet of outdoor open space for every bed used or intended
to be used. The open space shall be landscaped and shall include places for
walking and sitting. Off-street parking areas, driveways, and accessory uses or
areas shall not be counted as required open space.
      5.   State and federal regulations. Nursing homes, convalescent homes,
rest homes, and orphanages shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in
conformance with applicable City, state, and federal laws.
   N.   Open-air business. The following regulations shall apply to permanent
open-air businesses:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for open-air businesses shall
be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Driveway location. The nearest edge of any driveway serving an open-
air business shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from any street or road
intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way) and at
least twenty (20) feet from any side property line.
      3.   Parking setback. Parking shall be set back a minimum of ten (10)
feet from any road right-of-way line.
      4.   Lot width. The minimum lot width for open-air businesses shall be
one hundred (100) feet.
      5.   Loading and parking. All loading and parking areas for open-air
businesses shall be confined within the boundaries of the site, and shall not
be permitted to spill over onto adjacent roads or alleys.
      6.   Outdoor display of vehicles. The outdoor display of new or used
automobiles, boats, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, trailers, trucks, or
tractors that are for sale, rent, or lease shall comply with the requirements
in Section
7.02(A).
      7.   Plant material nursery. Nurseries that deal with plant materials
shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Plant storage and display areas shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements for the district in which the nursery is located.
         (b)   The storage of soil, wood chips, fertilizer, and similar loosely
packaged materials shall be contained and covered to prevent it from blowing
onto adjacent properties.
      8.   Composting and recycling. Composting operations and recycling center
as regulated by the City of Dearborn Ordinance, Chapter 16.
   O.   Restaurant site requirements. 
      1.   Access. Points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be limited to
the thoroughfare having business-zoned frontage only.
      2.   Screening. A restaurant with a rear or side yard abutting a
noncommercial district shall provide a permanent obscuring wall, conforming to
the requirements of
Article 8.00, along the full length of each abutting property line.
      3.   Vehicular storage. Parking and vehicular storage shall only be
permitted during normal business hours and any parking and vehicular storage in
excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours shall be prohibited at all times
on the premises, and the owner, franchisee holder or lessee shall post a sign
or signs giving notice that all parked or stored vehicles are subject to
ticketing and removal at the owner's expense.
      4.   Rubbish and debris. Each restaurant site shall be kept free of
rubbish and debris and the grass and other landscaping shall be well maintained
so as to present a neat and attractive appearance at all times.
   P.   Radio and television towers (commercial and public). The following
regulations shall apply to commercial and public radio and television towers,
microwave towers, and other communication antennas/towers:
      1.   Setbacks. Each tower shall be set back from all property lines a
minimum distance equal to the height of the tower.
      2.   Fencing. An open-weave, six (6) foot high chain link fence shall be
constructed around the entire perimeter, in accordance with Section
2.19.
      3.   State and federal regulations. Radio, television, and other types of
communication towers shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in
conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
   Q.   Recreation facilities. 
      1.   Outdoor recreation facilities. Outdoor recreation facilities, such
as, but not limited to, courses for off-road vehicles and snowmobiles,
campgrounds, baseball facilities, and swimming pools, shall comply with the
following regulations:
         (a)   Principal and accessory buildings shall be set back at least
fifty (50) feet from all property lines, unless otherwise specified herein.
         (b)   The location, layout, design, or operation of outdoor recreation
facilities shall not impair the continued enjoyment, use, and future orderly
development of adjacent and nearby properties. The plan commission may specify
the hours of operation in order to assure compatibility with adjacent uses.
         (c)   Outdoor recreation uses shall not generate excessive noise,
odors, dust, or other impacts, such that the continued use and enjoyment of
adjacent properties would be impaired.
         (d)   All parking for outdoor recreation uses shall be provided in
off-street parking lots, which shall be designed in accordance with
Article 4.00.
         (e)   Lighting for outdoor recreation uses shall be shielded to the
greatest extent possible from adjoining properties.
         (f)   Outdoor recreation uses shall be screened from view from
adjacent property zoned or used for residential purposes, in accordance with
Section
5.02(E).
         (g)   Accessory retail or commercial facilities, such as food and
beverage facilities or equipment shops, shall be designed to serve only the
patrons of the outdoor recreation facility, unless otherwise listed as a
permitted use in the district in which the facility is located.
      2.   Indoor recreation facilities. Indoor recreation facilities such as,
but not limited to, bowling establishments, indoor archery ranges, indoor
tennis courts, indoor skating rinks, and similar indoor recreation uses shall
comply with the following regulations:
         (a)   Indoor recreation uses shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from any property line that abuts a residential district.
         (b)   The location, design, and operation of an indoor recreation use
shall not adversely affect the continued use, enjoyment, and development of
adjacent properties. In considering this requirement, particular attention
shall be focused on the adverse impact resulting from loitering on the
premises.
         (c)   Indoor recreation uses shall have direct access onto a major
thoroughfare.
   R.   Religious institutions. The following regulations shall apply to all
religious institutions, including churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, and
related uses:
      1.   Minimum site area. The minimum site area for a religious institution
shall be five (5) acres.
      2.   Lot width. The minimum lot width for religious institutions shall be
two hundred (200) feet with a minimal site of five (5) acres.
      3.   Parking setback. Off-street parking shall be prohibited in the front
setback area required by this ordinance. No parking shall be allowed within
fifteen (15) feet of any property line and comply with
Article 4.00.
      4.   Frontage and access. Religious institutions shall be located on a
major thoroughfare. All vehicular access to the site shall be provided from a
major thoroughfare.
      5.   Landscaping. Religious institutions shall comply with the
landscaping requirements set forth in Section
5.03C.
   S.   Stamping plants, punch presses, press brakes, and other machines. The
following regulations shall apply to stamping machines, punch presses, press
brakes, and other machines:
      1.   General requirements. All such machines shall have shock-absorbing
mountings and be placed on a suitable reinforced-concrete footing. No machine
shall be loaded beyond the capacity prescribed by the manufacturer. All such
machines shall comply with the noise and vibration standards at all times in
this ordinance.
      2.   Automatic screw machines. Automatic screw machines shall be equipped
with noise silencers and shall not be located closer than three hundred (300)
feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes.
      3.   Setbacks. Punch and stamp presses, other than hydraulic presses
shall comply with the performance standards in
Article 8.00.
      4.   Press brakes. Press brakes shall be set back at least three hundred
(300) feet from any property line zoned for residential use.
   T.   Veterinary clinics. Veterinary clinics shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Enclosure. All activities shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
      2.   Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet
from abutting land that is zoned for residential use.
      3.   Treatment facilities. No veterinary clinic shall contain exterior
facilities for boarding of animals. Treatment shall be limited to domesticated
animals considered as pets.
   U.   Veterinary hospitals. Veterinary clinics shall comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   Enclosure. All activities shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
      2.   Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back at least two hundred (200)
feet from abutting land that is zoned for residential use.
      3.   Treatment facilities. No veterinary clinic shall contain exterior
facilities for boarding of animals. Treatment shall be limited to domesticated
animals considered as pets.
   V.   Smoking lounges. Smoking lounges shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Off-street parking. Smoking lounges shall provide off-street parking
per the standard for restaurants, bar/lounge/taverns in Section
4.01 
      2.   Access. Points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be limited to
the thoroughfare having business zoned frontage only.
      3.   Mechanical ventilation required. Mechanical ventilation shall be
supplied in compliance with the Michigan Mechanical Code to ensure sufficient
ventilation of the smoking lounge. The recirculation and the natural
ventilation of air from the smoking lounge are prohibited. The air supplied to
the smoking lounge shall be exhausted and discharged to an approved location in
compliance with the Michigan Mechanical Code.
      4.   Hours of operation; outdoor dining; other outdoor activities
prohibited. 
         a.   Businesses operating a licensed smoking lounge shall be closed
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
         b.   Outdoor dining of carryout food or food properly brought on the
premises by a customer may be permitted provided it is in compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and does not violate any other section of the code or state
law.
         c.   No outdoor dining of any kind, including carryout food or food
properly brought on the premises by a customer, shall occur at a business
operating a licensed smoking lounge with outdoor seating between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
         d.   All other smoking lounge business activities shall be conducted
wholly indoors, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
      5.   Notice on exterior. A clearly visible notice shall be posted by the
entry door to the premises that:
         a.   Indicates that it is a smoking lounge;
         b.   Indicates it is not a food service establishment;
         c.   States that no loitering is permitted on the premises; and
         d.   States that no minors are permitted on the premises.
      6.   Minimum distances between uses. 
         a.   The establishment of a smoking lounge is prohibited if it
constitutes the second such use within a one thousand two hundred (1,200) foot
radius;
         b.   The establishment of a smoking lounge is prohibited if it is
located within seven hundred (700) feet of a school, childcare facility, or a
park.
      7.   Cap on allowable number of smoking lounges. The number of smoking
lounges, as defined in Chapter 12, Article XXV, of the Code of the City of
Dearborn, shall be capped at fifteen (15).
         a.   An individual may petition the City Council for permission to
exceed the cap.
      8.   Smoking lounges, as defined in Chapter 12, Article XXV of the Code
of the City of Dearborn, shall not :
         a.   Advertise as a restaurant or other type of food establishment;
         b.   Have paper or electronic menus for customers of the smoking
lounge to use to place carry out orders for food;
         c.   Facilitate ordering or food deliveries from another food
establishment;
         d.   Store or prepare food on-site;
         e.   Provide condiments, small wares such as silverware, dishware,
drinking glasses or cups, dishwashing, etc., for customers of the smoking
lounge;
         f.   Have wait staff to facilitate the serving of food;
         g.   Provide ice in individual servings; or
         h.   Provide water, or drinks, other than to sell incidental amounts
of pre-packaged beverages.
      9.   Smoking lounges, as defined in Chapter 12, Article XXV of the Code
of the City of Dearborn, may only be located on premises that are physically
separated from any areas of the same or adjacent establishments in which
smoking is prohibited by state law and where smoke does not infiltrate into
those nonsmoking areas. "Physically separated" shall mean an area that is
enclosed on all sides by any combination of solid walls, windows, or doors that
extend from the floor to ceiling.
      10.   Federal, State and local regulations. All smoking lounges shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable laws,
ordinances, and code provisions.
   W.   Outdoor dining. The intent of permitting outdoor dining on private
property is to enhance the attractiveness, viability and pedestrian environment
of the business districts in the City. Outdoor dining on private property shall
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Location. Outdoor dining shall be directly adjacent to, and on the
same parcel as, the building or tenant space occupied by the principal use it
serves. Outdoor dining areas are permitted in all yards.
      2.   Off-street parking. Outdoor dining shall be considered an accessory
use and therefore not included in the calculation of required parking under the
following conditions:
          (a)   B-A, B-B, and B-C zoning districts: The occupant load of the
outdoor dining area shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the interior
customer/patron occupant load of the building or tenant space housing the
principal use (occupant load to be determined per the Building Code).
         (b)   WD and B-D zoning districts: The occupant load of the outdoor
dining area shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the interior customer/patron
occupant load of the building or tenant space housing the principal use
(occupant load to be determined per the Building Code).
         (c)   Limits on seating: Carry-out restaurants with no indoor seating
shall not exceed twelve (12) seats for outdoor dining.
         If the outdoor dining area does not qualify as an accessory use under
the standards listed above, the outdoor dining area shall be included as part
of the floor area and occupant load of the principal use for the purposes of
calculating the parking requirement for that use. Outdoor dining shall not be
permitted to displace off-street parking otherwise required for the principal
use.
      3.   Fencing. A decorative fence or wall less than four (4) feet in
height around the designated outdoor dining area may be permitted as part of
the site plan approval for this use. The fence or wall shall be designed to be
compatible and complimentary to the buildings on the site and the adjacent
sites. Fencing for outdoor dining areas is permitted in all yards.
      4.   Minimum landscaping. Landscaping shall be required between any
outdoor dining area and any public road right-of-way per Section 5.02B of the
Zoning Ordinance.
      5.   Hours of operation. The hours of operation of outdoor dining shall
be limited as follows:
         (a)   B-A, B-B, and B-C zoning districts: Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. or the normal operating hours of the principal use, whichever is more
restrictive.
         (b)   WD and B-D zoning districts: Between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. or
the normal operating hours of the principal use, whichever is more restrictive.
      6.   Washrooms. Washroom facilities shall be provided per the Building
Code based upon the occupant load of the building.
      7.   Nuisance. Outdoor dining shall comply with all applicable noise and
nuisance ordinances of the City of Dearborn.
      8.   Other codes and ordinances. Outdoor dining shall comply with all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
      9.   Exception: Temporary/Seasonal Outdoor Dining. The intent of this
provision is to create or increase outdoor dining areas for existing
restaurants on a temporary or seasonal basis:
         (a)   Permit required. An annual zoning permit issued by the Economic
& Community Development Department director or his designee shall be required.
A restaurant must submit a permit application and all required documents before
the issuance of a permit.
         (b)   Permit revocation. A permit may be revoked for cause by the
Director of Economic and Community Development Department director or his
designee if the outdoor dining is creating a nuisance, or for any other
violation of law.
         (c)   Appeals. An appeal of a permit denial or permit revocation shall
be made to City Council.
         (d)   Dates of operation. Permitted temporary/seasonal outdoor seating
may operate between April 15th and November 15th.
         (e)   Displacement of required parking:
            i.   Up to ten (10) percent of the existing parking spaces for the
building may be displaced to permit outdoor dining pursuant to this section, if
there are less than ten (10) spaces then one space may be displaced for this
purpose.
            ii.   Maximum: total permitted outdoor dining area (permanent &
temporary/seasonal) shall not exceed the limits established in section 2 above.
            iii.   The outdoor dining area shall be configured to provide safe
separation from neighboring parking spaces and drive aisles; movable planters
and decorative fencing may be used to provide such separation.
            iv.   Adequate clearance for car door swing areas shall be
maintained for adjacent parking spaces (Minimum: 2 feet).
         (f)   Minimum landscaping. Required landscaping in accordance with
section 4 above may be waived for issuance of a permit pursuant to this
section. Existing, permanently installed landscaping shall not be displaced
under this provision.
   X.   Terminal and Transfer Facilities. Storage of shippers' containers is
subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Site Plan. Shipper's containers shall be placed or stored in areas
depicted on a site plan approved by the Economic and Community Development
Department — Commercial Services Division and the Fire Marshal.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.png]
      2.   Set backs. Shippers' containers shall comply with the perimeter yard
setbacks for structures in an industrial zoning district, except that a minimum
setback of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between the front property line
and the masonry screening wall required in subsection
7.02X(1)(c)(3), and a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet shall be maintained
around the entire perimeter of the shippers' container storage area between the
masonry screening wall required in subsection
7.02X(1)(c)(3) and any shippers' containers stored on the site.
      3.   Stacking. Shippers' containers may be stacked provided that:
         (a)   Shipper's container stacks shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in
height.
         (b)   Only block storage is permitted, so that the number of
containers stacked vertically must be equaled or exceeded by the number of
containers placed side-by-side.
         (c)   The site plan must comply with applicable screening ordinances
for outdoor storage, and the shippers' container storage area must be enclosed
on all sides by an eight (8) foot masonry screening wall.
      4.   Portability. No shippers' container shall be permanently affixed to
the ground. Shippers' containers shall be able to be moved by a reasonable
means within a twenty-four (24) hour period.
      5.   Fire suppression. Shippers' containers storage areas shall comply
with the applicable fire codes, including installation and maintenance of fire
lanes, fire suppression lines, hydrants, and other protective devices as
determined by the Fire Marshal. A site plan approved by the Economic and
Community Development Department — Commercial Services Division and the Fire
Marshal must be on file with the Dearborn Fire Department.
      6.   Maintenance. Shippers' containers shall be painted and maintained
such that they do not constitute a nuisance, and shall be free of graffiti and
rust visible from public rights-of-way and properties surrounding the shippers'
container storage area. Shippers' container storage areas shall be maintained
so as to be free of weeds and debris.
   Y.   Day laborer agency. Day labor agencies shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Minimum distance between uses. 
         a.   No such use shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet
from any other day labor agency and/or establishments listed under Section
7.05 of the City of Dearborn Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   No such use shall be permitted within seven hundred (700) feet
from any school, childcare facility, park, residentially zoned district or any
existing residential use.
      2.   On-site management. Management personnel shall be present on-site
during normal business hours and must be accessible to day laborers, law
enforcement personnel, and any other individuals who needs to establish
communication upon or about the premises. On-site management also requires that
the employee has the authority to exercise control over the premises to ensure
that the use of the premises does not result in littering, nuisance activities,
noise, or other activities that interfere with the peaceful enjoyment and use
of surrounding properties.
      3.   Adequate seating and waiting area. The day laborer agency shall
provide a waiting area located in the lobby of the day labor agency. The
waiting area must accommodate seating for the maximum number of day laborers
expected per day.
      4.   Restrooms and water access. The day laborer waiting area shall
contain access to restrooms and water.
      5.   Trash. Trash receptacles shall be provided in the lobby waiting
area. Trash and cigarette receptacles shall be provided outside the premises.
      6.   Litter. All litter on the site, on the public right-of-way, and on
spaces adjacent to or within one hundred (100) feet of the premises of the use
shall be picked up at least twice a day and at the close of business, and more
often if necessary to prevent an unsightly or unsanitary accumulation, on each
day that the business is open.
      7.   Conducting business. All waiting and business related to the day
labor agency must be conducted inside the business.
   Z.   Alternative financial establishment. Alternative financial
establishments shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum distance between uses. 
         a.   No such use shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet
from any other alternative financial establishment listed under Section
7.05 of the City of Dearborn Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   No such use shall be permitted within seven hundred (700) feet
from any school, childcare facility, park, residentially zoned district or any
existing residential use.
      2.   Hours of operation. The hours of operations for alternative
financial establishments are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
      3.   Drive-thru. Drive-thru transaction stations are prohibited.
      4.   Security. 
         a.   The Dearborn Police Department will conduct a site security
survey and provide recommendations for the alternative financial establishment
that must implemented by the petitioner and/or business owner.
         b.   Requires unobstructed view of the business from a public street,
a security plan and other approved operating and development standards.
         c.   Window bars, chains, etc. are prohibited.
         d.   At least thirty (30) percent of a first floor façade that faces a
public street shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly tinted glass that
allow views into the building at eye level. The business window shall not be
obscured in any way, including by temporary or painted window signs.
      5.   Conducting business. All receipt, sorting or processing of checks,
cash, and goods shall occur within a completely enclosed building.
      6.   Lighting. The building shall have lighting to provide illumination
for security and safety of parking and access areas.
   AA.   Recreational vehicle storage facility. Recreational vehicle storage
facilities shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Screening and security. 
         a.   A secured wall or screening fence must be constructed around the
storage lot to provide security and screening from the view of the surrounding
properties and adjoining streets. Rolled razor wire on fences or walls is
prohibited. No fence or wall may exceed a maximum height of eight (8) feet.
         b.   As a substitute for a required screening wall or fence, the
Planning Commission may, in its review of the site plan, require the use of
other existing and/or proposed natural landscape features (such as closely
spaced evergreens, thujas, willows, cypresses, junipers, American hollies,
etc.) that would produce substantially the same results in terms of screening,
durability, and permanence. The character of adjoining uses and the preferences
of adjoining residents or businesses shall be taken into consideration in
determining whether any such substitution is appropriate.
         c.   When natural landscape features are required for screening as
part of Special Land Use approval, a fence that meets the requirements of
Section
5-127 of the Dearborn Code of Ordinances must be installed in addition to the
landscape features.
         d.   Lighting of the facility and storage lot must be adequate and
conforming with Section
2.12 and Section
8.02 of the Dearborn Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   Operations. 
         a.   Recreational vehicle storage facilities and the operations
conducted on-site shall comply with
Chapter 13 "Nuisances" of the City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances.
         b.   All stored recreational vehicles shall be in operable condition
with no disconnected, damaged, or missing parts. Recreational vehicles with
signs of major damage to mechanical and body parts shall not be permitted.
         c.   All stored recreational vehicles must be registered with the
Secretary of State during the current calendar year and display the
registration decals. There are three (3) options to register a recreational
vehicle with the Secretary of State. One (1) of the following three (3)
registration options is required during a calendar year: A thirty (30) day
option, sixty (60) day option, or twelve (12) month option.
         d.   No stored recreational vehicles shall be utilized for overnight
sleeping or as a living accommodation.
         e.   No vehicles shall be displayed "for sale" on the site.
         f.   All boats are required to have covers for the open areas. All
covers must be custom fit to the contours of the boat. No tarps or other non-
custom fit covers, or ready-fit or semi-custom covers may be used. A custom fit
cover is designed, manufactured and tailored to closely fit the body style and
size group of the specific make, model and year of the item to be covered.
         g.   The facility shall not engage or operate as a site for
maintenance or repair of recreational vehicles. No work or maintenance on
vehicles shall be permitted.
      3.   Lot surface. 
         a.   Drive aisles and outdoor storage lots/spaces shall have an
asphalt or concrete paved surface and be drained to prevent standing water.
   BB.   Food truck park.
      1.   Use restrictions. The principal and sole use of the property must be
a food truck park.
      2.   Food truck requirements. Food trucks on the site must have a valid
food truck license. All food trucks must remain moveable and operational at all
times.
      3.   Building requirements. A food truck park must include a permanent
building on the property which provides essential services to ensure the use
operates efficiently and consistent with health code standards. The building
must contain the following:
         a.   A facility which operates as the food truck park’s licensed
mobile food establishment commissary as regulated under PA 92 of 2000, MCL
289.1109 and MCL 289.4103. If all food trucks operating on the site are special
transitory food units, as defined under MCL 289.1111, a licensed mobile food
establishment is not required.
         b.   One of the following principal uses: a commissary kitchen, indoor
dining, or offices. These uses must be directly related, and accessory to, the
food truck park business.
         c.   For food truck parks with three or more food trucks, then the
building must contain a commissary kitchen, as defined under Section 1.03, and
an indoor dining area.
         d.   Access to washroom facilities for patrons based upon occupant
load. At a minimum, two bathrooms must be provided.
      4.   Site layout. Any areas on the property where food trucks are
proposed to be in use or parked must be identified on the approved site plan.
Food trucks must remain on paved areas at all times.
      5.   Outdoor storage prohibited. There shall be no outside storage of any
goods, inventory, or equipment.
      6.   Sanitation. A food truck park must provide the following:
         a.   A dumpster enclosure on the property per Section
2.14.A.
         b.   Installation of an exterior gravity grease interceptor for the
building, or other alternative treatment technology, is required, and is
subject to all applicable requirements under the law, including but not limited
to the Michigan Plumbing Code and applicable plumbing and sanitation
requirements found in the city’s Code of Ordinances. External waste grease
storage is prohibited.
         c.   A copy of the approved plan for sewage and waste disposal (food
waste, greywater, and grease) for each food truck from the Michigan Department
of Agriculture and Rural Development, successor agency, or an authorized local
or county health department.
      7.   Electrical requirements. Permanent electrical outlets must be
provided for each individual food truck. Use of generators is prohibited.
      8.   Propane usage. Food trucks that utilize propane must comply with all
relevant requirements under law, including but not limited to the city’s Fire
Code (See Code of Ordinances Section
10-38 ), and pass fire code inspection.
         a.   Propane canisters must be securely mounted to the food truck or
placed within a ventilated compartment;
         b.   A ventilated compartment must provide for the natural or
mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or
removing such air from, the location of the propane canister being used, in
conformity with the definition of “ventilation” found in Sec. 202 of IFC 2024;
and
         c.   Propane canisters must not be stored or placed on the ground.
      9.   Outdoor dining. Outdoor dining is considered a permitted accessory
use subject to the following regulations:
         a.   The occupant load of the outdoor dining area shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent of the interior customer/patron occupant load of the
building (occupant load to be determined per the Building Code).
         b.   The hours of operations are limited to 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
or the operating hours of the building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   All outdoor dining areas must be buffered and protected from
vehicles. Appropriate measures include but are not limited to fencing,
landscaping, and planter boxes.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 7.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 95-643, 7-5-1995; Ord. No. 06-
1088, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 09-1200, 1-20-2009; Ord. No. 10-1277, 6-21-2010; Ord.
No. 11-1306, 1-4-2011; Ord. No. 15-1458, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 15-1479, 9-22-
2015; Ord. No. 15-1483, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-1492, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 15-
1501, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 16-1519, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 16-1531, 4-12-2016; Ord.
No. 17-1582, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 21-1722, 1-11-2022; Ord. No. 22-1772, 9-13-
2022; Ord. No. 25-1839, 5-20-2025)
Sec. 7.03. - Site development standards for residential uses.
   A.   Housing for the elderly. The following site development standards shall
apply to housing for the elderly:
      1.   Minimum floor area. Dwelling units within a building shall average
three hundred fifty (350) square feet in floor area (not including kitchen and
sanitary facilities).
      2.   Lot coverage. Total coverage of the all buildings, including
dwelling units and related service buildings, shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the total site, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way.
   B.   Single-family cluster option. Except as stated within this Section, an
application for approval of a site plan for a residential cluster option shall
follow the procedures and requirements established for a special use approval
as stated in
Article 10.00. The following standards shall apply to single-family cluster
projects:
      1.   Intent. The intent of the single-family cluster option is to provide
the opportunity for creative design in single family residential districts to
accomplish the following primary objectives:
         (a)   To promote a higher quality of development than could be
achieved under conventional zoning regulations.
         (b)   To encourage innovation in land use and variety in design,
layout, and type of structures constructed.
         (c)   To provide a feasible means of residential development on sites
that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to develop because of the
parcel size or shape, the character of surrounding land uses, or other
constraints.
      2.   Eligibility criteria. 
         (a)   In considering any proposal for the single-family cluster
option, the plan commission shall determine that the proposal satisfies one (1)
or more of the following eligibility criteria:
            (1) The overall impact of the development will provide a
recognizable and substantial benefit to its ultimate residents and to the
community.
            (2) The parcel has narrow width, shallow depth, or a unusual
configuration that is a substantial detriment to development as a conventional
subdivision.
            (3) A significant portion of the property's perimeter is bordered
by a major or secondary thoroughfare so that, if developed as a conventional
subdivision, a substantial number of the lots would abut the thoroughfare and
be impacted by negative traffic noise and lights.
            (4) A substantial portion of the property's perimeter is bordered
by land that is zoned or used for more intensive and potentially incompatible
nonresidential development.
            (5) The parcel contains natural assets that would be preserved or
enhanced through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include stands
of trees, land that serves as a habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic
features, or other natural assets that should be preserved.
         (b)   An application for the single-family cluster option shall be
accompanied by written and graphic documentation demonstrating to the plan
commission that the proposal satisfies one or more of the listed eligibility
criteria.
      3.   Project density. The overall density of development on a site that
qualifies for cluster development shall not exceed the standards for density as
established by the underlying zoning regulations for the district in which the
site is located. The density of a development shall be computed by dividing the
total number of units proposed by the allowable acreage. The quotient shall be
rounded to the nearest tenth of an acre.
      For the purposes of computing density, allowable acreage shall include
the following:
         (a)   All areas to be used for residential purposes, including off-
street parking and private access roads, but excluding public street rights-of-
way;
         (b)   Dedicated private parks and/or common open space devoted for use
of residents of the single family cluster development.
      4.   Site design requirements. Single-family cluster developments shall
comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Clustering alternatives. 
            (1) Attachment of units. A maximum of four (4) single-family
dwelling units may be attached to each other provided that measures are taken
to avoid monotonous facade design or the appearance of massive buildings that
are out-of-scale with surrounding single family development. The attached units
shall be offset from one another, and/or different design details (i.e.,
different building entrance designs, different building materials, etc.) shall
be used for each unit.
            (2) Detached clusters. A maximum of four (4) single-family detached
units may be combined into a single cluster, provided that the units shall be
spaced not less than ten (10) feet apart. This spacing requirement may be
waived or modified by the plan commission during site plan review, based upon a
favorable recommendation of the City fire chief and compliance with the
building Code requirements.
         (b)   Open space.   
            (1) General requirements. Single-family cluster developments shall
provide and must maintain at least fifteen percent (15%) of the site as
dedicated common open space.
            (2) Water bodies and basins. Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
required open space may include the area of any created water bodies or water
detention/retention basins.
            (3) Conveyance of open space. The required open space shall be set
aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance, such as a deed
restriction(s) or covenant(s) that run with the land, assuring that the open
space will be developed, dedicated and continually maintained according to the
site plan and never changed to another use.
         (c)   Setbacks. 
            (1) Setbacks between clusters. Each cluster of attached or detached
dwelling units shall be set back a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from any
other cluster, except that the minimum setback for adjoining clusters that have
a side-to-side building relationship shall be twenty (20) feet.
            (2) Building setbacks. Buildings within each cluster shall comply
with the following minimum setbacks:
 
Internal private road:                   30 feet from edge of traveled roadway;
Public road right-of-way:                30 feet;
Property line (other than road right-of- 30 feet;
way):
Utility easement (other than individual  12 feet.
unit lead):
 
         (d)   Landscaping. Single-family cluster developments shall comply
with the landscaping requirements specified in
Article 5.00.
         (e)   Transitional area in density. Where the parcel proposed for use
as a cluster development abuts a conventional single-family development, the
cluster development shall be designed to provide an orderly transition between
the two (2) developments. Such a transition may be achieved by providing a
buffer zone consisting of any of the following: open space, additional
landscaping, berms, changes in topography, or similar measures.
         (f)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along all public roads
within the cluster development.
         (g)   Utility connections. Each dwelling unit shall be separately
connected and metered for City water and sewer service.
      5.   Determination of eligibility. The application for cluster
development shall include documentation that the proposal satisfies one or more
of the eligibility criteria set forth in Section
7.03C. The planning commission shall make a preliminary determination whether
the proposal qualifies for the cluster option, based on the submitted
documentation.
      6.   Effect of preliminary eligibility determination. Preliminary
determination by the planning commission that a parcel qualifies for cluster
development does not assure approval of the site plan. Such a determination,
however, does give the applicant the opportunity to proceed further with site
plan review.
      7.   Site plan review. A cluster housing development shall be subject to
the site plan review requirements in
Article 32.00 of this ordinance, as well as the additional requirements in this
Section.
      8.   Information required for site plan review. In addition to the
information required in
Article 32.00 as a part of site plan review, the following information shall be
included on all cluster option plans submitted for review:
         (a)   Acreage and density computations.
         (b)   Setbacks from all property lines and distances between all
buildings and between buildings and roads.
         (c)   Proposed landscape screening along the perimeter and within the
site.
         (d)   Specific locations of significant site features such as tree
stands and water retention areas.
         (e)   Delineation of open space areas and detailed information
concerning common access and proposed landscaping or other improvements within
the open space.
      9.   Recording of Planning Commission action. Each action taken with
reference to a cluster development proposal, including the grounds for the
action taken, shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the planning commission.
      10.   Recording of documents. If the planning commission approves the
cluster development proposal, all requirements and conditions upon which such
approval is based shall be included as part of the approved site plan.
Easements, deed covenants or deed restrictions shall be drafted into recordable
forms, reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney, and filed by the
applicant, with the appropriate county agency prior to the issuance of a
building permit for any construction.
      11.   Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee shall be deposited
with the City to insure faithful completion of improvements, in accordance with
this Ordinance.
   C.   Child care organizations. The following regulations shall apply to all
child care organizations as defined in Article 1 of this ordinance:
      1.   Licensing. In accordance with applicable state laws, all child care
organizations shall be licensed by the Department Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs and shall comply with the minimum standards of the Child Care
Organizations ACT (1973 PA 116).
      2.   Sleeping areas. In new and converted institutions, single occupant
sleeping rooms shall not be less than seventy (70) square feet, exclusive of
closet space. In new and converted institutions, multi-occupant sleeping rooms
shall not be less than fifty (50) square feet per occupant, exclusive of closet
space.
      3.   Toilet and bathing facilities. There shall be at least one (1)
toilet, lavatory, and tub or shower, which are easily accessible from sleeping
quarters, for each eight (8) residents.
      4.   Recreational areas. An institution shall provide and follow its
written policy regarding recreational activities. A variety of indoor and
outdoor recreational areas shall be provided and indicated on the site plan and
floor plans. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to review and
approve the proposed recreational activities plan and areas and determine its
adequacy in relation to the size and occupancy of the facility.
   D.   Home Occupations. Home occupations that meet the following standards
are considered a permitted accessory residential use of property:
      1.   It must be conducted entirely within a dwelling by the owner or
tenants.
      2.   It must be clearly incidental to the principal use of the dwelling
as a residence.
      3.   It must not change the character or appearance of the residence.
      4.   It must not result in any signs or displays on the premises.
      5.   It must not result in any sales of commodities or goods on the
premises.
   E.   Marijuana and Medical Marijuana Home Occupations.
      1.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this article is to exercise the
land use power of the City by regulating the medical use of marijuana, and
cultivation and possession of marijuana in a way that is consistent with the
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951et seq., City's Zoning Ordinance,
City's Code of Ordinances, and state law. In the development and execution of
these zoning regulations, it is recognized that there are some uses that, due
to operational characteristics, require additional regulations to meet public
health, safety, and welfare standards, and ensure that land use objectives of
the City are met.
      2.   Definitions, interpretations, and conflicts. The following words,
terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different
meaning. Any term defined by the MMMA or MRTMA (collectively referred to as
"the Acts") shall have the definition given in that particular statute. If the
definition of a word or phrase set forth in this article conflicts with the
definition for the same word or phrase in the Acts, or if a term is not defined
in this article but is defined in the Acts, then the definition in the Acts
shall apply.
      Adult-use participant. Means an individual 21 years of age or older that
possesses, stores, and/or processes marijuana pursuant and subject to the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951et seq.
      Enclosed, locked facility. Means a closet, room, or other comparable,
stationary, and fully enclosed area equipped with secured locks or other
functioning security devices that permit access only by a registered caregiver
or registered qualifying patient.
      Marijuana. Means all the parts of the plant genus cannabis, growing or
not; the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant;
and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
the plant or its seeds or resin, including marijuana concentrate and marijuana-
infused products. For the purposes of this article, marijuana does not include:
         1)   The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,
oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the
resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed
of the plant that is incapable of germination;
         2)   Industrial hemp; or
         3)   Any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical
or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
      Marijuana home occupations. Means accessory uses of residential
properties in which qualifying patients, primary caregivers, and adult-use
participants engage in the medical use of marijuana, and cultivation and
possession of marijuana in a way that is consistent with the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951et seq.
      Medical marijuana home occupations. Means accessory uses of residential
properties in which qualifying patients and primary caregivers engage in the
medical use of marijuana pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL
333.26421 et seq.
      Medical use of marijuana. Means the acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, extraction, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or
transportation of marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or paraphernalia
relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered
qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with
the debilitating medical condition, as defined in the Act, MCL 333.26423(h).
      Primary caregiver or caregiver. Means a person who is at least 21 years
old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marijuana
defined under MCL 333.26423(k) of the Act, and who has been issued and
possesses a valid registry identification card under the Act.
      Principal residence.  Means the one place where an owner of the property
has his or her true, fixed, and permanent home to which, whenever absent, he or
she intends to return and that shall continue as a principal residence until
another principal residence is established, pursuant to MCL 211.7dd(c).
      Qualifying patient or patient. Means a person who has been diagnosed by a
physician as having a debilitating medical condition, as defined under MCL
333.26423(l) of the Act.
      3.   Common regulations for marijuana and medical marijuana home
occupations. In addition to the standards set forth in Sec. 7.03 D for home
occupations the following standards apply specifically to marijuana home
occupations:
         a.   Square footage limitation. Not more than 25% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling or 200 square feet of the dwelling, whichever is less,
shall be used for the growing, processing, and handling of medical marijuana.
         b.   Cultivation prohibited outdoors and in accessory structures and
outdoors. The growing and/or cultivating of marijuana outdoors is prohibited.
No part of an accessory building, detached or attached garage, pole barn, shed,
or similar building or structure shall be used for the growing, processing, or
distribution of marijuana.
         c.   External appearance. With the exception of any equipment related
to the filtration, mitigation, or control of marijuana related odors, there
shall be no visible change to the outside appearance of the residential
property or other visible evidence of the conduct of the medical marijuana
operation occurring on the property.
         d.   Visibility of marijuana. No marijuana, marijuana plants,
marijuana paraphernalia, or plant growing apparatus shall be visible from a
public place or adjoining uses without the use of binoculars, aircraft, or
other optical aids, or outside of an enclosed area.
         e.   Access to marijuana limited. All storage, growing, and processing
associated with the cultivation of marijuana must occur within an enclosed area
that is equipped with locks or other functioning security devices that restrict
access to that area.
         f.   Compliance for existing growers. Residential properties within
the City that are being utilized for growing, cultivating, harvesting, and/or
storing of marijuana on the effective date of this section must come into
compliance with the provisions of this article, and all applicable requirements
within the City's Code of Ordinance within 180 days of the effective date of
this article. These regulations shall not apply to primary caregiver facilities
that were issued permits prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
      4.   Regulations for medical marijuana home occupations.
         a.   Location. Medical marijuana home occupations are limited to
detached single- family residential dwellings that are located in a RA-One
Family Residential zoning district. All storage, growing, and processing
associated with the medical use of marijuana must occur within the principal
residence for that primary caregiver or qualifying patient, and may not occur
within multiple locations.
         b.   Enclosed, locked facility. All medical marijuana cultivation,
growing, and manufacturing must occur within an enclosed, locked facility, and
such activities can occur only in locations not visible to the public and
adjoining uses.
            i.   The location of the enclosed, locked facility shall not be in
an area of the dwelling/premises where a utility or access to a utility is
located that may be accessed by someone other than the registered primary
caregiver.
         c.   Additional regulations for primary caregiver home occupations.
Primary caregiver home occupations are required to register with the City of
Dearborn in accordance with the process outlined in the City's Code of
Ordinances (
Chapter 5, Article XV). Registration for primary caregiver home occupations is
limited to owner-occupied residential dwellings. Primary caregiver home
occupations are subject to the following additional regulations:
            i.   Minimum distance requirement. No primary caregivers are
permitted within 1,000 ft. of an elementary school, middle school, or high
school, religious institution, public park, or city-owned and managed
recreational spaces located within the City. Distance shall be measured from
nearest property line to the nearest property line, measured as a straight
line.
            ii.   Limited to one primary caregiver. Only one primary caregiver
is permitted to register and operate within each single-family residential
dwelling. If a dwelling is registered for use by a primary caregiver it may not
be used for any other home occupation.
            iii.   Limits on primary caregivers and qualifying patients.  No
qualifying patient shall visit, come to, or be present at the primary
caregiver's residence to purchase, smoke, consume, obtain, or receive
possession of any marijuana. Rather, the primary caregiver must personally
deliver the marijuana to their qualifying patient. No person may deliver
medical marijuana to a qualifying patient other than the primary caregiver
linked through the state registry system to that qualifying patient.
   F.   Short Term Rentals. The following regulations shall apply to short term
rentals:
      1.   Number of rental units. One short-term rental unit is permitted per
parcel or condominium site. Additional short-term rental units may be permitted
subject to the Special Land Use process and standards outlined in Section
32.03 .
      2.   Registration. Short-term rentals must be registered with the City of
Dearborn and must remain compliant with all local and state laws including
those outlined in
Chapter 11  of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 7.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 17-1603, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 22-
1781, 12-14-2022; Ord. No. 25-1845, 7-15-2025)
Sec. 7.04. - Site development standards for mixed uses.
   Commercial uses in industrial developments. In all commercial districts, a
limited amount of storage is permitted where the storage is accessory to the
principal retail use. Similarly, in industrial districts office and sales
operations are permitted where such activities are clearly incidental to the
principal industrial use.
   In certain businesses, the accessory use is an integral part of the overall
business operation, such that the business takes on the character of a "mixed
use." In these cases, the specific guidelines provided in this section should
be used to determine if the accessory use is reasonable and should be
permitted.
   Retail uses in industrial districts. Retail uses shall be deemed acceptable
accessory uses in industrial districts if the following criteria are met:
      (a)   Character of the principal use. The principal use on the site must
be industrial in character. The retail activity must be an integral part of the
business such that separation of the manufacturing and retail activity would
adversely affect operating and management procedures.
      (b)   Percent of floor area. The retail activity shall occupy no more
than thirty percent (30%) of total floor area or one thousand (1,000) square
feet, whichever is less.
      (c)   Percent of gross value. The gross value of the retail sales shall
not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross value of the products produced on
the premises.
      (d)   Products offered for sale. Retail sales shall be limited primarily
to products produced on the premises. If it is determined by the zoning
administrator that the sale of limited specialty products not produced on the
premises is essential to installation or use of the principal product sold,
then such sales may be permitted provided that in total, they represent less
than fifty percent (50%) of the on-site retail sales.
      (e)   Compatibility of traffic. The type and quantity of traffic
generated by the retail sales operation shall be compatible with permitted
industrial uses in the district.
      (f)   Parking. Adequate parking shall be provided for the retail sales,
as specified in Section
4.01. Off-street parking shall be subject to the location and setback
requirements for the district in which the use is located.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 7.04, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 7.05. - Regulated uses.
   A.   Scope of regulations. In the development and execution of these zoning
regulations, it is recognized that there are some uses that, because of their
very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under
certain circumstances, thereby causing a deleterious effect upon the adjacent
areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that the adverse
effects of these uses will not contribute to the deterioration of the
surrounding neighborhood, including the diversity and vibrancy of business
districts. These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary
control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these
uses in any one area; i.e., not more than one such use within one thousand two-
hundred (1,200) feet of another. The establishment of the following kinds of
uses is prohibited if the establishment of any one of the following uses
constitutes the second such use within a one thousand two-hundred (1,200) foot
radius:
      1.   Adult book or supply store;
      2.   Adult model studio;
      3.   Adult motion picture arcade;
      4.   Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing theater;
      5.   Adult outdoor motion picture theater;
      6.   Adult physical cultural establishment;
      7.   Adult entertainment establishment;
      8.   Boarding house or rooming house;
      9.   Cabaret;
      10.   Massage parlor or massage establishment not including state-
certified massage therapists or practitioners;
      11.   Pawn shop or collateral loan or exchange establishments;
      12.   Public lodging house;
      13.   Second-hand resale stores.
   B.   Application procedure. Application to establish any of the above
regulated uses shall be made to the zoning administrator, who shall not approve
any such application if there are already in existence two (2) or more such
regulated uses within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of the outermost
boundaries of the lot upon which the proposed regulated use will be situated.
   C.   Waivers. Upon denial of any application for a regulated use under
Section
7.05B., the applicant may appeal for a waiver of the location provisions above
to the board of appeals consistent with the standards set forth below. The
board may waive the location provisions set forth in subsection
7.05(8), after all the following findings are made:
      1.   Compliance with regulations. The proposed use will not be contrary
to any other provision of these zoning regulations, or injurious to nearby
properties;
      2.   Not enlarge district. The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage
the development of a "skid row" or "strip";
      3.   Consistent with programs. That the establishment of an additional
regulated use will not be contrary to, or interfere with, any program of urban
renewal or neighborhood development;
      4.   Consistent with law. That all applicable City, state, or federal
laws and regulations will be observed.
   D.   Procedure for waiver. Prior to granting a waiver of the location
restrictions set forth above, and not less than five (5), nor more than fifteen
(15), days before the request for waivers is considered or a public hearing
held pursuant to this Section, the board shall publish, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, one (1) notice indicating that a request for
waivers to establish a regulated use has been received, and shall send by mail
or personal delivery a copy of that notice to the owners of the property for
which waivers are being considered, and to all waivers are being considered,
and to all persons to whom any real property is assessed within three hundred
(300) feet of the boundary of the premises in question, and to the occupants of
all structures within three hundred (300) feet. If the name of the occupant is
not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification.
      1.   Notification to manager. Notification need not be given to more than
one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than
one (1) dwelling or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one (1) occupant of each dwelling
unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure
containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas
owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or
organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure,
who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the
structure.
      2.   Notice contents. The notice of application shall:
         (a)   Inform the recipient of the applicant's name,
         (b)   Describe the nature and type of use proposed,
         (c)   Indicate the local address,
         (d)   The lot number and subdivision name of the property in question,
and,
         (e)   Provide the section of the zoning chapter under which the
proposal is being processed.
   This notice shall also invite written comments, statements, or opinions, and
indicate the place and date upon which written comments concerning the proposed
use must be received.
      3.   Hearing requests. The notice of application shall further indicate
that a public hearing on the proposed regulated use may be requested by a
property owner or occupant, no less than eighteen (18) years of age, of a
structure located within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the
property being considered for the regulated use. If the applicant or the board
requests a public hearing under this section, any interested person may be
represented by a person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation, board or
bureau.
   E.   Establishment prohibited near schools, residential zones. 
      1.   Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to hereafter establish any
regulated use if the proposed regulated use will be within a seven hundred
(700) foot radius of a residentially zoned district, or within a seven hundred
(700) foot radius of any nursery, primary, or secondary school. This
prohibition relative to the establishment of a regulated use near residentially
zoned districts shall be waived upon the presentment to the board of appeals of
a validated petition requesting such waiver, signed by at least fifty-one (51)
percent of occupants of all addresses within seven hundred (700) feet of the
proposed location. No waivers shall be given to permit a regulated use to
locate within a seven hundred (700) foot radius of any nursery, primary, or
secondary school.
      2.   Petitions for waiver. Petitions for waiver shall conform to the
following requirements:
         (a)   Circulators of petitions must subscribe to an affidavit to be
included on each page of petition signatures attesting to the fact that the
circulator is at least eighteen (18) years old, that the petition was
circulated in accordance with the rules of the Dearborn Zoning Ordinance, and
that the circulator personally witnessed the signatures on the petition and
that the same were affixed to the petition by the persons whose names appeared
thereon.
         (b)   Each petition sheet must identify and recite the Dearborn Zoning
Ordinance section that the petitioner is petitioning to be waived, and identify
the proposed use that would be allowed if the requirement is waived. Appendix
pages that contain only signatures are not permitted.
         (c)   The petition must elicit from each signer the signer's printed
and signed name, full address within seven hundred (700) feet of the proposed
regulated use, the date of signing and, if applicable, the name of the business
represented by the signer.
         (d)   The zoning administrator shall provide the petitioner a list of
all addresses that are within a seven hundred (700) foot radius of the proposed
regulated use. For purposes of determining the base number of addresses that
will be used in evaluating whether the fifty-one (51) percent threshold is
satisfied, the following standards shall be utilized:
            (1)   The phrase "occupants of all addresses" shall be construed to
include the following:
               a.   The occupant of a residential structure, whether or not
owner-occupied, or the owner of a vacant residential structure. Each unit of a
multiple-family dwelling with its own street address shall be considered a
separate address.
               b.   The occupant of each unit within a commercial building,
whether occupied by the owner or a tenant, or the owner of a vacant commercial
building, regardless of the number of units. If a commercial building is
partially occupied, then the occupied units shall each be counted as a separate
address and each be entitled to a signature, and all vacant units in the
building will be considered a single address for which the building owner may
sign once.
               c.   The owner of a multi-unit commercial or professional
building in which units are accessible exclusively through common interior
corridors. Any residential units within a multi-unit building, and any units
with public exterior entrances, shall each be considered a separate address
whose occupant may separately sign without affecting the right of the owner to
sign once on behalf of all interior units.
               d.   A representative of a religious or educational institution.
The religious or educational institution shall be considered one (1) address
entitled to one (1) signature, regardless of the number of buildings that
comprise the institution.
               e.   The owner or management company of a residential apartment
complex in which the individual units are labeled by apartment number. The
apartment complex shall be considered a single address entitled to one (1)
signature, regardless of the number of separate buildings that comprise the
complex.
               f.   To the extent that multiple addresses within the petition
area may be validly represented by the same person, that person may sign on
behalf of each property he or she properly represents.
               g.   Only one (1) signature will be permitted and required per
address, regardless of the number of persons residing in or working at the
address.
            (2)   The phrase "occupants of all addresses" shall not be deemed
to include the following:
               a.   Addresses assigned to vacant land on which no structure
exists.
               b.   In the event that reaching the fifty-one (51) percent
threshold is jeopardized solely by the existence of an unreasonably high number
of vacant properties, the petitioner may submit to the zoning administrator a
list of addresses that the petitioner wishes to challenge as being included in
the base number. If the zoning administrator can independently verify that the
properties are vacant and the owners of those properties are unreachable, the
zoning administrator may remove those properties from the list.
            (3)   Any decision of the zoning administrator to include or
exclude an address may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals.
      3.   Filing of waiver. The zoning board of appeals shall not consider the
waiver of location requirements until the above described petition, if
required, shall have been filed and verified by the zoning administrator. The
zoning administrator shall verify the petition by reviewing each signature for
conformance with the requirements of this section, and by sending a letter to
each signer at the address provided on the petition informing the signer that
he or she signed the petition, requesting that the signer contact the zoning
administrator if the signer believes that the signature is invalid, and
informing the signer of the date of the board of appeals meeting at which the
waiver will be considered.
      4.   Conditions of approval. Prior to the granting of approval for the
establishment of any regulated use, the planning commission may impose any
conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, or operation of the regulated use as in its judgment may be
necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence, bond, or
other performance and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.
   F.   Specific penalties. No person operating an adult entertainment business
shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be on the premises of
said business either as an employee or customer. In addition to the penalties
provided in this ordinance, violation of this provision may result in criminal
prosecution pursuant to Article 2 of Ordinance Chapter 14, as amended, entitled
"Penal Code".
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 7.05, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 12-1362, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 17-
1591, 9-12-2017)
ARTICLE 8.00 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 8.01. - Intent and scope of application.
   A.   Intent. The purpose of this Article is to establish controls on the
impacts generated by permitted uses so as to prevent an unreasonable negative
impact that might interfere with another person's use of his or her property,
or that may cause harm to the public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   Scope of application. After the effective date of this ordinance, Feb.
11, 1993, no structure or tract of land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, or
moved, except in conformity with all applicable performance standards set forth
in this Article. No site plan shall be approved unless evidence is presented to
indicate conformity with the requirements of this Article.
   C.   Submission of additional data. Nothing in this Article shall preclude
the applicant or other interested party from submitting additional data or
evidence related to a specific case. In consideration of such data or evidence,
the plan commission may waive or modify the regulations set forth in this
Article, provided that the plan commission finds that no harm to the public
health, safety and welfare will result and that the intent of this ordinance
will be upheld.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 8.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 8.02. - Performance standards.
   No activity, operation or use of land, buildings, or equipment shall be
permitted if such activity, operation, or use produces an environmental impact
or irritant to sensory perception which exceeds the standards set forth in this
section.
   A.   Noise. 
      1.   General requirements. No operation or activity shall be carried on
which causes or creates measurable noise levels which exceed the maximum noise
level limits prescribed in table A, following, as measured at the boundary line
of the lot on which the operation or activity is located.
      2.   Method and units of measurement. The measuring equipment and
measurement procedures shall conform to the latest American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) specifications. The sound-measuring equipment shall be
properly calibrated before and after the measurements.
   Since sound waves having the same decibel (dB) level "sound" louder or
softer to the human ear depending upon the frequency of the sound wave in
cycles per second (that is, depending on whether the pitch of the sound is high
or low) an A-weighted filter constructed in accordance with ANSI specifications
shall be used on any sound-level meter used to take measurements required in
this section. An A-weighted filter automatically takes account of the varying
effect on the human ear of different pitches. Accordingly, all measurements are
expressed in dB(A) to reflect the use of the A-weighted filter.
      3.   Table of maximum noise levels. Noise levels shall not exceed the
limits set forth in the following Table A:
Table A
Maximum Permitted Noise Level
Zoning District Time Sound Level (A-Weighted) Decibels dB(A)
Table A
Maximum Permitted Noise Level
Zoning District                Time                    Sound Level (A-Weighted)
                                                       Decibels dB(A)
Residential                    7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.  60
                               7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 55
                               10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50
Commercial                     7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.  65
                               7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.  60
Industrial, where all adjacent
properties are zoned           Anytime                 70
industrial
Industrial, where any adjacent
properties are zoned           Anytime                 60
industrial
 
   The time duration allowance set forth in the following chart shall apply to
these noise level limits.
 
Allowances For Sound Levels Lasting Less Than One Hour
Duration                        Decibel Allowance
Up to 30 minutes per hour (50%) +3 Db(A)
Up to 15 minutes per hour (25%) +6
Up to 10 minutes per hour (16%) +8
Up to 5 minutes per hour (8%)   +11
Up to 2 minutes per hour (3%)   +15
 
      4.   Compensation for street and background noise. Where street traffic
noise directly adjacent to the boundary line exceeds the maximum permitted
levels in Table A, the sound level permitted by the subject use may exceed the
levels specified, provided the sound level does not exceed the noise level on
the adjacent street(s).
   Where existing background noise exceeds the maximum permitted levels
specified in Table A, the sound level permitted by the subject use may exceed
the levels specified, provided that:
         (a)   The sound level at the property line does not exceed the
background noise level, and
         (b)   The background noise is being produced by a permitted use
operating in legally accepted manner. In order to make such a determination,
the zoning administrator shall determine the source, level and duration of
background noise.
      5.   Intermittent sounds. Intermittent sounds or sounds characterized by
pure tones may be a source of complaints, even though the measured sound level
may not exceed the permitted level in Table A. In such cases, the zoning
administrator shall investigate the complaints to determine the nature of and
justification for the complaint and possible corrective action. If the
complaints are determined to be justified and are not resolved within sixty
(60) days, the zoning administrator may proceed to enforce the terms of the
zoning ordinance in accordance with the remedies provided herein.
      6.   Variance from sound level provisions. An application for a variance
from the sound-level provisions may be submitted to the board of appeals. The
owner or operator of equipment on the property shall submit a statement
regarding the effects of noise from the equipment on the overall noise level in
the area. The statement shall also include a study of background noise levels,
predicted level of noise at the boundary line due to the proposed operation,
and justification for the variance. Upon review of the request for variance,
the board of appeals may grant a variance where strict adherence to the
permitted sound level would create unnecessary hardship and only if the
variance will not create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. The board of appeals may impose conditions of operation in granting a
variance.
      7.   Permitted exemptions. Noise resulting from the following activities
shall be exempt from the maximum permitted sound levels provided such activity
occurs in a legally-accepted manner:
         (a)   Temporary construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
         (b)   Performance of emergency work.
         (c)   Warning devices necessary for public safety, such as police,
fire, and ambulance sirens and train horns.
         (d)   Noises associated with snow plowing, street sweeping, and
similar public works activities.
         (e)   Church bells, chimes, and carillons.
         (f)   Lawn care and house maintenance that occurs between 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
   B.   Vibration. 
      1.   Permitted vibration. Vibration is the oscillatory motion of a solid
body. Machines or operations which cause vibration may be permitted in
industrial districts, provided that:
         (a)   No operation shall generate any ground- or structure-borne
vibrational motion that is perceptible to the human sense of touch beyond the
property line of the site on which the operation is located, and
         (b)   No operation shall generate any ground-transmitted vibrations
which exceed the limits specified in Section 3., following, as measured at the
boundary line of the lot on which the operation or activity is located.
      2.   Method and units of measurement. The instrument used to measure
vibrations shall be a three (3) component measuring system capable of
simultaneous measurement of vibration in three (3) mutually perpendicular
directions.
   Vibrations shall be measured in terms of particle velocity, which may be
measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of
displacement and frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be used:
 
PV     = 6.28 (F × D),
Where:
PV     = Particle velocity, expressed in inches per second
F      = Vibration frequency, expressed in cycles per second
D      = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, expressed in inches
 
   The maximum velocity shall be the vector sum of the three (3) components
recorded.
      3.   Maximum ground-transmitted vibration. Ground-transmitted vibration
shall not exceed a particle velocity of two-tenths (0.20) inches per second, as
measured at the boundary line of the lot, unless the adjacent property is used
for residential purposes, in which case the particle velocity shall not exceed
two-hundredths (0.02) inches per second. These maximum permitted values may be
doubled for impact vibrations, i.e., discrete vibration pulsations not
exceeding one (1) second in duration and having a pause of at least one (1)
second between pulses.
      4.   Permitted exemptions. Vibrations resulting from temporary
construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be
exempt from the maximum permitted vibration levels in Section 3., provided that
such activity occurs in a legally accepted manner.
   C.   Dust, smoke, soot, dirt, fly ash and products of wind erosion. Dust,
smoke, soot, dirt, fly ash, and products of wind erosion shall be subject to
the regulations established in conjunction with the Air Pollution Act, Michigan
Public Act 348 of 1965, as amended, or other applicable state or federal
regulations as administered by the Wayne County Air Pollution Division. No
person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain any process for any
purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other
natural or synthetic fuels, unless such processes or devices use or are
equipped with recognized and approved equipment, methods, or technology to
reduce the quantity of gas-borne or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the
open air.
   The drifting of air-borne matter beyond the lot line, including wind-blown
dust, particles or debris from open stock piles, shall be prohibited. Emission
of particulate matter from materials, products, or surfaces subject to wind
erosion shall be controlled by paving, wetting, covering, landscaping, fencing,
or other means.
   D.   Odor. Offensive, noxious, or foul odors shall not be allowed to escape
into the atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive, which produce a
public nuisance or hazard on adjoining property, or which could be detrimental
to human, plant, or animal life.
   E.   Glare and heat. Any operation or activity which produces glare shall be
conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light
does not exceed one-half (½) of one (1) footcandle when measured at any point
along the property line of the site on which the operation is located. Any
operation which produces intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an
enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct
view from any point along the lot lines. If heat is a result of an industrial
operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any
property line at any time.
   F.   Fire and safety hazards. 
      1.   General requirements. The storage and handling of flammable or
combustible liquids or gases, and explosives shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, county and local regulations.
      2.   Storage tanks. All storage tanks for flammable or combustible
liquids or gases above ground shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150)
feet from all property lines, and shall be completely surrounded by
embankments, dikes, or another type of approved retaining wall capable of
containing the total capacity of all tanks so enclosed. These provisions shall
not apply to approved tanks which hold propane or other fuel used for heating a
dwelling or other building on the site.
   Below-ground bulk storage tanks which contain flammable or combustible
liquids or gases shall be located no closer to the property line than the
distance to the bottom of the buried tank, measured at the point of greatest
depth. All underground tanks shall be registered with the Michigan Department
of Natural Resources, in accordance with Michigan Public Act 165 of 1985, as
amended.
      3.   Detonable materials. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of
detonable materials shall be permitted subject to approval by the Fire Chief
and the following restrictions:
 
Proposed Activity                        Restrictions
Storage, utilization or manufacture of 5 Permitted accessory use in industrial
lbs. or less                             "A" district
Storage or utilization of over 5 lbs.    Special land use in industrial "A"
                                         district
Manufacture of over 5 lbs.               Not permitted
 
   Detonable materials covered by these requirements include, but are not
necessarily limited to the following:
         (a)   All primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates, and tetracaine.
         (b)   All high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid
         (c)   Propellants and components thereof such as dry nitrocellulose,
black powder, boron hydrides, and hydrazine and its derivatives.
         (d)   Pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate, and potassium nitrate.
         (e)   Blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine.
         (f)   Unstable organic compounds such as acetylene, tetrazolium, and
ozonide.
         (g)   Strong unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid,
perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty-five
percent (35%).
         (h)   Nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor
elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
      4.   Liquefied petroleum gas. The storage or utilization of liquefied
petroleum gas shall be permitted subject to approval by the Fire Chief and the
following restrictions:
 
Proposed Activity                       Restrictions
Storage, utilization of 80 lbs. or less Permitted accessory use in all
                                        districts
Storage, utilization of more than 80    Permitted in industrial "A" district
lbs.
 
   G.   Sewage wastes and water pollution. Sewage disposal (including septic
systems) and water pollution shall be subject to the standards and regulations
established by federal, state, county and local regulatory agencies, including
the Michigan Department of Health, the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, the Wayne County Health Department, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   H.   Gases. The escape of or emission of any gas which is injurious or
destructive to life or property, or which is explosive, is prohibited. Gaseous
emissions shall be subject to regulations established in conjunction with the
Air Pollution Act, Michigan Public Act 348 of 1965, as amended, the Federal
Clean Air Act of 1963, as amended, and any other applicable state or federal
regulations. Accordingly, gaseous emissions measured at the property line at
ground level shall not exceed the levels indicated in the following chart,
which is based on the National Ambient Air Quality Standards, unless a higher
standard is imposed by a federal, state, county or local regulatory agency
which has jurisdiction:
Gas                    Maximum Emissions Level Sampling Period
Sulfur dioxide         0.14 ppm                24 hours
Hydrocarbons           0.24 ppm                3 hours
Photochemical oxidants 0.12 ppm                1 hour
Nitrogen dioxide       0.05 ppm                Annual
Carbon monoxide        9.0 ppm                 8 hours
                       35.0 ppm                1 hour
Lead                   1.5 ug/cubic meter      3 months
Mercury                0.01 mg/cubic meter     10 hours
Beryllium              2.0 ug/cubic meter      8 hours
Asbestos               0.5 fibers/cc           8 hours
 
   I.   Electromagnetic radiation and radio transmission. Electronic equipment
required in an industrial, commercial, or other operation shall be designed and
used in accordance with applicable rules and regulations established by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The operation of such equipment shall
not interfere with the use of radio, television, or other electronic equipment
on surrounding or nearby property.
   J.   Radioactive materials. Radioactive materials, wastes and emissions,
including electromagnetic radiation such as from an X-ray machine, shall not
exceed levels established by federal agencies which have jurisdiction. No
operation shall be permitted that causes any individual outside of the lot
lines to be exposed to any radiation exceeding the lowest concentration
permitted for the general population by federal and state laws and regulations
currently in effect.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 8.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 93-572, 9-21-1993)
Sec. 8.03. - Procedures for determining compliance.
   In the event that the City receives complaints or otherwise acquires
evidence of possible violation of any of the performance standards set forth in
this Article, the following procedures shall be used to investigate, and if
necessary, resolve the violation:
   A.   Official investigation. Upon receipt of evidence of possible violation,
the zoning administrator shall make a determination whether there is reasonable
cause to suspect the operation is indeed in violation of the performance
standards. The zoning administrator may initiate an official investigation in
order to make such a determination.
   Upon initiation of an official investigation, the Building Official is
empowered to require the owner or operator of the facility in question to
submit data and evidence deemed necessary to make an objective determination
regarding the possible violation. Failure of the owner or operator to supply
requested data shall constitute grounds for taking legal action to terminate
the use and/or deny or cancel any permits required for continued use of the
land. Data which may be required includes, but is not limited to the following:
      1.   Plans of the existing or proposed facilities, including buildings
and equipment.
      2.   A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes, and
products.
      3.   Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to
be used to control emissions regulated under the provisions of this Article.
      4.   Measurement of the amount or rate of emissions of the material
purported to be in violation.
   B.   Method and cost of determination. The zoning administrator shall take
measurements and complete investigation necessary to make an objective
determination concerning the purported violation. Where required measurements
and investigation can be accurately made by the zoning administrator using
equipment and personnel normally available to the City without extraordinary
expense, such measurements and investigation shall be completed before notice
of violation is issued. If necessary, skilled personnel and specialized
equipment or instruments shall be secured in order to make the required
determination.
   If the alleged violation is found to exist in fact, the costs of making such
determination shall be charged against those responsible, in addition to such
other penalties as may be appropriate. If it is determined that no substantive
violation exists, then the costs of this determination shall be paid by the
City.
   C.   Appropriate remedies. If, after appropriate investigation, the zoning
administrator determines that a violation does exist, the zoning administrator
shall take or cause to be taken lawful action as provided by this ordinance to
eliminate such violation. The owners or operators of the facility deemed
responsible shall be given written notice of the violation. The zoning
administrator shall take appropriate action in accordance with the owner or
operator's response to the notice of violation. Appropriate action includes the
following:
      1.   Correction of violation within time limit. If the alleged violation
is corrected within the specified time limit, even if there is no reply to the
notice, the zoning administrator shall note "violation corrected" on the City's
copy of the notice, and the notice shall be retained on file. If necessary, the
zoning administrator may take other action as may be warranted by the
circumstances of the case, pursuant to the regulations in this and other
ordinances.
      2.   Violation not corrected and no reply from owner or operator. If
there is no reply from the owner or operator within the specified time limits
[thus establishing admission of violation, as provided Section
8.03A.], and the alleged violation is not corrected in accordance with the
regulations set forth in this Article, then the zoning administrator shall take
such action as may be warranted to correct the violation.
      3.   Reply requesting extension of time. If a reply is received within
the specified time limit indicating that an alleged violation will be corrected
in accordance with the regulations set forth in the zoning ordinance, but that
more time is required than was granted by the original notice, the zoning
administrator may grant an extension if:
         (a)   The zoning administrator deems that such extension is warranted
because of the circumstances in the case, and
         (b)   The zoning administrator determines that such extension will not
cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
      4.   Reply requesting technical determination. If a reply is received
within the specified time limit requesting further review and technical
analysis even though the alleged violations continue, then the zoning
administrator may call in properly qualified experts to complete such analysis
and confirm or refute the initial determination of violation.
   If expert findings indicate that violations of the performance standards do
exist in fact, the costs incurred in making such a determination shall be paid
by the persons responsible for the violations, in addition to such other
penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of this ordinance. Such costs
shall be billed to those owners or operators of the subject use who are deemed
responsible for the violation. If the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days,
the City shall take whatever appropriate action is necessary to recover such
costs, or alternately, the cost shall be charged against the property where the
violation occurred. If no substantial violation is found, cost of determination
shall be paid by the City.
   D.   Continued violation. With respect to alleged violations occurring
subsequent to enactment of this ordinance, if, after the conclusion of the time
period granted for compliance, the zoning administrator finds that the
violation still exists, any permits previously issued shall be void and the
City shall initiate appropriate legal action, including possibly pursuit of
judicial remedies in court.
   E.   Appeals. Action taken by the director of building and safety pursuant
to the procedures outlined in this section may be appealed to the board of
appeals within thirty (30) days following said action. In the absence of such
appeal, the administrative decision shall be final.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 8.03, 2-2-1993)
ARTICLE 9.00 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Sec. 9.01. - Creation of districts.
   For the purposes of this ordinance, the City is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts as shown on the official Zoning Map:
R-A One Family Residential District
R-P Residential Preservation District
R-B One Family Residential District
R-C Multiple Family Residential District
R-D Multiple Family Residential District
R-E Multiple Family Residential District
O-S Business Office District
B-A Local Business District
B-B Community Business District
B-C General Business District
B-D Downtown Business District
I-A Light Industrial District
I-B Medium Industrial District
I-C Intensive Industrial District
I-D General Industrial District
T-R Technology and Research District
PUD Planned Unit Development Mixed Use District
F-P Floodplain District
V-P Vehicular Parking District
VPD Vehicular Parking District, Class A Auto Dealer
 
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 9.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 9.02. - Adoption of Zoning Map.
   The boundaries of the zoning districts listed in Section
9.01 are hereby established as shown on the official Zoning Map of the City.
The Zoning Map with all notations, references, and other information shown
thereon shall be, and is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance as if
fully described herein.
   In accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and Michigan Public Act
207 of 1921, as amended, changes made in district boundaries and other matters
portrayed on the Zoning Map shall be entered on the Zoning Map after the
amendment has been approved by the city council and has been published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. No changes of any nature shall be
made to the Zoning Map except in conformity with the procedures set forth in
Article 32.00.
   Regardless of the existence of copies of the Zoning Map which may, from time
to time, be made or published, the official Zoning Map shall be located at the
municipal offices and shall be the final authority with regard to the current
zoning status of all land in the City.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 9.02, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 9.03. - Interpretation of district boundaries.
   The following rules shall apply to the interpretation of zoning district
boundaries:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, roads, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following such limits.
   D.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
ditches, drains, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines.
   E.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or as an extension of features
cited in paragraphs (A) through (D) above shall be construed as being parallel
to or an extension of the features cited. Distances not specified on the
official Zoning Map shall be determined using the scale on the map.
   F.   Where there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict with the
city planner concerning the intended location of zoning district boundaries,
the zoning board of appeals shall interpret the exact location of zoning
district boundaries.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 9.03, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 9.04. - Zoning of vacated areas.
   Whenever any street, alley, or other public way within the City is vacated,
such street, alley, or other public way shall be automatically be classified in
the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches, and shall be
subject to the standards for said zoning district.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 9.04, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 9.05. - District requirements.
   Buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this zoning ordinance, including but
not limited to
Article 29.00, Schedule of Regulations.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 9.05, 2-2-1993)
ARTICLE 10.00 - R-A and R-B, ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-830, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 10.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 10.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, §§ 10.01—10.03, adopted Feb. 2,
1993; and Ord. No. 93-569, adopted July 6, 1993.
Sec. 10.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the One Family Residential Districts is to provide areas of
the City for the construction and continued use of single-family dwellings
within stable neighborhoods. The two (2) One Family Residential Districts have
different minimum area, density, and building placement requirements to provide
different housing types to accommodate the varied needs of the population.
   The regulations in this Article are intended to promote development that
preserves the physical characteristics of the land and natural environment to
the maximum extent possible. It is further the intent of this district to
prohibit multiple-family, office, business, commercial, or industrial use of
the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere
with single-family development or quality of life in this District.
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 10.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures.  In all areas zoned R-A and R-B One
Family Residential, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one (1) or more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings.
      2.   Private parks owned and maintained by homeowner associations.
      3.   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions in Section
2.05.
      4.   Golf courses and country clubs.
      5.   Cemeteries.
      6.   Public and private museums.
      7.   Family day care homes.
      8.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in Section
2.03.
   B.    Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 32.00 
      1.   Two-family duplex, side-by-side units, residential dwellings within
the R-B District only.
      2.   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the State of Michigan to offer courses in general
education.
      3.   Public or Private colleges, universities and other such institutions
of higher learning, offering courses in general, technical or religious
education.
      4.   Group day care homes, and child-care centers, subject to the
provisions in Section
7.02G.
      5.   Religious institutions, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02R.
      6.   Hospitals, in R-B districts only, subject to the provisions in
Section
7.02H.
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 14-1418, 2-11-2014; Ord. No 22-1745, 5-
24-22)
Sec. 10.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the city planner is
required for all uses except detached single-family residential uses, in
accordance with
Article 32.00.
   B.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the One Family Residential Districts are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   C.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Item deleted. Residential
structures must adhere to the design standards outlines in Section
2.05.
   D.   Single-family development options. Single-family development in the One
Family Residential Districts may be developed in accordance with the single-
family cluster option in Section
7.03.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the One Family
Residential Districts shall be subject to all applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this Ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site-Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 24-1822, 8-20-2024)
ARTICLE 11.00 - R-P, RESIDENTIAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
Sec. 11.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the RP, Residential Preservation District is to permit the
construction or conversion of structures for combined office and residential
use, provided that the residential character of the structure and the parcel is
maintained. This district may serve as a transition between neighborhood
commercial centers and the surrounding residential uses.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 11.01, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 04-1018, 9-21-2004)
Sec. 11.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned R-P, no building
shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor shall the land or premises
be used in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following principal
permitted uses:
      1.   Office of civic, professional, religious or charitable
organizations.
      2.   Office of an accountant, architect, artist, attorney, doctor or
dentist.
      3.   An insurance agency.
      4.   A real estate office.
      5.   A public park or playground.
      6.   Any other use that, according to the city planner, is similar to the
above.
      7.   Low-impact retail that would be harmonious with and support the
neighborhood.
      8.   Family day care homes.
      9.   Residential uses as permitted in residential districts.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted in an R-
P District, subject to the conditions specified for each use, review and
approval of the site plan, any special conditions imposed during the course of
review, and the provisions set forth in
Article 32.00.
      1.   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the state to offer courses in general education.
      2.   Group day care homes, and childcare centers, subject to the
provisions in Section
7.02G.
      3.   Religious institutions, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02R.
      4.   Private swimming pools and swimming pool clubs.
      5.   Private noncommercial recreational facilities, such as a subdivision
or neighborhood center, a nonprofit swimming pool club, or similar facility.
      6.   Community buildings, including education, social, neighborhood, or
community centers, but not a residential club operated as a commercial
enterprise.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 11.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 04-1018, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 14-
1419, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 25-1845, 7-15-2025)
Sec. 11.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Dimensional standards. 
      1.   Front yard setback. Same as R-A or as exists.
      2.   Side yard setback. Same as R-A or as exists.
      3.   Rear yard setback. Same as R-A or as exists.
      4.   Height. Same as R-A or as exists.
      5.   Coverage. Same as R-A or as exists.
   B.   Signs. One (1) flat, wall-mounted, nonilluminated sign of a maximum of
four (4) square feet is permitted or one (1) post sign as approved by the
Downtown Business District Design Review Committee (DBDDRC).
   C.   Exterior building restrictions. 
      1.   Existing residential structures. Retain the existing residential
facade; in addition to site plan review and approval by the city planner,
modifications requiring a building permit will also require review and approval
by the DBDDRC.
      2.   Existing nonresidential structures and new construction. In keeping
with the architectural character of the neighborhood; in addition to site plan
review and approval by the city planner, DBDDRC review and approval is
required.
      3.   Historic District Commission review. If the structure is
historically or architecturally significant as determined by the Historic
District Commission, or if new construction is in a designated historic
district, in addition to the standard review, review and approval will be
required by both the Historic District Commission, consistent with Section
2-481 of the City of Dearborn Code of Ordinances, and the DBDDRC.
   D.   Preservation of residential character.   
      1.   Commercial uses in existing buildings. Exterior alterations that
change the residential character or appearance of the dwelling, any accessory
building or the zoning lot, shall be reviewed and approved by the DBDDRC where
the property was originally designed for residential purposes.
      2.   New construction of commercial use. All new construction shall be
compatible with the scale and character of the surroundings; exterior building
materials shall be harmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood.
      3.   Prohibition. The combination of more than two (2) platted lots is
prohibited, except for solely residential uses.
      4.   Office uses. Office uses are limited to a maximum gross floor area
of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
      5.   Medical clinics. Medical clinics are limited to a maximum gross
floor area of two thousand (2,000) square feet.
      6.   Structures and flatwork. Maximum lot coverage for structures and
flatwork shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot.
      7.   Parking. Parking shall be developed with landscaped screening so
that there is no visual impact from the parking area to adjacent properties.
Any boundary fencing must be decorative/ornamental.
      8.   Manufacturing. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution
off of the premises in not permitted.
      9.   Enclosed buildings. All business, services, or processing, except
off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within a complete enclosed
building, unless otherwise specifically permitted.
      10.   Outside storage. There shall be not outside storage of any goods,
inventory, or equipment.
      11.   Warehousing and indoor storage. Warehousing and/or indoor storage
of goods or material, beyond that normally incidental to the above permitted
uses, shall be prohibited.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the R-P District
shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this
Ordinance, including the following:
 
Article        Topic
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking.
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Fences and Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 11.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 04-1018, 9-21-2004)
ARTICLE 12.00 - R-C, R-D, AND R-E MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-830, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 12.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 12.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, §§ 10.01—10.03, adopted Feb. 2,
1993; and Ord. No. 93-571, adopted July 6, 1993.
Sec. 12.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the R-C, R-D, and R-E Multiple Family Residential Districts is
to address the varied housing needs of the community by providing locations for
development of multiple-family housing at a higher density than is permitted in
the single-family districts. In addressing these housing needs, multiple-family
housing in the R-C, R-D, and R-E districts should be designed in consideration
of the following objectives:
   — R-C, R-D, and R-E developments are generally considered suitable
transitional uses between single-family detached housing and nonresidential
development.
   — Multiple-family housing should be provided with necessary services and
utilities, including usable outdoor recreation space and a well-designed
internal road network.
   — Multiple-family housing should be designed to be compatible with
surrounding or nearby single-family housing.
   — Multiple-family developments in the R-C, R-D, and R-E Districts should
have direct access to a collector road or major thoroughfare.
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 12.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned R-C, R-D, and R-
E Multiple Family Residential Districts, no building shall be erected, used, or
structurally altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in
part, except for one (1) or more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Single-family attached dwellings or townhouses, as defined in
Article 1.00.
      2.   Multiple-family dwellings, including apartments, terrace apartments,
and row houses.
      3.   Two-family dwellings.
      4.   Private parks and community buildings owned and maintained by a
homeowner association or the proprietor of a housing project.
      5.   State licensed residential facilities which provide resident
services for six (6) or fewer persons, such as family day care homes, adult
foster care family homes, foster family homes, or foster family group homes,
subject to the regulations of Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973, as amended.
      6.   Public and private museums.
      7.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in Section
2.03, except for the provisions of Sections
2.03C.5. and D.3. including, but not necessary limited to, the following:
         (a)   Private swimming pools for the exclusive use of residents and
their guests.
         (b)   Private garages, carports, community garages, or parking lots.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 32.00.
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings, subject to the area, height, bulk,
and placement requirements for single-family dwellings in the R-A and R-B One
Family Residential Districts,
Article 10.00.
      2.   Multiple-family housing for the elderly, subject to the provisions
in Section
7.03(A).
      3.   Nursing homes or convalescent homes, subject to the provisions in
Section
7.02(M).
      4.   Group day care homes and child-care centers, subject to the
provisions in Section
7.02G.
      5.   Private noncommercial recreational facilities, such as a community
center for the housing project.
      6.   Child care organizations which provide resident and child caring
services for thirty (30) or fewer children, subject to the regulations of
Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973, as amended.
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 17-1604, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 22-1747, 5-
24-2022; Ord. No. 25-1845, 7-15-2025)
Sec. 12.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the plan commission
is required for all uses except detached Single-Family Residential Uses, in
accordance with
Article 32.00.
   B.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the R-C, R-D, and R-E Multiple Family Residential Districts are subject to the
area, height, bulk, and placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   C.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Item deleted.
   D.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the R-C, R-D, and
R-E Multiple Family Residential Districts shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this Ordinance, including the
following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site-Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000)
ARTICLE 13.00 - O-S, BUSINESS OFFICE DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-830, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 13.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 13.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, §§ 13.01—13.03, adopted Feb. 2,
1993.
Sec. 13.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the O-S, Business Office District is to accommodate various
types of administrative and professional office uses, as well as certain
personal service businesses. These uses can serve as transitional uses between
more intensive land uses and less intensive residential uses. This district
prohibits those types of retail and other uses that typically generate large
volumes of traffic, traffic congestion, parking problems, require outside
storage, or have other impacts that could negatively affect the use or
enjoyment of adjoining properties. Accordingly, low-rise office buildings in
landscaped settings with sufficient off-street parking are considered the most
appropriate land uses in this district.
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 13.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned O-S, Business Office
District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one (1) or
more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Office buildings for professionals and general office use, subject
to the intent and limitations of this Article.
      2.   General office buildings and uses, provided that goods are not
manufactured or sold on the premises.
      3.   Business and technical schools.
      4.   Financial institutions without drive-through facilities.
      5.   Accessory structures and uses such as personal service
establishments such as shoe repair shops, tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber
shops, and including dry cleaning or laundry pickup stations without processing
on the premises and customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 7.00 and
Article 32.00.
      1.   Financial institutions with drive-through facilities.
      2.   Medical, dental, or optical laboratories, excluding the
manufacturing of pharmaceutical or other products for wholesale distribution.
      3.   Veterinary hospitals or clinics.
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 13.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
O-S Business Office District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      2.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment.
      3.   No interior advertising display shall be visible from the exterior
of the building.
      4.   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles having a maximum
gross vehicle weight of three-quarters (¾) of a ton used in the normal
operation of a permitted use on the site may be parked in the rear only. This
provision applies to operable vehicles that are moved on and off of the site on
a regular basis.
      5.   External security gates, bars, steel barriers, hurricane curtains,
and other security devices are prohibited. If they are located inside a
building, security devices must be retractable so as not to be visible from the
sidewalk or public right-of-way during business hours, must be equipped with an
emergency release device, and must be permitted and inspected by the fire
marshal and the economic and community development department commercial
services division.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the plan commission
is required for all uses in the O-S Business Office District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the O-S Business Office District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
may be permitted as a means to achieve the basic intent of this district, in
accordance with guidelines in
Article 23.00.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the Business
Office District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in this ordinance, including the following:
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site-Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-830, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 11-1318, 4-4-2011)
ARTICLE 14.00 - B-A, LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 14.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 14.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 14.01—14.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993;
Ord. No. 94-609, adopted Oct. 18, 1994; Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 16, 2000;
and Ord. No. 03-943, adopted March 4, 2003.
Sec. 14.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The B-A Local Business District is designed for the convenience of persons
residing in adjacent residential areas, and is intended to permit only such
uses as are necessary to satisfy the limited shopping and service needs of
these residents. Commercial development in this district offers a less
intensive range of goods and services than uses permitted in the B-B District
and the B-C District. Because of the limited variety of business types
permitted in the B-A District, special attention must be focused on site
layout, building design, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and coordination
of site features between adjoining sites. Accordingly, B-A Local Business
District developments should be:
   — Compatible in design with adjacent commercial development and adjacent
residential Districts,
   — Designed with a pedestrian orientation,
   — Buffered from residential areas, and
   — Located with direct access to a major thoroughfare or indirect access to a
major thoroughfare through a minor road or service drive.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 14.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In the B-A Local Business District,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all buildings shall be erected,
and all lands shall be used only for one (1) or more of the following specified
uses:
      1.   Business, executive, administrative, and professional offices.
      2.   Business and technical schools and schools and studios for
photography, art, music, and dancing.
      3.   Establishments utilizing customer operated automatic washer, dryer,
or dry cleaning machines for family washing or dry cleaning.
      4.   Financial institutions without drive-through facilities.
      5.   Medical or dental clinics and offices.
      6.   Neighborhood newspaper distribution stations, provided that loading
and unloading area is provided on the site.
      7.   Personal service establishments such as shoe repair shops, tailor
shops, barber shops/beauty salons, tanning salons, and including dry cleaning
or laundry pickup stations without processing on the premises.
      8.   Private clubs, fraternities, and lodges without rental of
facilities.
      9.   Libraries, museums, and publicly owned buildings used for offices or
business functions.
      10.   Retail stores which supply goods and commodities on the premises
for persons residing in adjacent residential areas such as groceries, dairy
products, beverages, packaged baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods,
notions, hardware, books, stationery, records, video cassette rentals or sales,
bicycles, flowers, sporting goods, paints, periodicals, shoes, hobby supplies,
small household articles, and tobacco products.
      11.   Stores producing jewelry, leather goods, candles, and similar
merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises, provided that the services of
not more than four (4) persons are required to produce such merchandise.
      12.   Religious institutions, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02R.
      13.   Other uses not specifically listed in this ordinance, after
determination by the director of building and safety that such use is similar
to other permitted uses in this district.
      14.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 7.00 and
Article 32.00.
      1.   Group day care home or child care center.
      2.   Restaurants without drive-through facilities.
      3.   Carry-out restaurants.
      4.   Outdoor dining, subject to the provisions of Section
7.02W.
      5.   Multiple-family dwellings to include rental apartments and
condominium units. These dwellings shall only be a special land use on the
second floor of buildings in which the first floor is occupied by commercial
uses that are permitted or special land uses in the B-A zoning district.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 03-943, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-1123, 3-19-
2007; Ord. No. 10-1276, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 17-1573, 7-18-2017)
Sec. 14.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
B-A District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly
with retail customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off
of the premises is not permitted.
      2.   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment. All storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted
use.
      4.   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles having a maximum
gross vehicle weight of three-quarters (¾) of a ton used in the normal
operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked in the
rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are moved on
and off of the site on a regular basis.
      5.   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of Section
5.03.
      6.   External security gates, bars, steel barriers, hurricane curtains,
and other security devices are prohibited. If they are located inside a
building, security devices must be retractable so as not to be visible from the
sidewalk or public right-of-way during business hours, must be equipped with an
emergency release device, and must be permitted and inspected by the fire
marshal and the economic and community development department commercial
services division.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the city planner is
required for all uses in the B-A Local Business District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the B-A District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and placement
requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
may be permitted as a means to achieve the basic intent of this district, in
accordance with the guidelines in
Article 23.00.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the B-A Local
Business District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in this ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 11-1318, 4-4-2011)
ARTICLE 15.00 - B-B, COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 15.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 15.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 15.01—15.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993;
and Ord. No. 93-569, adopted July 6, 1993.
Sec. 15.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the B-B Community Business District is to provide for
commercial development that offers a broad range of goods and services. Uses
permitted in the B-B District are generally intended to be less intensive than
those permitted in the B-C District. Commercial establishments in the B-
B District cater to the convenience and comparison-shopping needs of residents.
Because of the variety of business types permitted in the B-B District, special
attention must be focused on site layout, building design, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, and coordination of site features between adjoining
sites. Accordingly, Community Business District developments should be:
   — Compatible in design with adjacent commercial development,
   — Designed as part of a planned shopping center or in coordination with
development on adjoining commercial sites,
   — Buffered from or located away from residential areas, and
   — Served by a major thoroughfare.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 15.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned B-B Community
Business District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered,
nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one (1)
or more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   All principal uses and structures permitted in the B-A, Local
Business District as specified in Section
14.02(A).
      2.   Bakeries with all goods for retail sale on the premises.
      3.   Blueprinting shops.
      4.   Commercial parking lots.
      5.   Electronics, bicycle, and household appliance repair shops.
      6.   Laundries and dry cleaning establishments with processing limited to
goods brought to the establishment by the individual retail customer.
      7.   Equipment and car rentals.
      8.   Standard restaurants.
      9.   Fast food and carry out restaurants.
      10.   Other uses not specifically listed in this ordinance, after
determination by the director of building and safety that such use is similar
to other uses permitted in this district.
      11.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
      12.   Outdoor dining, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02W.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 7.00 and
Article 32.00.
      1.   Financial institutions with drive-through facilities.
      2.   Funeral homes and mortuaries.
      3.   Group day care home or child care center.
      4.   Indoor recreation facilities.
      5.   Open air businesses.
      6.   Gun sales, retail sales, commercial service, storage, or repair of
any firearms, handguns, long guns, rifles, shotguns, ammunition, gunpowder,
explosives or blasting agents as partial or sole use of an individual structure
or building subject to not being located closer than a seven hundred (700) foot
radius distance to the nearest residential zoning district, residential land
use, church or place of worship, and public or private school.
      7.   Veterinary hospitals.
      8.   Bar/lounge/tavern.
      9.   Smoking lounges subject to provisions in Section
7.02V.
      10.   Multiple-family dwellings to include rental apartments and
condominium units. These dwellings shall only be a special land use on second
and third floors of buildings in which the first floor is occupied by
commercial uses that are permitted or special land uses in the B-B zoning
district.
      11.   Alternative financial establishments.
      12.   Day labor agencies.
      13.   Restaurants with drive through facilities.
      14.   Motels and hotels.
      15.   Automobile filling and/or repair stations which may also provide
retail sales of prepackaged food products for consumption off premises, and
other small consumer convenience items.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 08-1195, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 09-1243, 9-
30-2009; Ord. No. 10-1284, 7-19-2010; Ord. No. 15-1480, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-
1493, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 15-1498, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 15-1503, 11-24-2015;
Ord. No. 17-1592, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 19-1645, 2-26-2019)
Sec. 15.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
B-B Community Business District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly
with customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the
premises is not permitted.
      2.   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment. Any storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted
use.
      4.   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles used in the
normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked
in the rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are
moved on and off of the site on a regular basis.
      5.   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of Section
5.03.
      6.   External security gates, bars, steel barriers, hurricane curtains,
and other security devices are prohibited. If they are located inside a
building, security devices must be retractable so as not to be visible from the
sidewalk or public right-of-way during business hours, must be equipped with an
emergency release device, and must be permitted and inspected by the fire
marshal and the economic and community development department commercial
services division.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the City Planner is
required for all uses in the B-B Community Business District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the B-B Community Business District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
may be permitted as a means to achieve the basic intent of this district, in
accordance with the guidelines in
Article 23.00.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the Community
Business District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in this Ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 11-1318, 4-4-2011)
ARTICLE 16.00 - B-C, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 16.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former
Article 16.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 16.01—16.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993;
and Ord. No. 93-570, adopted July 6, 1993.
Sec. 16.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the B-C, General Business District is to provide for intensive
commercial development. B-C Districts typically exhibit one (1) or more of the
following characteristics:
      — Permitted businesses offering a broad range of goods and services,
including both comparison and convenience goods and services.
      — The market for businesses in the B-C District may include the general
City population, residents in surrounding communities, and the people in
transit.
      — Permitted businesses are frequently auto-oriented, rather than
pedestrian-oriented.
      — Because of the impacts commonly generated by B-C uses, these districts
are not generally appropriate adjacent to residential uses unless ample
buffering is provided.
   Because of the variety of business types permitted in the B-C District,
special attention must be focused on site layout, building design, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, spacing of uses, and coordination of site features
between adjoining sites. Accordingly, General Business District developments
should be directly served by a major thoroughfare.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 16.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned B-C, General Business
District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one (1) or
more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   All uses permitted in a B-B District.
      2.   Service establishments including, but not limited to, a workshop
maintained by electricians, plumbers, painters, upholsterers, printers, when in
conjunction with retail establishments that offer merchandise of a related
nature.
      3.   Greenhouses or nurseries.
      4.   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric
transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations with service yards
but without storage yards, and water and sewage pumping stations.
      5.   Automobile dealerships selling new and used automobiles.
      6.   Fast food and carry-out restaurants.
      7.   Other uses not specifically listed in this ordinance, after
determination by the director of building and safety that such use is similar
to other permitted uses in this district.
      8.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted use.
      9.   Automobile filling and/or repair stations which may also provide
retail sales of prepackaged food products for consumption off premises, and
other small consumer convenience items.
      10.   Arcades and pool or billiard halls.
      11.   Hospitals.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 7.00 and
Article 32.00.
      1.   All special land uses permitted in the B-B Community Business
District as stated in Section
15.02B.
      2.   Multiple-family dwellings to include rental apartments and
condominium units.
      3.   Sale of used automobiles only.
      4.   Car wash establishments.
      5.   Bus terminals, cab stands, and other transit facilities.
      6.   Drive-in movie establishments.
      7.   Indoor motion picture theaters and rental halls.
      8.   Open air businesses.
      9.   Recreation facilities, indoor and outdoor.
      10.   Alternative financial establishments.
      11.   Day laborer agencies.
      12.   Regulated uses as set forth in Section
7.05.
      13.   Motels or hotels, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02.
      14.   Food truck parks, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02.BB, but prohibited within the West Downtown District, as defined in
Article 27.00, the BD-Downtown Business District, as defined in
Article 17.00, and the Dix-Vernor and Warren Business District Improvement
Authorities, as defined in
Article 1.00.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 15-1481, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-1484, 9-
22-2015; Ord. No. 15-1499, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 15-1504, 11-24-2015; Ord. No.
16-1548, 10-4-2016; Ord. No. 17-1593, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 18-1611, 5-15-2018;
Ord. No. 22-1767, 8-23-2022; Ord. No. 25-1839, 5-20-2025)
Sec. 16.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
B-C, General Business District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All permitted retail or services establishments shall deal directly
with customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the
premises is not permitted.
      2.   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment. Any storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted
use,
      4.   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles used in the
normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked
in the rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are
moved on and off at the site on a regular basis,
      5.   Parking or storage of damaged or disabled vehicles shall be
prohibited. Vehicles parked on a site shall not be used principally for
storage, sales, or advertising.
      6.   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of Section
5.03.
      7.   External security gates, bars, steel barriers, hurricane curtains,
and other security devices are prohibited. If they are located inside a
building, security devices must be retractable so as not to be visible from the
sidewalk or public right-of-way during business hours, must be equipped with an
emergency release device, and must be permitted and inspected by the fire
marshal and the economic and community development department commercial
services division.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the city planner is
required for all uses in the B-C, General Business District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the B-C, General Business District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
may be permitted as a means to achieve the basic intent of this District, in
accordance with the guidelines in
Article 23.00.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the B-C, General
Business District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in this ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 11-1318, 4-4-2011)
ARTICLE 17.00 - B-D, DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT
Sec. 17.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of creating the B-D, Downtown Business District in the City is to
provide for a list of land uses and a set of standards to guide the future
growth and development of these areas. It is not the intent of this Article to
change the existing zoning of any property within the boundaries of the B-D,
Downtown Business District. Each parcel of land within the B-D, Downtown
Business District shall adhere to the land uses permitted within its existing
zoning classification. This ordinance does not eliminate the need for other
permits or approvals required by other applicable laws, ordinances, or code
provisions. However, properties within the boundaries of the B-D, Downtown
Business District shall be subject to an overlay of principles and standards
that are set forth in this Article in order to promote and enhance economic
development. The following set of principles would be applied to designated B-
D, Downtown Business Districts:
      1.   Protect, enhance and reinforce the adjacent residential.
      2.   Support existing merchants, business owners and property owners.
      3.   Create a pedestrian-friendly downtown district, with unified
landscaping, paving, lighting and signage, which connects to the adjacent
residential neighborhoods.
      4.   Provide traffic calming on major avenues while retaining their
arterial function.
      5.   Provide ample, visible and accessible parking.
      6.   Provide flexible sites for new mixed-use development including
retail, entertainment, cultural, office and residential uses.
      7.   Preserve the historic heritage of downtown and Dearborn.
      8.   Connect downtown to nearby visitor attractions and employment
centers.
      9.   Create landmark gateway entrances to downtown along major avenues
and along other arterial streets.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 17.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas within the B-D, Downtown
Business District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered,
nor shall land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one (1) or
more principal permitted uses in a B-A, Local Business District; B-B, Community
Business District; and B-C, General Business District; O-S, Business Office
District; and R-C, R-D, and R-E, Multiple Family Residential Districts.
   B.   Special Land Uses. In all areas within the B-D, Downtown Business
District, Special Land Uses may be permitted as specified in the B-A, Local
Business District; B-B, Community Business District; B-C, General Business
District and O-S, Business Office District, subject to the conditions specified
for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any special conditions
imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set forth in
Article 7.00  and
Article 32.00 .
   C.   Short Term Rentals. Within the BD, Downtown Business District, short
term rentals, as defined in Section
1.03 , may be permitted in zoning districts where multiple-family dwellings are
permitted subject to the same standards and review process for multiple-family
dwellings. Additional standards specific to short term rentals may be found in
Section
7.03  (F) and
Chapter 11  of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 04-996, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 25-
1845, 7-15-2025)
Sec. 17.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
B-D, Downtown Business District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All permitted retail or services establishments shall deal directly
with customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the
premises is not permitted.
      2.   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment. Any storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted
use.
      4.   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles used in the
normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked
in the rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are
moved on and off of the site on a regular basis.
      5.   Parking or storage of damaged or disabled vehicles shall be
prohibited. Vehicles parked on a site shall not be used principally for
storage, sales, or advertising.
      6.   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of Section
5.03.
   B.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval by the city planner is
required for all uses in the B-D, Downtown Business District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the B-D, Downtown Business District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00, Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
may be permitted as a means to achieve the basic intent of this district, in
accordance with the guidelines in
Article 23.00.
   E.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the B-A, Local
Business District; B-B, Community Business District; and B-C, General Business
District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set
forth in this ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
   (F)   Off-street parking requirements. 
   (1)   It is the intent of these off-street parking requirements to regulate
parking supply and demand in a way that supports the unique character and
transportation choices in a downtown urban area.
   (2)   Due to the strong presence of the existing public parking facilities,
properties within the district are not required to provide any private parking.
However, new projects and developments are encouraged to supply parking if
feasible for their anticipated demand.
   (3)   The Planning Commission, in its review of any proposed special land
uses or site plan, shall specifically consider how the proposed project aligns
with the parking standards outlined in the table below or as explicitly
regulated in Article 4.00.
   •   Office                        3.0      Parking Spaces/1,000 square feet
   •   Retail                        1.0      Parking Spaces/1,000 square feet
   •   Restaurant                     9.0      Parking Spaces/1,000 square feet
   •   Medical                        4.0       Parking Spaces/1,000 square
feet
   •   Community                     .5      Parking Spaces/1,000 square feet
   •   Fraternal Lodges                  .5      Parking Spaces/1,000 square
feet
   •   Motel                        1.0      Parking Spaces/1,000 square feet
   •   Residential Apts.                  1.0      Parking Spaces/1,000 square
feet
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 24-1831, 12-10-2024)
Sec. 17.04. - B-D, Downtown Business District boundaries.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6551.png]
 
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.04, 2-2-1993; Ord. 19-1635, - -2019)
Sec. 17.05. - Development standards for B-D, Downtown Business Districts.
   A.   Construction of language and definitions. 
      1.   Rules of construction. The following rules of construction apply to
the text of the Ordinance.
         (a)   The provisions of this section shall have precedence over any
conflicting section contained in any other code or ordinance. The particular
shall control the general.
         (b)   In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of the ordinance and any caption, preamble or illustration, the text
shall control.
         (c)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive and discretionary.
         (d)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural; and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
         (e)   A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
         (f)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for."
         (g)   The word "person" includes an individual, firm, a corporation,
company, co-partnership, partnership, an incorporated association, club, joint
venture, estate, trust, or any other similar entity, group, or combination
acting as a unit.
         (h)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunctions "and," "or," "either … or," the conjunction shall
be interpreted as follows:
            (1) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, or
provisions, or events shall apply.
            (2) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, or
provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.
            (3) "Either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
or provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
         (i)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them, unless defined in any City ordinance.
   B.   Definitions.   
   Appearance. The outward aspect visible to the public.
   Appropriate. Sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the
whole community.
   Appurtenances. The visible, functional objects accessory to and part of
buildings.
   Architectural concept. The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of
buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development, which
produces the architectural character.
   Architectural feature. A prominent or significant part or element of a
building, structure, or site.
   Architectural style. The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of
a particular historic period.
   Attractive. Having qualities that are compatible and harmonious in design,
construction, and color scheme with the surrounding buildings.
   Awning. A roof-like covering of canvas, or similar material, over a door or
window to provide protection against the sun, wind or, rain.
   Berm. A raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the
aesthetic character.
   Character. The combination of traits which, when considered together,
distinguish specified land and/or development from other specified land and/or
development. In assessing character, the following may be considered, along
with any other expressly identified factors:
      1.   Percentage of a lot(s) covered by structures and other impervious
improvements.
      2.   Type of structure(s).
      3.   Type, extent, location and use of natural landscape.
      4.   Topography and soil.
      5.   Traffic flow and pattern, and the relationship of traffic to
pedestrian and vehicular thoroughfares.
      6.   Density of land uses.
      7.   Intensity of uses.
      8.   Type and location of utilities and other infrastructure improvement.
      9.   Natural areas.
      10.   Natural features.
      11.   Architectural concepts, features, and/or style.
   Cohesiveness. Unity of composition between design elements of a building or
a group of buildings, and the landscape development.
   Compatibility. Harmony in the appearance of two or more external design
features in the same vicinity.
   Conservation. The protection and care, which prevent destruction or
deterioration of significant structures, buildings, or natural resources.
   Exterior building component. An essential and visible part of the exterior
of a building.
   External design feature. The general arrangement of any portion of a
building, sign, landscaping or structure and including the kind, color, and
texture of the materials of such portion and types of roof, windows, doors,
lights, attached or grounded signs or other fixtures appurtenant to such
portions, as will be open to public view from any street, place or way.
   Graphic element. A letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or other
device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.
   Harmony. A quality which represents an appropriate and congruent arrangement
of parts, as in an arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements.
   Landscape. Plant materials, topography, and other natural physical elements
combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.
   Light cutoff angle. An angle from vertical extending downward from a
luminaire, which defines the maximum range of incident illumination outward at
the ground plane.
   Logic of design. Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the
solution of the problem of design.
   Mechanical equipment. Equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which
relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and
similar purposes.
   Miscellaneous structures. Structures, other than buildings, visible from
public ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings, antennas, water tanks and
towers, sheds, shelters, fences and walls, transformers, drive-up facilities,
benches, trash receptacles, fountains, etc.
   Mullion system. Decorative moldings/trim surrounding or separating (and
often supporting) windows, doors, or panels set in a series, including but not
limited to the mullion cover.
   Plant materials. Trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials,
annuals, and bulbs.
   Proportion. Balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape,
structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole.
   Scale. Proportional relationship of the size of parts to one another and to
the human figure.
   Screening. Structure of planting which conceals from view from public ways
the area behind such structure or planting.
   Shrub. A multistemmed woody plant other than a tree.
   Site break. A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and
create visual interest in a site development.
   Street hardware. Man-made objects other than buildings, which are part of
the streetscape. Examples are: lamp posts, utility poles, traffic lights,
traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes,
fire hydrants.
   Streetscape. The scene as may be observed along a public street or way
composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving,
planting, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
   Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground.
   Utilitarian structure. A structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or
electrical services to a building or development.
   Utility hardware. Devices such as poles, cross arms, transformers and
vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that
are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or
project.
   Utility service. Any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit which carries
gas, water, electricity, oil, and communications into a building or
development.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, placement standards, and landscaping. 
      1.   Front yard setbacks. The regulations for each zoning district shall
apply, except as follows: Front yard setback for commercial uses on Michigan
Avenue shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front lot line of the
business.
      2.   Landscaping. From April 1 to October 31, an owner/occupant/tenant
may install moveable container landscaping, which may encroach up to thirty
(30) inches onto sidewalks provided a five (5) foot pedestrian walkway is
maintained. Owner/occupant/tenant does so at his/her own risk and shall be
liable for injuries and damages arising there from.
   D.   Architectural standards. All buildings shall be subject to the
following physical requirements:
      1.   At least ninety percent (90%) of the exterior finish material on all
facades that face a street shall be limited to the following: glass, brick, cut
stone, cast stone, face brick, aluminum/vinyl trim. Coarsely textured stucco,
wood, and E.F.I.S. (exterior finish insulation system) shall be allowed on the
second floor or above.
      2.   The primary colors of building exteriors shall be compatible with
the colors of adjacent buildings and in character with the surrounding area,
although the trim may be of a contrasting color.
      3.   Blank walls shall not face a public street. Walls facing a public
street shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on
the front facade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing
or decorative finish materials.
      4.   All buildings fronting a public walkway shall be directly accessible
and have an entrance for the public. Each storefront must have transparent
areas, equal to seventy percent (70%) of its portion of the facade, between one
(1) and eight (8) feet from the ground. Window coverings during business hours
and visible storage are prohibited.
      5.   Storefronts shall have mullion systems, with doorways and signage
integrally designed. Mullion systems shall be painted, powder-coated, or
stained.
      6.   Glass shall be clear or lightly tinted only. Opaque applications
shall not be applied to the glass surface.
      7.   Facade openings, including porches, windows, and colonnades, shall
be vertical in proportion.
      8.   Sliding doors and sliding windows are prohibited along frontage
lines.
      9.   Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets of sufficient height to
conceal roof-mounted equipment and constructed with material compatible with
the building exterior.
      10.   Roof-mounted fixture screening, roof-mounted appliances, including,
but not limited to, air conditioners, heating apparatus, dust collectors,
filters, transformers, and any other such appliance or apparatus, shall be
enclosed on all sides by view obscuring screening so as not to be visible from
off the site from any angle. If such appliances or equipment are placed on the
ground, the above screening requirements shall still apply.
      11.   Cantilevered mansard roofs are prohibited.
      12.   Balconies, railings, and porch structures shall be brick, metal,
wood, cast concrete, stone, or stone composite.
      13.   Facades may be supplemented by awnings, which shall be straight
sheds with or without side flaps, not cubed or curved, or backlit. Awnings
shall be between eight (8) and twelve (12) feet above sidewalk grade at the
lower drip edge. Awnings must avoid street trees and be set back at least two
(2) feet from the road curb.
      14.   Outside dining tables and chairs shall be primarily metal, wood, or
similar material. Plastic outside dining tables and chairs shall be prohibited.
Approval from the zoning board of appeals is also required.
      15.   All building corners and terminal ends shall provide distinct and
prominent architectural features of enhanced character and visibility, which
reflect the importance of the building's location and create a positive visual
landmark.
      16.   All buildings that become vacant shall immediately remove all
business signage and cover all windows during the vacancy with an approved
opaque material.
      17.   External security gates and bars are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.05, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 04-996, 2-17-2004)
Sec. 17.06. - Signs.
   A.   New and replacement signs. All new and replacement signs shall conform
to the requirements of this ordinance. Plans, details, elevations and samples
must be submitted for administrative review and approved by the following
officials:
      1.   Plan reviewer. Reviews submittals for compliance with the Building
Code and sign regulations in the Code of Ordinances, decisions of this official
may be appealed to the Building Board of Appeals.
      2.   Zoning Administrator. Reviews submittals for compliance with the
specific requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, decisions of this official may
be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      3.   Director of Economic Development or their designee. Review of
submittals for compatibility with the building and its surroundings per the
standards of this article, decisions of this official may be appealed to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
   B.   Face changes or relocations. Face changes or relocations of existing
signs on the same building or site are permitted subject to permitting and
administrative approval by the Director of Economic Development or their
designee on the basis that the sign is in safe and serviceable condition and
the new sign face is consistent with the intent and requirements of this
Article to the extent feasible. A denial under this provision may be appealed
to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   C.   General requirements. 
      1.   All signs in the B-D district shall also comply with the
requirements of the general sign requirements in the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Dearborn (Chapter 5, Article XII - Signs).
      2.   All signs and sign-lighting fixtures shall exhibit ornamental
features consistent with the examples shown in the design review manual.
      3.   Every sign shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color,
lettering, location, materials, and arrangement shall be harmonious with the
building design and its surroundings, and shall be compatible with signs of
adjoining buildings.
      4.   All signs shall be constructed of durable material capable of
resisting the deleterious effects of weather exposure. Plywood, fiberboard,
plastic sheeting or similar materials are prohibited.
      5.   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Fluorescent,
brilliant, or optical colors are prohibited.
      6.   Address numbers shall be a maximum of eight (8) inches in vertical
dimension and should be separate from the main signage. Phone numbers and other
secondary text such as "dine-in or carry-out" are prohibited in most cases as
they serve limited useful communication purposes and unnecessarily contribute
to visual clutter in the district.
      7.   The vertical drip of an awning may be stenciled with signage a
maximum of eight (8) inches in vertical dimension by any horizontal length.
      8.   Lighting: Signs may be internally or externally lit. Sign lighting
shall be considered part of the design of the sign and evaluated per the
standards in this Article. Sign lighting shall be decorative or hidden from
view. Signs with exposed luminaries of any type (including neon, LEDs, and
similar) are prohibited.
      9.   Businesses located in corner buildings are permitted one (1) sign
for each street frontage.
      10.   Businesses with service entrances may identify these with one (1)
sign not exceeding two (2) square feet.
      11.   Permanent window or door signs/graphics (stenciled, etched, silk
screened, hand painted, vinyl letters/images, or similar) are permitted
provided the following standards are met:
         (a)   The seventy (70) percent transparency requirement in the
architectural standards of this Article shall still be met; otherwise such
signs shall not be permitted.
      12.   Temporary banners and window signs shall be regulated per the
provisions of the sign requirements in the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Dearborn (Chapter 5, Article XII - Signs).
      13.   Art installations. Installation of art pieces (sculpture, murals,
posters, or paintings) on the exterior of building or on the grounds of such a
building may be allowed at the discretion of the Economic Development Director.
If such an installation is primarily for the purpose of advertising a
particular brand or business, then it shall be treated as commercial signage
and subject to the requirements of this section governing such.
   D.   Wall signs. 
      1.   Prohibited wall signs. Box or cabinet signs and signs painted
directly onto any exterior wall or surface are prohibited.
      2.   Sign bands. A single external sign band or zone may be applied to
the façade of a building between the first and second floors, provided that it
shall be a maximum of one and one-half (1½) feet in vertical dimension by any
horizontal dimension. The sign band or zone may contain multiple individual
signs, but all must refer to a tenant of the building.
      3.   Board signs. Board-type signs shall be defined as signs consisting
of opaque letters permanently applied to an opaque background, anchored as a
single unit to a building façade. Board signs shall meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   Text shall be raised or routed from the background by not less
than three-quarter (¾) inch, nor more than two (2) inches.
         (b)   Text shall be of a contrasting color from the background
(painted on text is prohibited).
         (c)   Text shall be three (3) inches minimum height, and thirty-six
(36) inches maximum height.
         (d)   The background shall be framed by a finished edge.
         (e)   Logos, graphics, and features other than text are encouraged and
may be painted directly on the background.
      4.   Halo illuminated letter signs. Halo illuminated letter signs shall
be defined as individual, internally illuminated letters with opaque face and
sides. Halo illuminated letters are characterized by indirect illumination,
with all illumination projecting from the rear of each letter onto the
background surrounding the letters. Halo illuminated letter signs shall meet
the following requirements:
         (a)   The face and sides of letters shall be opaque.
         (b)   Sides of letters shall not be greater than three (3) inches.
         (c)   Text shall be three (3) inches minimum height, and thirty-six
(36) inches maximum height.
         (d)   All lights, transformers, fasteners, and connections shall be
concealed from view.
      5.   Internally illuminated letter signs. Internally illuminated letter
signs shall be defined as individual, internally illuminated letters with a
translucent face and opaque sides. Internally illuminated letter signs shall
meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The face of the letters shall be translucent, transparent faces
are prohibited (the light element should not be visible).
         (b)   The sides of the letters shall be opaque.
         (c)   Sides of letters shall not be greater than three (3) inches.
         (d)   Text shall be three (3) inches minimum height, and thirty-six
(36) inches maximum height.
         (e)   All lights, transformers, fasteners, and connections shall be
concealed from view.
      6.   Dimensional letter signs. Dimensional letter signs shall be defined
as individual letters with opaque face and sides, pin mounted to the building
façade. Dimensional letter signs shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The face and sides of letters shall be opaque.
         (b)   Sides of letters shall not be greater than three (3) inches.
         (c)   Text shall be three (3) inches minimum height, and thirty-six
(36) inches maximum height.
         (d)   Letters shall be fabricated of metal or acrylic (wood is
prohibited) designed to resist the deleterious effects of weather exposure.
         (e)   Letters shall be mounted to the building façade using stainless
steel anchors to prevent staining.
      7.   Electronic signs. Electronic signs shall be permitted in the B-
D District as secondary signage to serve a message board function; they are not
to serve as the primary signage for a commercial or institutional use.
Electronic signs shall be defined and regulated per the requirements of Section
5-1342.1 of the Code of Ordinances, except that the following additional
requirements shall apply:
         (a)   The electronic sign shall be part of or accessory to a primary
permitted sign identifying the business or institution.
         (b)   Color: single color/monochrome only.
         (c)   Resolution (minimum pixel pitch/spacing): Seventeen (17)
millimeters.
         (d)   Prohibited electronic signs:
      (1) Projecting signs.
      (2) Wall signs mounted on the front of a building perpendicular to a
public road, as these signs serve limited useful communication purposes and
unnecessarily contribute to visual and lighting clutter in the district. This
does not apply to signs mounted facing a street on the side of a building on a
corner lot.
   E.   Ground signs. Ground signs shall be any freestanding sign supported by
and anchored directly to the ground on privately owned property. Ground signs
shall include pole and monument signs. Ground signs shall meet the following
requirements:
      1.   Ground signs shall meet the requirements for one of the approved
types of wall signs described above.
      2.   Cabinet style ground signs may be approved at the discretion of the
Economic Development Director if they comply with the general sign ordinance,
meet the general requirements for downtown signs and are designed to mimic one
of the approved types of wall signs described above. Simple geometric shape
cabinet signs (squares, rectangles, circles, ovals, etc.) are prohibited.
      3.   Kiosk signs. Kiosk signs shall be defined as small ground signs
placed on public or private property for the purposes of providing directions
or other information regarding the location, nature, or schedule of activities
conducted within a specific property or district. Kiosk signs may be approved
by the Economic Development Director if they meet the requirements of the sign
ordinance, general requirements for downtown signs and are determined to be
necessary to aid the public in navigation and use of the property or district
in question.
   F.   Projecting signs. Signs which project outward from the face of the
building shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Pedestrian level projecting signs. 
         (a)   Shall be mounted perpendicular (ninety (90) degrees) to the
building façade.
         (b)   Shall be located entirely between twelve (12) and eight (8) feet
above the pedestrian walkway. Shall not project above the roof line.
         (c)   Shall be securely mounted using ornamental brackets attached to
either the building façade or from permanent overhanging canopies (chain or
hinge mounting is prohibited). If wall mounted, the sign shall be located a
maximum of six (6) inches from the wall.
         (d)   Shall not exceed two (2) feet in width or two (2) feet in
height.
         (e)   Shall be double sided, having text on two (2) sides.
         (f)   Text shall be raised or routed from the background by not less
than three-quarter (¾) inch, nor more than two (2) inches.
         (g)   Text shall be of a contrasting color from the background
(painted on text is prohibited).
         (h)   The background shall be framed by a finished edge.
         (i)   Logos, graphics, and features other than text are encouraged and
may be painted directly on the background. Icon-style signs are allowed.
         (j)   Shall not be internally illuminated or electronic signs.
      2.   Upper level projecting signs. 
         (a)   Shall be mounted perpendicular (ninety (90) degrees) to the
building façade.
         (b)   Shall be located entirely between twelve (12) and the uppermost
point of the building façade. Shall not project above the roof line.
         (c)   Shall be securely mounted to the building façade.
         (d)   Shall be double sided, having text on two (2) sides.
         (e)   Shall be located a maximum of one (1) foot from the wall.
         (f)   Shall not exceed three (3) feet in width or four (4) feet in
height.
         (g)   Shall not be internally illuminated or electronic signs.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.06, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 13-1393, 4-30-2013; Ord. No. 22-
1770, 9-13-2022)
Sec. 17.07. - Miscellaneous structures and street hardware.
   A.   Miscellaneous structures include any structures, other than buildings,
visible to view from any public way or ways. Street hardware includes all
objects not commonly referred to as structures and located in streets and
public ways and outside of buildings.
   B.   Miscellaneous structures and street hardware located on private
property shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design
and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be
proportional, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and
proportions shall be attractive.
   C.   Miscellaneous structures and street hardware located in public ways and
other public property shall be harmonious with design of adjacent buildings and
other structures and City landscape.
   D.   Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street
hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to size, landscaping, buildings,
and signs.
   E.   The provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance regarding area and bulk
regulations and standards, and of those portions of the Dearborn Building Code
which directly affect appearance, incorporated in reference thereto.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.07, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 17.08. - Residential uses.
   Residential uses are encouraged in the B-D, Downtown Business Districts.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 17.08, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 17.09. - Appeals.
   All appeals under this section shall be to the zoning board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 22-1770, 9-13-2022)
ARTICLE 18.00 - I-A, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 18.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 18.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 18.01—18.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993;
and Ord. No. 94-609, adopted Oct. 18, 1994.
Sec. 18.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the I-A, Light Industrial District is to provide locations for
planned industrial development, including development within planned industrial
park subdivisions and on independent parcels. It is intended that permitted
activities or operations produce no external impacts that are detrimental in
any way to other uses in the district or to properties in adjoining districts
not to include normal traffic impacts or similar operational aspects. Permitted
uses should be compatible with nearby residential or commercial uses.
   Accordingly, permitted manufacturing, distribution, warehousing, and light
industrial uses permitted in this district should be fully contained within
well-designed building on landscaped sites, with adequate off-street parking
and loading areas provided in accordance with the standards of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 18.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned I-A, Light Industrial
District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one (1) or
more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research,
design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a
completely enclosed building. The growing of any vegetation requisite to the
conducting of basic research shall be excluded from the requirement of
enclosure.
      2.   Any use as permitted and regulated in the T-R, Technology and
Research District and O-S, Business Office District as long as it primarily
services the employees of the principal I-A use.
      3.   Research and office uses related to permitted industrial operations.
      4.   Any of the following uses when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building:
         (a)   Warehousing and wholesale establishments, tool, die, gauge and
machine shops.
         (b)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment
of such products as: cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products,
hardware and household supplies.
         (c)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet
metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile fenders or bodies), ferrous
and nonferrous metals (excluding large castings and fabrications), shell,
textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing mills), and yams.
         (d)   The manufacture of pottery and figures or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
         (e)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal
or rubber stamps or other small molded rubber products (not including pneumatic
tires).
         (f)   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs.
         (g)   Laboratories—Experimental, film or testing.
         (h)   Mini-warehouses subject to the provisions in Section
7.02K.
         (i)   Labs.
         (j)   Data processing.
      5.   Warehouse, storage and transfer uses and electric and gas service
buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical
transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, provided that
outside storage is not permitted for any of these uses.
      6.   The parking of trucks and truck trailers incidental to any of the
above permitted uses, not to exceed seven (7) continuous days.
      7.   Commercial kennels subject to the provisions in Section
7.02J.
      8.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in Section
2.03. Accessory office and sales operations may be permitted where such
activities are clearly incidental to the principal industrial use, subject to
the provisions in Section
7.04.
      9.   Regional newspaper distribution centers, provided that loading and
unloading area is provided on the site.
      10.   Tree trimming services.
      11.   Commissary kitchens.
   B.   Uses prohibited. Manufacturing development which creates unusual danger
from fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards
and which cause noxious, offensive, unhealthful and harmful odors, fumes, dust,
smoke, light, waste, noise or vibration is prohibited.
   C.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 32.00 .
      1.   Automobile repair garages, including minor and major repair, subject
to the provisions in Section
7.02B., and provided that all operations are carried on within a completely
enclosed building.
      2.   Radio and television transmitting and receiving towers, subject to
the provisions in Section
7.02P.
      3.   Metal plating, buffing, and polishing operations.
      4.   Construction equipment and related equipment sales, leasing, and
storage, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Where feasible, equipment shall be stored inside. Open storage
structures may be permitted by the plan commission, provided that such
structures are enclosed on three (3) sides and have a roof.
         (b)   Storage yards shall be screened from any abutting public or
private road in accordance with Section
5.02E.
      5.   Contractor's storage yards, provided that such yards are completely
enclosed within an eight (8) foot masonry wall or screening, in accordance with
Section
5.02(E).
      6.   Millwork, lumber, and planing mills when completely enclosed and
located on the interior of the district so that no property line forms the
exterior boundary of the I-A District.
      7.   Retail sales, gun ranges, commercial service, storage, or repair of
any firearms, handguns, long guns, rifles, shotguns, ammunition, gun powder,
explosives or blasting agents as partial or sole use of an individual structure
or building subject to not being located closer than a seven-hundred-(700)-foot
radius distance to the nearest residential zoning district, residential land
use, church or place of worship, and public or private school.
      8.   Day laborer agencies.
      9.   Accessory retail or service uses that are intended to serve the
occupants and patrons of the principal use, provided that any such use shall be
an incidental use occupying no more than five percent (5%) of a building that
accommodates a principal permitted use. Permitted accessory retail and service
uses shall be limited to the following:
         (a)   Retail establishments that deal directly with the consumer and
generally serve the convenience shopping needs of workers and visitors, such as
convenience stores, drug stores, uniform supply stores, or similar retail
businesses.
         (b)   Personal service establishments which are intended to serve
workers or visitors in the district, such as dry cleaning establishments,
travel agencies, tailor shops, or similar service establishments.
         (c)   Restaurants, cafeterias, or other places serving food and
beverages for consumption within the building.
         (d)   Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and
savings and loan associations.
      10.   Indoor recreation facilities, in the IA District only, subject to
the provisions in Section
7.02Q(2).
      11.   Food truck courts, in the IA District only, subject to the
provisions in Section
7.02BB, but prohibited within the West Downtown District, as defined in
Article 27.00, the BD-Downtown Business District, as defined in
Article 17.00, and the Dix-Vernor and Warren Business District Improvement
Authorities, as defined in
Article 1.00.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 15-1485, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 16-1524, 3-
15-2016; Ord. No. 25-1836, 1-28-2025; Ord. No. 25-1839, 5-20-2025)
Sec. 18.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, building and uses in
the Light Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall comply with the performance
standards set forth in
Article 8.00.
      2.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, except as otherwise specified.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment except in designated areas which shall be enclosed on all sides with
a screening fence or wall, subject to the requirements in Section
5.02. Use of trailers for storage is prohibited.
      4.   Where applicable, machinery shall comply with the standards in
Section
7.02S.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval is required by the city
planner for all uses in the Light Industrial District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the Light Industrial District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the Light
Industrial District shall be subject to all applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 8.00  Performance Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
ARTICLE 19.00 - I-B, MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 19.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 19.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 19.01—19.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993.
Sec. 19.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the I-B, Medium Industrial District is to provide locations
for industrial, high technology, research and development and other knowledge
based businesses, including development within planned industrial park
subdivisions and technology and knowledge-based campus environments and on
independent parcels. It is intended that permitted activities or operations
produce limited external impacts that may be detrimental to other uses in the
district or to properties in adjoining districts.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 1525, 3-15-2016)
Sec. 19.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned I-B, Medium
Industrial District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one (1) or more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Any use as permitted and regulated in the I-A, Light Industrial
District.
      2.   The manufacture of sheet metal products, including heating and
ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and similar products.
      3.   Metal polishing and buffing, but not including metal plating.
      4.   Printing, lithography, blueprinting, and similar uses.
      5.   Warehousing and wholesale activities with accessory outside storage.
      6.   Greenhouses and plant nurseries with outside sales.
      7.   Tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
      8.   Lumber yards or building material sales establishments which have
storage in partially open structures, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any
abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, sales or display.
         (b)   Open storage structures shall be enclosed on three (3) sides and
shall have a roof.
         (c)   The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall be enclosed
with a six (6) foot high chain link fence or masonry wall, constructed in
accordance with
Article 6.00.
         (d)   A landscaped greenbelt with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet
shall be required adjacent to any street, in conformance with Section
5.02(0).
      9.   Central dry cleaning plants and laundries, provided that such plants
do not deal directly with the customer at retail.
      10.   Other research, laboratory, testing, high technology or light
manufacturing uses similar to the above.
      11.   Public or private utility or municipal service buildings, including
electric or gas service buildings and yards, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations, gas-regulator stations, water treatment plants
and reservoirs, and sewage treatment plants, provided that any open storage
shall require Special Land Use approval.
      12.   Recycling collection stations and centers.
      13.   Essential services, subject to the provisions in Section
2.16.
      14.   Parking decks and parking structures whether stand alone or
connected to another structure, intended to serve one (1) or multiple existing
or proposed structures or uses within the applicable development.
      15.   Uses and structures accessory or incidental to the above, including
retail, food, food service, banking, fitness, child care and medical facilities
principally serving occupants and patrons of the principal use or visitors to
the development in which the principal use is a part of, subject to the
provisions in Section
2.03.
      16.   Accessory office and sales operations may be permitted where such
activities are clearly incidental to the principal industrial use, subject to
the provisions in Section
7.04.
      17.   The uses permitted herein may be combined into one (1) or more
single, mixed use buildings and structures.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 32.00.
      1.   Automobile repair garages, truck repair garages, including minor and
major repair, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02B., and provided that all operations are carried on within a completely
enclosed building.
      2.   Radio and television transmitting and receiving towers, subject to
the provisions in Section
7.02P.
      3.   Metal plating, buffing, and polishing operations.
      4.   Mini-warehouses, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02K.
      5.   Construction equipment and related equipment sales, leasing, and
storage, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Where feasible, equipment shall be stored inside. Open storage
structures may be permitted by the plan commission, provided that such
structures are enclosed on three (3) sides and have a roof.
         (b)   Storage yards shall be screened from any abutting public or
private road in accordance with Section
5.02E.
      6.   Contractor's storage yards, provided that such yards are completely
enclosed within an eight (8) foot masonry wall or screening, in accordance with
Section
5.02E.
      7.   Millwork, lumber, and planing mills when completely enclosed and
located on the interior of the district so that no property line forms the
exterior boundary of the I-B District and any residential district.
      8.   Truck and trailer rentals.
      9.   Accessory retail or service uses that are intended to serve the
occupants and patrons of the principal use, provided that any such use shall be
an incidental use.
      10.   Terminal and transfer facilities to include truck storage, material
storage, shippers' containers, repair and service facilities.
      11.   Recreational vehicle storage facility.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 15-1486, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 16-1525, 3-
15-2016; Ord. No. 15-1506, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 16-1545, 10-4-2016; Ord. No. 20-
1674, 8-25-2020)
Sec. 19.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, building and uses in
the Medium Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall comply with the performance
standards set forth in
Article 8.00.
      2.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, except as otherwise specified.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment except in designated areas which shall be enclosed on all sides with
a screening fence or wall, subject to the requirements in Section
5.02. Use of trailers for storage is prohibited.
      4.   Where applicable, machinery shall comply with the standards in
Section
7.02S.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval is required by the city
planner for all uses in the Medium Industrial District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the Medium Industrial District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the Medium
Industrial District shall be subject to all applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 8.00  Performance Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 16-1525, 3-15-2016)
ARTICLE 20.00 - I-C, INTENSIVE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 20.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 20.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 20.01—20.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993.
Sec. 20.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the I-C, Intensive Industrial District is to provide locations
for industrial development. It is intended that permitted activities or
operations may produce adverse external impacts that are detrimental to other
uses in the district or to properties in adjoining districts.
   Accordingly, permitted manufacturing, distribution, warehousing, and
industrial uses permitted in this district should be fully contained within
their site with adequate off-street parking and loading areas.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 20.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned I-C, Intensive
Industrial District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one (1) or more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Any use as permitted and regulated in the I-A and I-B Industrial
Districts.
      2.   Automobile repair garages, truck repair garages, including minor and
major repair, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02B. and provided that all operations are carried on within a completely
enclosed building.
      3.   Radio and television transmitting and receiving towers, subject to
the provisions in Section
7.02P.
      4.   Metal plating, buffing, stamping, and polishing operations.
      5.   Mini-warehouses, subject to the provisions in Section
7.02K.
      6.   Construction equipment and related equipment sales, leasing, and
storage, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Where feasible, equipment shall be stored inside. Open storage
structures may be permitted by the plan commission, provided that such
structures are enclosed on three (3) sides and have a roof.
         (b)   Storage yards shall be screened from any abutting public or
private road in accordance with Section
5.02E.
      7.   Contractor's storage yards, provided that such yards are completely
enclosed within an eight (8) foot masonry wall or screening, in accordance with
Section
5.02E.
      8.   Millwork, lumber, and planing mills when completely enclosed and
located on the interior of the district so that no property line forms the
exterior boundary of the I-C District and any residential district.
      9.   Accessory retail or service uses that are intended to serve the
occupants and patrons of the principal use, provided that any such use shall be
an incidental use.
      10.   Terminal and transfer facilities to include truck storage, material
storage, shippers' containers, repair and service facilities.
      11.   Day labor agencies.
      12.   Recreational vehicle storage facility.
      13.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in Article [Section] 2.03. Accessory office and sales operations may
be permitted where such activities are clearly incidental to the principal
industrial use, subject to the provisions in Section
7.04.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 32.00.
      1.   Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacturing.
      2.   Petroleum refining.
      3.   Rubber manufacturing from crude or scrap materials.
      4.   Scrap iron and junk storage, auto wrecking and scrap iron
processing, scrap paper and rag storage or baling, If enclosed within a
substantial fence or wall.
      5.   Sewage, refuse or garbage disposal plants, or refuse dumps.
      6.   Slaughtering of animals and incineration of garbage.
      7.   Smelting of copper, tin, zinc or iron ores.
      8.   Storage of explosives.
      9.   Tar distillation.
      10.   Correctional or detention facilities.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 15-1487, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-1507, 9-
20-2016)
Sec. 20.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the Intensive Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall comply with the performance
standards set forth in
Article 8.00.
      2.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, except as otherwise specified.
      3.   There shall not be outside storage of any goods, inventory or
equipment except in designated areas which shall be enclosed on all sides with
a screening fence or wall, subject to the requirements in Section
5.02.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval is required by the city
planner for all uses in the Intensive Industrial District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the Intensive Industrial District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   D.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the Intensive
Industrial District shall be subject to all applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this Ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 8.00  Performance Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 11-1306, 1-4-2011)
ARTICLE 21.00 - I-D, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 21.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 21.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 21.01—21.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993.
Sec. 21.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the I-D, General Industrial District is to provide locations
for any industrial development or industrial related land use.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 21.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. 
      1.   All uses not expressly prohibited by this ordinance shall be
permitted in a General Industrial (I-D) zone, provided, however, that certain
uses enumerated below shall be permitted by the plan commission only as a
special land use as hereinafter provided.
      2.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in Article [Section] 2.03. Accessory office and sales operations may
be permitted where such activities are clearly incidental to the principal
industrial use, subject to the provisions in Section
7.04.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 32.00.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 21.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval is required by the city
planner for all uses in the General Industrial District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   B.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the General Industrial District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in
Article 29.00—Schedule of Regulations.
   C.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the General
Industrial District shall be subject to all applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this Ordinance, including the following:
Article Topic
Article        Topic
Article 1.00  Definitions
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 5.00  Landscaping
Article 6.00  Walls
Article 7.00  Site Development Standards
Article 8.00  Performance Standards
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
ARTICLE 22.00 - T-R, TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 22.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 22.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 22.01—22.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993.
Sec. 22.01. - Statement of purpose.
   Advances in industry and technology have created uses which are related to
industry and office uses, but may not be appropriate or function adequately in
a typical industrial or office zoning district. These uses have been identified
as "high-tech" uses. The purpose of the T-R, Technology and Research District
(T-R District) is to provide an environment where high-tech uses and functions
such as engineering, design, research and development, photonics/optics,
computer assisted design, robotics research, numerical control equipment (CAD/
CAM), prototype development and limited manufacturing, biotechnology lasers,
medical research, food and materials testing, telecommunications, and related
storage, warehousing and limited assembly operations associated with principal
permitted uses can be located. The T-R District will be located in a campus-
type environment and so situated that uses will be developed without being
negatively impacted by elements and conditions which are commonly found in a
traditional industrial district and without negatively impacting uses found in
an Office Service District.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 22.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned T-R, Technology and
Research District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered,
nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or
more of the following principal permitted uses:
      1.   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research,
research and development design, and prototype or experimental product
development.
      2.   Any use charged with the principal function of technical training.
      3.   Office buildings, providing for uses such as corporate offices in
accordance with the purpose of this district, including any of the following
occupations: executive; administrative, professional; accounting; engineering;
architecture; drafting; writing; clerical; stenographic; and sales provided
that no display shall be visible from the exterior of the building, and that
the total area devoted to product display, including both the objects displayed
and the floor space set aside for the persons observing the displayed objects,
shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the usable floor area of the
establishment.
      4.   Data processing and computer centers, including service and
maintenance of electronic data processing equipment.
      5.   Any use charged with the principal function of research in the areas
of photonics/optics, robotics, and electronic equipment.
      6.   A high-technology service activity which has as its principal
function the providing of services including computer, information transfer,
communication, distribution, processing, administrative, laboratory,
experimental, developmental, technical, or testing services.
      7.   A high-technology industrial activity which has as its principal
function limited manufacture for the purposes of one-time prototype production
robotics, biological or pharmaceutical research, or technology oriented or
emerging industrial or business activity not involving any heavy manufacturing.
      8.   A business activity which has as its primary function developing,
improving, or creating new or existing products.
      9.   Limited assembly and machining operations, when adjunct to research
and development activities occurring at the same locations, and subject to the
following conditions:
         (a)   Assembly activities shall be limited to assembly of
premanufactured finished objects or components, arid shall include only small-
volume, nonroutine production of innovative products or equipment.
         (b)   Machining shall be permitted on a limited basis and only for
research and development activities, repair, demonstration and/or training.
         (c)   Assembly operations shall be located within a building so that
floor area used for this purpose will at no point be within three hundred (300)
feet of residentially zoned land. This requirement may be waived by the plan
commission, if it is determined that there are natural features of
characteristics of the property or adjacent property that would provide a
natural separation between limited assembly operations in a building and
adjacent residentially zoned land.
   B.   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use, review and approval of the site plan, any
special conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set
forth in
Article 7.00 and
Article 32.00.
      1.   Medical or dental clinics and offices.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000; Ord. No. 19-1647, 5-7-2019)
Sec. 22.03. - Specific development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the T-R, Technology and Research District shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Site Plan Review and approval by the city planner for all uses as
specified in
Article 32.00 of this ordinance.
      2.   Off-street parking for all uses as specified in
Article 4.00 of this ordinance.
      3.   Off-street loading and unloading for all uses as specified in
Article 4.00 of this ordinance.
      4.   Screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in
Article 5.00 of this ordinance.
      5.   Signs for all uses as regulated by the City Ordinance, Chapter 5,
Article XII.
      6.   Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in
Article 29.00 of this ordinance.
      7.   The following specific requirements shall apply within T-R,
Technology and Research District:
         (a)   Machines permitted. All machines are permitted when installed
and operated so as to not allow noise, odor, fumes, dust, smoke, glare or
radioactive material exceeding the limits set forth in Performance Standards,
Article 8.00.
         (b)   Performance standards. Compliance with the Performance Standards
in
Article 8.00 is required for all uses.
         (c)   Fire safety requirements. The use of flammable gas, enameling
and paint spraying operations shall be permitted when incidental to the
principal operation and when such operations are contained within a masonry
building of four-hour fire construction.
         (d)   Source of power. Power for any manufacturing or heating process
or activity shall be derived only from electrical energy, smokeless fuels, such
as gas or oil, smokeless solid fuels containing less than twenty percent (20%)
of the volatile content on a dry basis, and bituminous coal fired by mechanical
equipment.
         (e)   Yard grading and drainage. All yards in T-R, Technology and
Research District shall be graded in a manner which shall avoid the ponding of
stormwater unless said conditions have been designed to occur as part of a
storm[water] detention plan which has been approved by the City of Dearborn and
such grading shall comply with the engineering design standards for the City of
Dearborn. A detailed grading plan shall be submitted by the builder and shall
be approved by the City of Dearborn prior to issuance of a permit.
         (f)   Emergency access. All buildings shall be readily accessible by
fire and emergency vehicles and shall comply with the current Michigan Fire
Prevention Code.
         (g)   Outdoor lighting. Lighting shall be provided in an amount which
shall be sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrian at
night.
         (h)   Trash removal. The method of trash removal shall be presented to
the plan commission for approval, if dumpsters or compactors are proposed, they
shall be located within the building.
         (i)   Fencing and screen walls. Fences and screen walls shall require
review and approval by the plan commission as a part of the site plan approval.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
ARTICLE 23.00 - PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT MIXED USE DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-831, adopted Nov. 8, 2000, amended
Article 23.00 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein.
The former
Article 23.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 23.01—23.07, adopted Feb. 2, 1993.
Sec. 23.01. - Statement of purpose.
   It is the intent of these regulations to permit Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use District for the purposes of:
   — Encouraging innovation in land use planning and development.
   — Achieving a higher quality of development than would otherwise be
achieved.
   — Encouraging assembly of lots and redevelopment of outdated commercial
corridors.
   — Encouraging in-fill development on sites that would be difficult to
develop according to conventional standards because of the shape, size,
abutting development, accessibility, or other features of the site.
   — Providing enhanced housing, employment, and shopping opportunities.
   — Providing a development of framework that promotes appropriate business
activity that significantly improves the economic viability of the City.
   — Ensuring compatibility of design and function between neighboring
properties.
   — Encouraging development that is consistent with the City's Master Plan.
   These Planned Unit Development Mixed Use regulations are not intended as a
device for ignoring the more specific standards in the Zoning Ordinance, or the
planning upon which the standards are based. Rather, these provisions are
intended to result in development that is substantially consistent with the
zoning standards generally applied to the proposed uses, but allowing for
modifications to the general standards to assure a superior quality of
development.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 23.02. - Eligibility criteria.
   To be eligible for Planned Unit Development Mixed Use approval, the
applicant must demonstrate that the following criteria will be met:
   A.   Recognizable and substantial benefit. The Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the
ultimate users of the project.
   B.   Minimum frontage and size. The Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall
have minimum frontage of two hundred (200) feet along a public street or road.
The minimum size of a parcel that is developed as a Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
   C.   Availability and capacity of public services. The proposed type and
density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the use of
public services, facilities, and utilities.
   D.   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed development shall not
have an adverse impact on the Master Plan of the City.
   E.   Compatibility with the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use intent. The
proposed development shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of these
regulations, as stated in Section
23.01.
   F.   Unified control of property. The proposed development shall be under
single ownership or control such that there is a single person or entity having
responsibility for completing the project in conformity with the Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use regulations. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer
of ownership or control, provided that notice of such transfer is given
immediately to the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 23.03. - Project design standards.
   Proposed Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall comply with the following
project design standards:
   A.   Location. A Planned Unit Development Mixed Use may be approved in any
location in the City, subject to review and approval as provided herein.
   B.   Permitted uses. Any land use authorized in this ordinance, except for
industrial uses, may be included in a Planned Unit Development Mixed Use as a
principal or accessory use, provided that public health, safety, and welfare
are not impaired.
   C.   Applicable base regulations. Unless waived or modified (in accordance
with subsection D., the yard and bulk, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting,
and other standards for the districts listed below shall generally be
applicable for uses proposed as a part of a Planned Unit Development Mixed Use:
      1.   Single-family residential uses shall comply with the regulations
applicable in the S-A and R-B, One Family Residential Districts,
Article 10.00 
      2.   Multiple-family residential uses shall comply with the regulations
applicable in the R-C, R-D and R-E Multiple Family Residential Districts,
Article 12.00.
      3.   Retail commercial uses shall comply with the regulations applicable
in the B-C, General Business District,
Article 16.00.
      4.   Office uses shall comply with the regulations applicable in the O-S,
Office,
Article 13.00.
      5.   Mixed uses shall comply with the regulations applicable for each
individual use, as outlined above, except that if regulations are inconsistent
with each other, the regulations applicable to the most dominant use shall
apply.
   D.   Regulatory flexibility. To encourage flexibility and creativity
consistent with the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use concept, departures form
the regulations in subsection C.1. above, may be permitted, subject to review
and approval by the plan commission and city council. For example, such
departures may include modifications to: lot dimensional standards; floor area
standards; setback requirements; density standards; parking, loading, and
landscaping requirements; and similar requirements. Such modifications may be
permitted only if they will result in a higher quality of development than
would be possible without the modifications.
   E.   Residential density. Modifications to the density of residential
development may be permitted upon determination that the desired density will
not adversely affect water and sewer services, storm water drainage, road
capacity, traffic, parks and recreation, fire and police services, schools,
character of the area, and any planned public and private improvements in the
area.
   F.   Permitted mix of uses. Where the existing underlying zoning district is
residential, nonresidential uses shall be permitted as part of a Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use which also contains a residential component, provided
that the applicant demonstrates that the residential uses will be predominant.
The plan commission shall determine predominance of use after taking into
account the following criteria as they apply to each of the proposed uses:
amount of traffic generated; hours of operation or use; noise, odors, and
overall impact on adjoining uses; land area allocated to each use; and,
building area allocated to each use.
   G.   Open space requirements. Planned Unit Development Mixed Uses containing
a residential component shall provide and maintain usable open space at the
ratio of three hundred fifty (350) square feet of open space per dwelling unit,
provided that each development shall contain a minimum of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of open space. Any pervious land area within the boundaries of the
site may be included as required open space, except for the land contained in
public or private street rights-of-way.
   The required open space shall be set aside by the developer through an
irrevocable conveyance, such as a deed restriction or covenant that runs with
the land, assuring that the open space will be developed according to the site
plan. Such conveyance shall:
      1.   Provide for the privately-owned open space to be maintained by
private property owners with an interest in the open space.
      2.   Provide maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule.
      3.   Provide for assessment of the private property owners by the City of
Dearborn for the cost of maintenance or the open space in the event that it is
inadequately maintained and becomes a public nuisance.
   H.   Frontage and access. Planned Unit Development Mixed Uses shall front
onto a primary major thoroughfare, secondary major thoroughfare, or collector
street, as specified in the adopted Master Plan of the City, except where the
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use involves reuse or redevelopment of an
existing structure which fronts onto a local street.
   The nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer
than one hundred (100) feet from any street or road intersection (measured from
the nearest intersection right-of-way line).
   I.   Utilities. All utilities serving a Planned Unit Development Mixed Use,
including electric, telephone, and cable television lines, shall be placed
underground, wherever feasible.
   J.   Privacy for dwelling units. The design of a Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use shall provide visual and sound privacy for all dwelling units within
and surrounding the development. Fences, walks, and landscaping shall be used
in the site design to protect the privacy of dwelling units.
   K.   Emergency access. The configuration of buildings, driveways, and other
improvements shall permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access.
   L.   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation. A pedestrian circulation system
shall be provided that is insulated as completely as possible from the
vehicular circulation system. The layout of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation routes shall respect the pattern of existing or planned streets
sidewalks, and bicycle pathways in the vicinity of the site.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 23.04. - Procedures and requirements.
   Amendment required. The approval of a Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposal shall require an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to revise the
zoning map and designate the subject property as "Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use." Approval of a Planned Unit Development Mixed Use proposal,
including all aspects of the final plan and conditions imposed on it, shall
constitute an inseparable part of the zoning amendment.
   Planned Unit Development Mixed Use applications shall be submitted in
accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in
Article 32.00. Section
32.04 calls for a two-step approval process as follows:
      1.   The applicant shall first submit a Planned Unit Development Mixed
Use Plan which shall be reviewed in accordance with zoning amendment
procedures. The plan commission shall review the Planned Unit Development Mixed
Use Plan, hold a public hearing, and make a recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council shall have the final authority to act on a Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use Plan and grant the requested Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use Zoning.
      2.   Following approval of the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use Plan
and rezoning to Planned Unit Development Mixed Use (PUD), the applicant shall
submit a final site plan for review by the plan commission in accordance with
normal site plan review procedures.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 23.05. - Standards and requirements with respect to review and approval.
   In considering any application for approval of a Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use proposal, the plan commission and city council shall make their
determinations on the basis of standards set forth for Site Plan Review in
Section
23.01, as well as the following standards and requirements:
   A.   Conformance with the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use concept. The
overall design and all uses proposed in connection with a Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use shall be consistent with and promote the intent of the
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use concept as described in Section
23.01, as well as with the specific project design standards set forth herein.
   B.   Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use shall set forth specifications with respect to height, setbacks,
density, parking, circulation, landscaping, views, and other design and layout
features which exhibit due regard for the relationship of the development to
surrounding properties and the uses thereon. In determining whether this
requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to the following:
      1.   The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of proposed
structures.
      2.   The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking
areas in relation to surrounding development.
      3.   The location and screening of outdoor storage, outdoor activity or
work areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development.
      4.   The hours of operation of the proposed uses.
      5.   The provision of landscaping and other site amenities.
   C.   Public services. The proposed Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall
not exceed the capacity of existing and available public services, including,
but not necessarily limited to, utilities, public roads, police and fire
protection services, and educational services, unless the project proposal
contains an acceptable plan for providing necessary services or evidence that
such services will be available by the time the Planned Unit Development Mixed
Use is completed.
   D.   Impact of traffic. The Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall be
designed to minimize the impact of traffic generated by the proposed
development on surrounding uses. In determining whether this requirement has
been met, consideration shall be given to the issues required in the traffic
impact analysis in Section
32.04(C).
   E.   Accommodations for pedestrian traffic. The Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use shall be designed with a sidewalk network to accommodate safe
pedestrian circulation throughout and along the perimeter of the site, without
interference from vehicular traffic.
   F.   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use shall be consistent with the general principles and
objectives of the adopted Dearborn Master Plan.
   G.   Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use shall be in compliance with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws and ordinances.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 23.06. - Phasing and commencement of construction.
   A.   Integrity of each phase. Where a project is proposed for construction
in phases, the project shall be so designed that each phase, when completed,
shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services,
facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to
insure protection of natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of
the users of the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use and residents of the
community.
   B.   Rate of completion of residential and non-residential components. 
      1.   Purpose. The purpose of the following provisions is to ensure that
Planned Unit Development Mixed Uses are constructed in an orderly manner and,
further, to ensure that the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use approach is not
used as a means of circumventing restrictions on the location or quantity of
certain types of land use.
      2.   General standards. In developments which include residential and
nonresidential components, the phasing plan shall provide for completion of at
least thirty-five percent (35%) of all proposed residential units concurrent
with the first phase of any nonresidential construction; completion of at least
seventy-five percent (75%) of all proposed residential construction concurrent
with the second phase of nonresidential construction; and completion of one
hundred percent (100%) of all residential construction prior to the third phase
of nonresidential construction. For purposes of carrying out this provision,
the percentages shall be approximations as determined by the plan commission
and city planner, based on the floor area and land area allocated to each use.
      3.   Modifications to general standards. Such percentages may be modified
should the plan commission and city planner determine that the applicant has
presented adequate assurance that the residential component or components of
the project will be completed within the specified time period.
      4.   Completion of each phase. Construction of any facility may commence
at any time following site plan approval per Section
32.02, provided that construction shall be commenced for each phase of the
project within twenty-four (24) months of the schedule set forth on the
approved plan for the planned development. However, the applicant may submit a
revised phasing plan for review and approval by the plan commission. The
applicant shall also submit a statement indicating the conditions which made
the previous phasing plan not achievable. Once construction of a planned
development has commenced, approval of a revised phasing plan shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, provided that the revised phasing does not
materially change the integrity of the approved planned development proposal.
   In the event that construction has not commenced within the required time
period and a revised phasing plan has not been submitted, the City may initiate
proceedings to amend the zoning classification of the undeveloped portion of
the site.
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
Sec. 23.07. - Development standards.
   A.   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the Planned Unit Development Mixed Use District are subject to the area, bulk,
and placement requirements specified in Section
29.00.
   B.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use District are subject to all applicable requirements set
forth in this Ordinance, as specified below:
Article Topic
Article       Topic
Article 1.00 Definitions
Article 2.00 General Provisions
Article 4.00 Off-Street Parking
Article 5.00 Landscaping
Article 6.00 Walls
Article 7.00 Site Development Standards
Article 8.00 Performance Standards
 
(Ord. No. 00-831, 11-8-2000)
ARTICLE 24.00 - FP, FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-866, adopted Dec. 4, 2001, amended Article 24 in its
entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Article
24 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 24.01—24.08, adopted Feb. 2, 1993; and Ord.
No. 06-681, adopted July 5, 1995.
Sec. 24.01. - Statement of purpose.
   A.   Intent. It is the purpose of this Article to significantly reduce
hazards to persons and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in
the City of Dearborn, and to enhance the value to the community of the natural
wildlife and vegetation dependent upon the floodplain.
   B.   Objectives. The objectives of this Article include:
      1.   The protection of human life, health and property from the dangerous
and damaging effects of flood conditions;
      2.   The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects,
rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood-damaged
public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood-damaged homes,
neighborhoods, commercial and industrial area;
      3.   The prevention of private and public economic loss and social
disruptions as a result of flood conditions;
      4.   The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the
blighting influence of flood damage;
      5.   To insure that the public has access to information indicating the
location of land areas subject to periodic flooding;
      6.   To preserve the entire floodplain to accommodate present flood flows
and future base floods, since the dangers of floods are ever increasing with
the continued development of upstream areas; and
      7.   To preserve and protect the natural resources and enhance aesthetic,
recreational, and educational values of the floodplain.
(Ord. No. 96-681, 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 24.02. - Delineation of the F-P, Floodplain Zoning District.
   The boundaries of the F-P, Floodplain Zoning District shall coincide with
the boundaries of the areas as described and set forth in the assessor's code
number in relation to each area of the River Rouge. The assessor's code numbers
utilized by the City of Dearborn assessor's office as of July 1, 1996, and said
numbers are on file in the Dearborn assessor's office, shall be included in the
F-P, Floodplain Zoning District:
      1.   Lower Branch River Rouge Floodplain. Land located north and south of
the Lower Branch River Rouge, between Brady and Gulley Road, and further
described as Assessor's code numbers:
         (a)   Brady to Military. 
            The north 139.15 feet of the east 210 feet of 82-09-221-02-078
            82-09-221-02-167
         (b)   Military to Outer Drive. 
            82-09-212-13-135
         (c)   Outer Drive to Telegraph Road. 
            82-09-213-01-110
         (d)   Telegraph Road to Gulley Road. 
            82-09-204-05-054
            82-09-204-05-093
      2.   River Rouge and Lower Branch River Rouge Floodplain. Land located
east and west of the River Rouge, and land located north and south and east and
west of the Lower Branch River Rouge, between Ford Road and Michigan Avenue,
and further described as assessor's code numbers:
         82-09-154-01-002
         82-09-222-01-039
(Ord. No. 96-681, 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 12-1370, 11-
13-2012)
Sec. 24.03. - Disputes.
   Where there are disputes as to the location of an F-P, Floodplain Zoning
District boundary, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute in
accord with Section
33.04 of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 24.04. - Required compliance.
   Compliance with the requirements of this Article shall be necessary for all
development occurring within the F-P, Floodplain Zoning District. Conflicts
between the requirements of this Article and other requirements of this
ordinance or any other ordinance shall be resolved in favor of this article,
except where the conflicting requirement is more stringent and would further
the objectives of this Article to a greater extent than the requirements of
this Article. In such cases, the more stringent requirements shall be applied.
(Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 24.05. - Permitted uses and structures.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. 
      1.   Within the F-P, Floodplain Zoning District, no land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, playfields, athletic fields,
golf courses, bridle paths, nature paths and trails;
         (b)   Wildlife preserves; and
         (c)   Required open space or lot area for structural uses that are
landward of the F-P, Floodplain Zoning District.
   B.   Accessory structures and uses. 
   The following accessory structures and uses are permitted:
   Off-street parking, streets, roads, bridges, outdoor play equipment, sheds
and garages, boat hoists, utility lines, pump houses, bleachers, bank
protection structures, signs, fences, gazebos and similar outdoor equipment and
appurtenances; provided each of the following requirements are met:
      (1) The structure would not cause an increase in water surface elevation,
obstruct flow or reduce the impoundment capacity of the floodplain;
      (2) All equipment and structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation
and lateral movement; and
      (3) Compliance with these requirements is certified by an engineering
finding by a registered engineer.
(Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 24.06. - Filling and dumping.
   Dredging and filling and/or dumping or backfilling with any material in any
manner is prohibited unless, through compensating excavation and shaping of the
floodplain, the flow and impoundment capacity of the floodplain will be
maintained or improved, and unless all applicable state regulations are met
including, but not limited to, approvals pursuant to: P.A. 288 of 1967 (MCL
560.101 et seq.); P.A. 347 of 1972, as amended, (MCL 282.101, et seq.); P.A.
346 of 1972, as amended, (MCL 281.951, et seq.); and P.A. 231 of 1970 (MCL
281.761, et seq.).
(Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 24.07. - General standards for flood hazard reduction.
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, converted or substantially
improved or placed, and no land filled or structure used in an F-P, Floodplain
District unless a Zoning Compliance Permit, or variance from the zoning board
of appeals, is obtained, which approval shall not be granted until a permit
from the Department of Natural Resources under authority of P.A. 288 of 1967
(MCL 560.101 et seq.) has been obtained. Where a development permit cannot be
issued prior to the issuance of a Zoning Compliance Permit, a letter from the
issuing agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning
compliance shall be acceptable.
   B.   All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and
located to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   C.   The city planner and the director of building and safety shall review
development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this
section, and other applicable ordinances, and shall approve or deny the
request.
   D.   Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots, which
cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this Article.
   E.   The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not
subject to state or federal regulations designed to insure flood carrying
capacity shall be maintained.
   F.   Available flood hazard data from federal, state, or other sources shall
be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this section. Data furnished
by the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from
other resources.
(Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 24.08. - Disclaimer of liability.
   A.   The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. Approval of the use of land under this Article
shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage.
   B.   This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodplain area
will be free from flood damage. This ordinance does not create liability on the
part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 01-866, 12-4-2001)
ARTICLE 25.00 - VP, VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-867, adopted Dec. 4, 2001, amended
Article 25.00 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former
Article 25.00 derived from Ord. No. 93-553, 25.01—25.03, adopted Feb. 2, 1993.
Sec. 25.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the VP, Vehicular Parking District is to provide areas to be
used solely for off-street parking as an incidental use to an abutting
commercial, office, or industrial use. More specifically, the VP, Vehicular
Parking District is intended to accommodate the parking needs of businesses
which may have developed without adequate parking, or which have the need for
additional parking due to business growth, or which have inadequate parking
because of shallow lot depth.
(Ord. No. 01-867, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 25.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned VP, Vehicular Parking
District, the land or premises shall be used only for off-street parking, and
shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the regulations set forth
herein.
(Ord. No. 01-867, 12-4-2001)
Sec. 25.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the VP, Vehicular Parking District shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Construction and maintenance. Permitted off-street parking shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of
Article 4.00.
      2.   Uses. Off-street parking in the VP, Vehicular Parking District shall
be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more business, office,
or industrial uses, located in an adjoining commercial, office or industrial
district.
      3.   Location. Permitted off-street parking shall abut a nonresidential
zoning district. There may be a private driveway or public alley between the
off-street parking and the abutting nonresidential district.
      4.   Purposes. Permitted off-street parking shall be used solely for
parking of passenger vehicles for periods of less than one (1) day.
      5.   Restrictions. Permitted off-street areas shall not be used for off-
street loading, outside storage or display, or vehicular repair.
      6.   Signs. No signs shall be permitted except for signs designating
entrances, exits, and conditions of use of the off-street parking area.
      7.   Buildings. No building shall be erected on the premises, except for
a shelter for parking attendants, provided the shelter does not exceed ten (10)
feet in height.
      8.   Screening. Notwithstanding the landscaping requirements in
Article 5.00, off-street parking in the VP, Vehicular Parking District need not
be screened from the business it is intended to serve.
      9.   Side and rear yard screening. A masonry screen wall shall be
constructed along any side or rear yard of a VP, Vehicular Parking District
which abuts a residentially zoned district, in accordance with
Article 6.00 in addition, a ten (10) foot screening greenbelt per Section
5.02 D shall be provided between the side or rear property line and the edge of
the parking lot.
      10.   Front yard requirements. Where a VP Vehicular Parking District is
contiguous to a residentially zoned district, which has common frontage on the
same road, the minimum front yard setback shall be equal to the required front
yard setback for the residential district. A landscaped berm shall be required
to screen the parking from view of the road, in accordance with Section
5.03C.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the city planner is
required for all uses in the Vehicular Parking District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the VP Vehicular
Parking District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in this ordinance, including the following:
 
Article        Topic
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking
Article 5.00  Landscaping, Screening, and Walls
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
(Ord. No. 01-867, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 21-1720, 10-12-2021)
ARTICLE 26.00 - VPD, VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT—CLASS A AUTO DEALER
Sec. 26.01. - Statement of purpose.
   The intent of the VPD, Vehicular Parking—Class A Auto Dealer District is to
provide areas to be used solely for off-street parking as an incidental use to
an abutting Class A Auto Dealer. More specifically, the VPD District is
intended to accommodate storage of new and good-condition used vehicles for
sale, but not to allow any activities that negatively impact adjacent
residential property.
(Ord. No. 05-1029, 3-7-2005)
Sec. 26.02. - Permitted uses and structures.
   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned VPD, Vehicular
Parking—Class A Auto Dealer District, the land or premises shall be used only
for off-street parking and storage of new and good-condition used vehicles for
sale, and shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the regulations
set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 05-1029, 3-7-2005)
Sec. 26.03. - Development standards.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the VPD, Vehicular Parking—Class A Auto Dealer District shall comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   Permitted off-street parking shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of
Article 4.00, with the exception of Sections
4.01B.4., D.2. and D.3.
      2.   Off-street parking in the VPD District shall be accessory to and for
use solely in connection with an adjacent Class A Auto Dealer located in an
adjoining commercial district.
      3.   Permitted off-street parking shall abut a nonresidential zoning
district. There may be a private driveway or public alley between the off-
street and the abutting nonresidential district.
      4.   Permitted off-street parking shall be used solely for parking new
and good condition used vehicles for sale by Class A Auto Dealers. A Class A
(new vehicle dealer) is defined by the Michigan Association of Auto Dealers as
a dealer that buys and sells new vehicles under a franchise agreement or a
contract with a new vehicle manufacturer. The following conditions shall apply
to storage of passenger vehicles by Class A Auto Dealers:
         (a)   Servicing and repair of vehicles is prohibited, except for
cleaning.
         (b)   Parking of vehicles with obvious damage is prohibited.
         (c)   The requirements contained in
Article 4.00, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, Sections
4.01B.4., D.2 and D.3. shall not apply to the storage of passenger vehicles in
this district by Class A Auto Dealers.
      5.   Permitted off-street parking areas shall not be used for off-street
loading, outside storage or display, vehicular repair, except that Class A Auto
Dealers may load and unload vehicles from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
      6.   No signs shall be permitted except for signs designating entrances,
exits and conditions of use of the off-street parking area.
      7.   No building shall be erected on the premises.
      8.   Notwithstanding the landscaping requirements in
Article 5.00, off-street parking in the VPD, Vehicular Parking—Class A Auto
Dealer District need not be screened from the business it is intended to serve.
      9.   Side and rear yard screening. A masonry screen wall be constructed
along any side or rear yard of a VPD District which abuts a residentially-zoned
district, in accordance with
Article 6.00. In addition, a ten (10) foot setback landscaped such that it
provides additional screening shall be provided between the side or rear
property line and the edge of the parking lot.
      10.   Front yard requirements. Where a VPD, Vehicular Parking—Class A
Auto Dealer District is contiguous to a residentially-zoned district which has
a common frontage on the same road, the minimum front yard setback shall be
equal to the required front yard setback for the residential district. A
landscaped berm shall be required to screen the parking from view of the road,
in accordance with Section
5.03(C)
      11.   Lighting. All lighting in the VPD District shall be placed and
shielded in accordance with Section
2.12.
   B.   Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the city planner is
required for all uses in the VPD, Vehicular Parking—Class A Auto Dealer
District in accordance with
Article 32.00.
   C.   General development standards. Buildings and uses in the VPD, Vehicular
Parking—Class A Auto Dealer District shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in the Ordinance, except as otherwise
provided in this Ordinance including the following:
 
Article        Topic
Article 2.00  General Provisions
Article 4.00  Off-Street Parking
Article 5.00  Landscaping, Screening, and Walls
Article 29.00 Schedule of Regulations
 
ARTICLE 27.00 - WEST DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
Sec. 27.01. - West Downtown District, in general.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of the West Downtown District form-based code is
to implement the Master Plan Vision:
      1.   Set the stage for the long-term redevelopment of the District in a
walkable, traditional pattern and form.
      2.   Provide community stakeholders a reasonable expectation of how the
District will look and function in the future.
      3.   Create a District that respects the character of Dearborn's historic
downtown while providing a transition to the more automobile-oriented parts of
the community.
      4.   Develop a setting for a true mixture of uses that recognize the West
Downtown District as an urban town center of retail, office, residential,
entertainment and dining for the City of Dearborn.
   B.   Goals. The West Downtown Form-Based District provides specific
standards to achieve the following:
      1.   Develop a fully integrated, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented
environment with buildings that contain retail, residential, and office uses.
      2.   Create a synergy of uses within the West Downtown District to
support economic development and redevelopment in accordance with the
recommendations of the Master Plan.
      3.   Minimize traffic congestion, inefficient surface parking lots,
infrastructure costs and environmental impacts by promoting a compact, mixed-
use, pedestrian-friendly district.
      4.   Regulate building height and placement to achieve appropriate scale
along streetscapes and ensure proper transition to nearby residential
neighborhoods.
      5.   Establish clear controls on building form and placement to frame a
well-defined public realm comprised of human-scale streets, neighborhoods and
public spaces, all of which contribute to creating a safe, comfortable and
livable environment.
      6.   Emphasize placemaking - physical form and character - with a
secondary focus on land uses.
   C.   Applicability.
      1.   The West Downtown District is hereby established on the Official
Zoning Map, as amended.
      2.   All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance not addressed by the
provisions of the West Downtown District shall be applicable.
      3.   The provisions of the West Downtown District, when in conflict with
the other articles of the Zoning Ordinance, shall take precedence.
   D.   Triggers for compliance. For properties located in the West Downtown
District, as designated on the Zoning Map, compliance with each component of
the district shall apply based on the following table:
                                          Architectural
Applicability               Architectural Elements -    Architectural      Parking Parking
Levels        Height Siting Elements -    Dooryard and  Elements -    Uses -       -
                            Fenestration  Private Open  Materials          Design  Location
                                          Space
                                                                                                     Architectural
                                                                                       Architectural Elements -    Architectural      Parking Parking
Applicability Levels                                                     Height Siting Elements -    Dooryard and  Elements -    Uses -       -
                                                                                       Fenestration  Private Open  Materials          Design  Location
                                                                                                     Space
New Construction                                                         X      X      X             X             X             X    X       X
Expansion of Building Area:
   Minor: 0%-38% of building area                                     X             X                           X             X    X
   Major: 39% or more of building area                                X      X      X             X             X             X    X       X
Changes in Use:
   Does not require additional parking or building additions                                                                  X
   Requires additional parking or expand the parking lot by more than               X             X             X             X    X       X
10% from the approved site plan 1
Expansion of Parking Area
   Surface Parking                                                                                                                 X       X
   Parking Structure                                                  X      X      X             X             X                  X       X
Façade Changes                                                                        X                           X
 
Footnotes:
1.   Not applicable to Public Parking Sector.
   Improvements to nonconforming sites, structures and uses are also subject to
review according to
Article 3.00 of the Dearborn Zoning Ordinance entitled Nonconformities.
   E.   Regulating map in relation to zoning map.
      1.   The intent of the regulating plan is to identify the desired
physical character by sub-district in the downtown through the use of frontage
types.
      2.   The West Downtown District Regulating Map, which is hereby adopted,
and related regulations of this sections shall control land development within
the West Downtown District.
      3.   The Regulating Map divides the West Downtown District into the
following Frontage Types:
         (a)   Urban General.
         (b)   Urban Mixed-Use.
         (c)   Mixed Residential.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7023.png]
 
   F.   Code components.
      1.   For the frontage types designated on the Regulating Map:
         (a)   Building and site development shall comply with the General
Provisions of Section
27.03 and Frontage Type standards of Section
27.04;
         (b)   Uses shall comply with the use standards of Section
27.05;
         (c)   Signs shall comply with the standards of Section
27.06; and
         (d)   Parking shall comply with the standards of Section
27.07.
(Ord. No. 19-1634, - -2019; Ord. No. 20-1681, 9-22-2020; Ord. No. 23-1801, 9-
26-2023)
Sec. 27.02. - Administration.
   A.   Plan review.
      1.   Site plan and concept plan reviews and approvals shall be required
for the activities or uses listed in
Table 27.01.
      2.   Development requiring Site Plan Review shall follow the Site Plan
Review process set forth in
Article 32.00.
      3.   Approvals are obtained from the Planning Commission, City Council,
or Administrative (City Planner, or his or her designee), depending upon the
nature of the proposed construction or use. Where the Ordinance allows the City
to grant modifications to a specific requirement, the approval authority shall
be the body with the authority to grant the associated modification or waiver,
based upon the standards provided in that section. Variances may only be
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) per
Article 32.00.
      4.   A site plan shall be submitted for the following activities:
Table 27.01:   Administrative
Review Process Concept Plan Full Site Plan Planning Commission City Council
Approvals
                                                                               Administrative
Table 27.01: Review Process Approvals                                          Concept Full   Planning   City
                                                                               Plan    Site   Commission Council
                                                                                       Plan
Site Plan Review                                                                                       
   New development                                                                  X
   Major Expansion                                                                  X
   Minor Expansion                                                          X
   Accessory structures                                                     X
   Change in use that requires additional parking or expand the parking lot Xy
more than 10% from the approved site plan
   Provide more parking spaces than permitted (must meet special land use                  X
criteria)
Special Land Use                                                                              X
Rezoning                                                                                      X          X
 
      5.   The City Planner may require additional site plan information
related to the proposed project area and existing site areas that do not meet
current standards. The City Planner, or his or her designee, retains the option
to require a complete site plan for review by the Planning Commission,
particularly for sites which do not comply with previously approved site plans,
sites with parking deficiencies, sites abutting residential districts or sites
experiencing problems with drainage, traffic, noise, aesthetics or other
general health and safety issues. If a full site plan is required, the reasons
shall be provided in writing to the applicant and the Planning Commission, and
the City Planner shall inform the applicant to submit a set of plans in
accordance with
Article 32.00 within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the application.
      6.   Concept Plan Review:
         Minor Expansions, accessory structures, or changes in use to existing
sites are permitted to provide less detailed information than a full-scale site
plan review. The level of information is intended to be proportionate to the
extent of the change and yet ensure adequate review for compliance with
applicable standards.
         (a)   Application form;
         (b)   Conceptual review fee;
         (c)   The name and address of the owner and any designated
representative of the owner;
         (d)   Written description of the proposed use;
         (e)   Conceptual site plan, illustrating existing site features such
as lot dimensions, general footprints of buildings and parking, and provides
more detail on the areas of the site proposed to be changed. The level of
information required shall be established by the Director of Economic and
Community Development Department to be sufficient to ensure the modification
complies with this and other applicable City codes.
         (f)   A location map.
   B.   Deviations from approved Site Plan. Minor changes to the approved final
site plan may be approved by the City Planner, or his or her designee, without
requiring a resubmittal to the Planning Commission or City Council, as
applicable, provided that the applicant or property owner notifies the City
Planner of any proposed amendment to such approved site plan prior to making
said change on the site and the City Planner determines the proposed revision
does not alter the basic design, compliance with the standards of approval, nor
any specified conditions of the approved site plan. Where the modifications are
not determined to be minor, then the site plan shall require resubmittal to the
Planning Commission, as applicable, for approval as a site plan amendment. For
purposes of interpretation, the following shall be considered minor changes
only if the changes continue to comply with the design requirements:
      1.   Height:
         (a)   Minimum and maximum height - up to five percent for any
cumulative increase or decrease in building height.
         (b)   Finished floor elevation - up to five percent.
      2.   Siting:
         (a)   Build-to line-up to 5 feet forward or backward.
         (b)   Minimum percentage built-to - reduction of up to five percent of
required length.
         (c)   Parking setback line - move forward up to 5 feet.
      3.   Architectural Elements:
         (a)   Entrances (maximum average spacing) - up to ten percent increase
in spacing.
         (b)   Fenestration (minimum and maximum percent) - up to five percent.
         (c)   Projections - up to five percent.
      4.   Storefront - up to ten percent.
(Ord. 19-1634, - -2019)
Sec. 27.03. - General provisions.
   A.   Height.
      1.   Measuring height:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6692.png]
 
         (a)   The minimum and maximum building heights are measured from the
average fronting sidewalk to the halfway point of a pitched roof or to the top
of a wall plate for flat roofs.
         (b)   The minimum height shall be satisfied from the build-to line
back to a depth of at least 30 feet.
         (c)   A building height maximum of a half story, labeled as ".5",
indicates an attic story with dormers in a pitched roof. Dormers in a half
story shall be less than 15 feet wide and their collective width may not be
more than 60 percent of the building elevation length.
         (d)   Second floor finished elevation shall be measured from the
average fronting sidewalk grade to the second story finished floor
elevation.   
         (e)   Upper floor clear height is measured from finished floor
elevation to finished ceiling elevation.
      2.   Permitted roof types:
         (a)   Pitched: between 4:12 and 12:12 slope.
         (b)   Flat roof: with cornice and parapet.
      3.   Height exceptions:
         (a)   The following structures may be erected above the height limits
of this chapter, subject the additional requirements below: screened mechanical
equipment; roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the
building; skylights; towers; steeples; stage lofts and screens; flagpoles;
chimneys; water tanks; solar or wind energy devices; or similar structures.
         (b)   None of the structures described above may be erected to exceed
the building height by more than 15 feet. The aggregate area of all such
structures, including parapet walls, shall not be greater than ten percent of
the roof area of the building and shall be setback 6 feet along the perimeter
of the roof, except that skylights may occupy 25 percent of the gross roof area
and solar panels may occupy 85 percent of the gross roof area.
         (c)   None of the structures described above shall be used for any
residential, commercial or industrial purpose other than a use incidental to
the principal use of the building.
      4.   Bonus Height: Development in the area designated as "Bonus Height
Area" on the Regulating plan is eligible for additional height beyond the
listed maximum height. Developments shall incorporate the following elements to
earn points as indicated in the table below.
         (a)   Compliance with the standards and value of points will be
determined by the City Planner, or his or her designee.
         (b)   Elements and points can be combined for a sum of points that
relates to the number of additional stories permitted as defined below.
            i.   One point is equal to one half story. The half story shall be
50 percent of the buildable square footage of the top story.
            ii.   Two points is equal to one story.
         (c)   The number of additional stories shall not exceed the Ultimate
Building Height as indicated in the frontage standards.
Building Height Incentives
Element                    Points
Building Height Incentives
Element                                                                  Points
Transit and Pedestrian Amenities
On-site, off-site, or pay-in-lieu of the provision of public transit and 2
pedestrian amenities, including sheltered seating or substantial
rehabilitation or improvement of the streetscape.
Rehabilitation of Historic Structure
Significant rehabilitation of on-site historic structure(s) at least 50  2
years old, including the maintenance of a historic façade.
Outdoor Public Art                                                       1
Incorporation of substantial public art on-site.
Sustainable Design
On-site provision of sustainable design elements that incorporate        1-4
energy-efficiency and/or green design into construction practices,
building design and/or site design.
   LEED Certified                                                     1
   LEED Silver                                                        2
   LEED Gold                                                          3
   LEED Platinum                                                      4
 
   B.   Siting.
      1.   Build-to and dooryard:
         (a)    The area between the right-of-way and the build-to line is the
dooryard and is intended as a transitional area between the public and private
realms for pedestrian-oriented amenities.
         (b)   The dooryard shall accommodate entrances, outdoor seating, and
projections such as awnings, balconies, bay windows, stoops and porches.
         (c)   The dooryard may contain urban-style landscape (concrete
pavement, planters, street furniture) including bicycle parking. Lawns are not
permitted in the Urban General district.
         (d)    The frontage build-to is the percentage of the front build-to
line occupied with a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6694.png]
 
      2.    Permitted articulations of architectural features.
         (a)   Architectural features utilized for building wall articulation
that are within 2 feet of the primary building wall may be utilized in the
length of applicable building wall meeting the build-to.
         (b)   Recessed entries at a maximum depth of 15 feet, measured
perpendicular to the build-to, and a maximum width of 15 feet, measured
parallel to the build-to may be utilized in the length of applicable building
wall meeting the build-to.
      3.   Corner lots. For corner lots, the building must meet the build-to
line of both frontages at the corner. A building form with a chamfered corner
is permitted only on corner lots and only if a corner entry is provided. A 10'
x 10' unobstructed sight triangle shall be provided to accommodate a chamfered
corner with entry.
      4.   Front yard build-to exception. The Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee may grant a build-to exception to allow a greater amount of the
building to be setback when the dooryard is used for providing a public
gathering area or plaza that offers seating, landscape enhancements, public
information and displays, fountains, or other pedestrian amenities.
      5.   Parking setback:
         (a)   Where regulated in the Frontage Standards, vehicle parking shall
be located behind the parking setback line that is 30 feet behind the build-to
line and extends vertically as a plane from the first-floor level.
         (b)   Surface parking is not allowed directly between a building
façade and a street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6696.png]
 
      6.    Adjacent to residential setback. For Urban General and Urban Mixed-
Use districts that share a common lot line with a single-family detached lot or
residential condominium complex:
      (a)    There shall be a 40-foot setback from the common lot line. Parking
and landscaping are permitted within this setback, but there shall be no
structures within this area.
      (b)   A minimum of 10 feet must be landscaped and include a minimum
number of plantings per the table below.
 
Type           Requirements
Deciduous tree 1 per 35 linear feet
Shrubs         6 per 35 linear feet
 
      (c)   An obscuring wall or fence per Article 6.
      (d)   An upper floor step back for any story above the second story shall
be set back an additional 10'.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7017.png]
 
   C.   Architectural elements.
      1.   Doors and windows.
         (a)    Fenestration is defined as the openings in the building wall,
including windows, doors and open areas. When measuring fenestration, framing
elements (such as muntins) with a dimension less than 2 inches are considered
part of the opening.
         (b)   Fenestration shall be measured as a percentage of openings per
total wall area.
         (c)   Blank walls exceeding 25 linear feet are prohibited on all
facades below their fourth story.
         (d)   At least one functioning entrance shall be provided along each
ground floor façade at intervals not greater than 50 feet, unless otherwise
specified in this district.
         (e)   Upper level windows shall be oriented vertically.
         (f)   Heavily-tinted (darker than 70% V.L.T.) and mirrored glass
windows are prohibited.
      2.   Projections.
         (a)   Balconies.
            i.   Balconies shall not be located within 5 feet of any common lot
line and shall not encroach into the public right-of-way without prior approval
from MDOT (Michigan Avenue) or the City of Dearborn.
            ii.   Balconies may be a single level or multiple balconies stacked
vertically for multiple stories.
            iii.   Where balconies are used as a method for achieving the
required private open area, the balcony shall be enclosed by balustrades,
railings, or other means.
            iv.   Integrated design. The balcony support structure shall be
integrated with the building facade; separate columns or posts supporting any
balcony from the ground are prohibited.
            v.   False balconies. False balconies are not permitted on any
storefront frontage facade. False balconies consist of a rail and door, and any
outdoor platform less than eighteen inches in depth and are sometimes referred
to as Juliet balconies or balconets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6700.png]
 
         (b)   Awnings.
            i.   Awnings may project over a sidewalk; however, there must be a
minimum of 8 foot clearance provided from the sidewalk.
            ii.   Awnings shall be positioned immediately above ground floor
windows and have a straight shed that projects from the building at a straight
angle.
            iii.   Awnings shall be constructed of durable materials such as
canvas or metal that will not fade or tear easily. Plasticized, rigid, cubed or
curved awnings or mansard style canopies are prohibited.
            iv.   Awnings shall not be internally illuminated and any signs
shall be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed
downward.
            v.   Awnings shall not interfere with street trees.
         (c)   Stoop or front porch.
            i.   Each residential unit with a separate entrance shall include a
stoop or porch.
            ii.   A stoop shall have a maximum depth of 5 feet deep and maximum
width of 6 feet (not including steps or ramp).
            iii.   A porch shall be between 7 feet and 9 feet deep that
projects no more than 7 feet into the dooryard and with a width of not less
than 65% of each unit with a separate entrance.
            iv.   Where the first floor is occupied by a lobby, office, or
common space and no dwelling are located on the first floor along the front of
the building, then a stoop or porch is not required.
         (d)   Signage. Projecting blade signs are permitted but must be a
minimum of 8-foot clearance from the sidewalk. See Section 27.06 for more on
signs.
         (e)   Bay window. Bay windows shall project no more than 36 inches
outside the building envelope but may not project into the right-of-way.
         (f)   ADA ramps. Ramps to improve accessibility to front porches and
stoops are permitted to encroach into the dooryard and shall be built to ADA
specifications.
      3.   Building materials.
         (a)   All buildings shall contain quality building materials that are
in keeping with the character of traditional downtown buildings in Dearborn.
Permitted materials for exterior walls (exclusive of windows and doors) that
are clearly visible from the street and public or private open space shall be
limited to the following:
                             Primary building
Building    Primary building material - Urban Secondary Trim material and
material    material - Urban Mixed-Use and    building  Accents
P=Permitted General          Mixed            material
                             Residential
                                                Primary
                                     Primary    building              Trim
Building material                    building   material -  Secondary material
P=Permitted                          material - Urban       building  and
                                     Urban      Mixed-Use   material  Accents
                                     General    and Mixed
                                                Residential
Brick or tile masonry (modular,      P          P           P         P
include veneer)
Native stone (or synthetic           P          P           P         P
equivalent)
Wood lap siding                                 P           P         P
Fiber cement siding                             P           P         P
Stucco (cementitious finish) only               P           P         P
above ground floor
Split-faced block (only for piers,                          P         P
foundation walls and chimneys)   
Gypsum Reinforced Fiber Concrete                                      P
(GFRC-for trim elements only)
Metal                                           P           P         P
Molded polyurethane trim (such as                                     P
Fypon)
EIFS (above first floor only)                                         P
 
 
Wall materials visible Primary Building Material  Secondary Building Material
from Streets           (min.)                     and Trim
First and Second Floor 75%                        25%
Elevations
Above second floor     50%                        50%
 
         (b)   Wall area calculations are exclusive of windows and doors.
         (c)   Wall materials including panel brick, tilt-up brick textured
paneling, plain, smooth-face, or scored concrete masonry units, exterior
insulation and finish system (EIFS), corrugated metal paneling and fiberglass
sheeting are permitted for walls that are not visible from streets or public or
private open space.
         (d)   Glass areas on front facades shall be clear or lightly tinted
(lighter than 70% V.L.T.).
      4.   Private Open Area. Private open area is defined as an unenclosed
occupiable area within the buildable area, which is accessible only to
occupants of the particular development. A private or semi-private usable open
area is required on every lot, defined as a percentage of the total buildable
area. This requirement may be satisfied in a variety of configurations, at or
above grade. A minimum private open area, within, and equal to a percentage of,
the total buildable area, is prescribed in the districts. The parameters are as
follows:
         (a)   Where located at grade, such private open area shall not include
any required side or rear setbacks.
         (b)   At least 20% of the private open area shall be in no more than
two contiguous areas.
         (c)   Up to 80% of the required private open area may be satisfied
through the balconies of individual units.
         (d)   Any development on a lot that is exclusively reusing existing
structures (without external expansion) is exempt from the private open area
requirement.
   D.   Services.
      1.   Services and utility hookups shall not be visible from the primary
street frontage, and when possible located in the rear yard.
      2.   Dumpster enclosures, where not provided by the City and excluding
residential zoned properties, shall comply with Section
2.14, entitled Trash Removal and Collection.
      3.   All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened by parapet walls or a
pitched roof of sufficient height to screen rooftop equipment view from the
ground, and the screening shall be integrated into the architectural design of
the building.
   E.   Parking structure design.
      1.   Intent. To minimize the visual impact of structured parking decks on
the public realm, mitigate nuisances including noise and light, and design
decks to be visually compatible with the surrounding character and development.
      2.   Design standards.
         (a)   Spandrel panels or opaque architectural wall systems, a minimum
of 42" high, shall be required to screen the view of parking cars and car
headlights from the opposite side of the street.
         (b)   For all exposed, above-grade parking structures on Side Streets
and alleys, at least 50 percent of the ground floor level must be covered by an
architectural screen.
         (c)   Parking decks exposed to view shall be subject to the same
standards as buildings in terms of massing, form, and building character.
         (d)   The 30-foot parking setback area shall apply in the Required
Storefront frontages and is required to be lined by non-parking uses.
(Ord. No. 19-1634, - -2019; Ord. No. 23-1801, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 27.04. - Frontage types.
A.   Urban general.
   1.   Intent. The intent of the Urban General frontage type is to create a
pedestrian-friendly, compact, mixed-use district. This frontage type is
intended for the most density in Dearborn, in the East and West Downtowns and
along primary corridors.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6680.png]
Illustrative example of the intent of this district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6702.png]
 
Height
Minimum                                        2 stories     32 ft.
Maximum                                        6 stories     92 ft.
Ultimate Building Height (with building height 10 stories    125 ft.
incentive)
Ground Floor Elevation - Residential Units                  3 ft.
(min.)
Second Floor Finished Elevation                             16 ft. to 22 ft.
Upper Stories Clear Height (min.)                           9 ft.
Siting
Build-To/Dooryard                                           10 ft.
Frontage Build-To (min.)                                    85%
Parking Setback                                             30 ft.
Side Setbacks (min.)                                        0 ft.
Rear Setback (min.)                            With alley    3 ft.
                                              Without alley 10 ft.
Abutting single-family detached setback (side               40 ft.
and rear)
Architectural Elements
Ground Floor Fenestration                                   40 to 90%
Upper Story Fenestration                                    25 to 90%
Private Open Area (min.)                                    15%
 
   B.   Storefront.
      1.   Intent. This additional designation in Urban General District
requires ground floor storefront uses and architectural requirements in order
to preserve the walkable, active downtown interface with the public realm.
Storefront buildings shall also meet the design specifications for the Urban
General Frontage, except as provided herein:
         (a)   Fenestration.
            i.   Ground floor fenestration shall comprise between 70% and 90%
of the ground story façade.
            ii.   Ground floor windows may not be made opaque by window
treatments (except operable sunscreen devices). A minimum of 80% of the window
surface shall allow a view into the building interior for a depth of at least
12 feet.
            iii.   The bottom of the window must be no more than 3 feet above
the adjacent exterior grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6704.png]
 
         (b)   Horizontal articulation.
            i.    Horizontal articulation is the arrangement and proportion of
façade materials and elements (windows, doors, columns, pilasters, and bays)
into discreet bays.
            ii.    For each block frontage, facades shall be divided into
discreet horizontally articulated bays at no greater than 60 feet each.
            iii.    Adjacent façades shall contain different wall materials and
rhythm of bays to distinguish each storefront in the horizontal plane.
            iv.    There shall be a minimum of one functional entrance every
full 25 feet of frontage.
         (c)    Ground floor articulation.
            i.    Storefront buildings shall be designed to create a distinct
and separated ground floor area through the use of a horizontal expression
line, such as a string course, change in material or textures, awnings or
canopies, or sign band between the first and second stories.
   C.   Urban mixed-use.
      1.     Intent. The intent of the Urban Mixed-Use frontage type is to
accommodate a flexible variety of uses and scales; preserve historic detached
houses; integrate context-sensitive mixed-uses; and serve as a transition from
the denser Urban General frontage types to surrounding residential
neighborhoods.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6682.png]
 
Illustrative example of the intent of this district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7019.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7021.png]
Height
Minimum                                           2 stories        32 ft.
Maximum                                           4 stories        48 ft.
Ground Floor Elevation - Residential Units (min.)                 3 ft.
Second Floor Finished Elevation (min.)                            12-16 ft.
Upper Stories Clear Height (min.)                                 8 ft.
Siting
Build-To/Dooryard                                                 10-20 ft.
Frontage Build-To (min.)                                          75%
Parking Setback (ground floor)                                    30 ft.
Side Setbacks (min.)                                              0 ft.
                                                 Without firewall 5 ft.
Rear Setback (min.)                               With alley       3 ft.
                                                 Without alley    10 ft.
Abutting single-family detached setback (side and                 40 ft.
rear)
Architectural Elements
Ground Floor Fenestration                                         25 to 90%
Upper Story Fenestration                                          25 to 70%
Private Open Area (min.)                                          10%
 
D.   Mixed Residential.
   1.    Intent. The Mixed residential frontage type is intended to accom
modate a mixture of housing types. Historically, these areas were single-family
neighborhoods that have transitioned over time to include a mixture of housing
types. Historic single-family houses should be retained where possible for
their character and infill housing should respect the established scale and
massing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6684.png]
 
Illustrative example of the intent of this district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6708.png]
 
 
                             Must comply with the regulations for RA- One
                             Family Residential District as outlined in
                             Sections
                             29.02 and
                             2.05. All standards related to single-family
Detached Single Family Homes homes, including those found in Article 2, Article
                             4, and Article 5, must also be met.
                             Homes determined to be new construction per
                             Article 3.00 must also comply with the parking
                             setback in Section
                             27.04 D.
 
Requirements for All Other Uses
Requirements for All Other Uses
Height
Minimum                               2 stories   24 ft.
Maximum                               2.5 stories 30 ft.
Ground Floor Elevation (min.)                    3 ft.
Upper Stories Clear Height (min.)                8 ft.
Siting
Build-To/Dooryard                                15-20 ft.
Frontage Build-To (min.)                         65%
Parking Setback                                  30 ft.
Side Setbacks (min. with firewall)               0 ft.
Side Setbacks (min. without firewall)            5 ft.
Rear Setback (min.)                              20 ft.
Building footprint per unit (max.)               1,500 sq. ft.
Facade width per unit (max. per unit)            50 ft.
Facade width total (max.)                        120 ft.
If abutting single-family detached    An obscuring wall or fence per Article 6.
(side & rear)
Architectural Elements
Ground Floor Fenestration                        25 to 70%
Upper Story Fenestration                         25 to 70%
Private Open Area (min.)                         10%
 
(Ord. 19-1634, - -2019; Ord. No. 23-1801, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 27.05. - Uses.
    Uses are allowed in the West Downtown District in accordance with the
following table.
P=Permitted Urban General Urban General -       Urban Mixed- Use   Mixed
Use                       Storefront                               Residential
S=Special   Ground Upper  Ground    Upper Story Ground Upper Story All Stories
Land Use    Floor  Story  Floor1, 5             Floor
P=Permitted Urban General Urban General -       Urban Mixed- Use   Mixed
Use                       Storefront                               Residential
S=Special   Ground Upper  Ground    Upper Story Ground Upper Story All Stories
Land Use    Floor  Story  Floor1, 5             Floor
Residential
Single-
family                                                       P
detached
Multiple-   P      P      P2        P           P      P           P
family
Group/
Foster                                      S      S           S
Homes
Non-Residential
Clinic      P      P               P           P                  
Child Care  P      P               P           S                 S
Center
Libraries/  P      P      S         P           P                  
museums
Lodging     S      S      S2        S                             
Short-Term  P      P      P2        P           P      P            
Rentals7
Office      P      P      S6        P           P                  
Parking     S      S               S           S      S            
Structure3
Places of   S      S      S         S           S      S           S
Assembly
Research
and         S      P               S                             
Development
Restaurant  P      P      P         P           S4                 
Bar/Lounge/
Smoke       P      P      P         P                             
Lounge
Retail
sales and   P      P      P         P           P                  
service
Studio      P      P      S         P           P                  
Veterinary  P      P               P           P                  
Clinic
 
1    For storefront, only active ground floor uses are permitted for the first
30 feet of building depth. Past the first 30 feet of building depth, the Urban
General permitted ground floor uses apply.
2    Only support functions such as lobbies, rental offices, and club rooms may
be located on the first floor.
3    Parking Structure Design Standards See Section
27.03 (M).
4   Outdoor areas to accommodate waiting, dining, etc. in the rear yard are not
permitted.
5   For Storefront Special Land Uses, in addition to the standards in Section
32.03, the Planning Commission shall evaluate the proposal relative to the
requirement under footnote 1 above. In particular, characteristics providing
visual and physical interaction with, and activation of, the adjacent public
space through the storefront (including days and hours of operation) shall be
evaluated.
6   For Office uses within the required storefront, the following standards
also apply:
   •   Office use cannot occupy more than 20' or 25% of linear frontage along
Michigan Avenue per parcel (whichever is greater).
   •   Offices are not permitted within the first 30' of frontage from corners
measured along both Michigan and side streets.
   •   Public waiting rooms or lobbies must be located within the frontage to a
minimum depth of 12 feet. In addition, conference rooms may be permitted in the
frontage if the office exceeds 20 linear feet. These areas must remain fully
visible through the windows.
   •   An office use cannot exceed 2,000 sq. ft. within the Required Storefront
area within the front 30' of depth of the space.
   •   Primary public entrance must be located along the Required Storefront.
7   Refer to Section
7.03 (F) and
Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances for additional regulations.
(Ord. No. 19-1634, - -2019; Ord. No. 20-1681, 9-22-2020; Ord. No. 21-1696, 2-9-
2021; Ord. No. 23-1801, 9-26-2023; Ord. No. 25-1845, 7-15-2025)
Sec. 27.06. - Signs.
   A.   New and replacement signs. All new and replacement signs shall conform
to the requirements of this ordinance. Plans, details, elevations and samples
must be submitted for administrative review and approved by the following
officials:
      1.   Plan Reviewer: reviews submittals for compliance with the Building
Code and sign regulations in the Code of Ordinances, decisions of this official
may be appealed to the Building Board of Appeals.
      2.   Zoning Administrator: reviews submittals for compliance with the
specific requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, decisions of this official may
be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      3.   Director of Economic and Community Development or their designee:
review of submittals for compatibility with the building and its surroundings
per the standards of this article, decisions of this official may be appealed
to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   B.   Face changes or relocations. Face changes or relocations of existing
signs on the same building or site are allowed subject to permitting and
administrative approval by the Director of Economic and Community Development
or their designee on the basis that the sign is in safe and serviceable
condition and the new sign face is consistent with the intent and requirements
of this Article to the extent feasible. A denial under this provision may be
appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   C.   General requirements.
      1.   All signs in the district shall also comply with the general sign
requirements in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dearborn (
Chapter 5, Article XII - Signs).
      2.   All signs and sign-lighting fixtures shall exhibit ornamental
features consistent with the examples shown in the design review manual.
      3.   Every sign shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color,
lettering, logo, graphics, location, materials, and arrangement shall be
harmonious with the building design and its surroundings, and shall be
compatible with signs of adjoining buildings.
      4.   All signs shall be constructed of durable materials capable of
resisting the deleterious effects of weather exposure. Plywood, fiberboard,
plastic sheeting, EFIS or similar materials are prohibited.
      5.   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Fluorescent,
brilliant, or optical colors are prohibited.
      6.   Address numbers shall be a maximum of eight (8) inches in vertical
dimension and should be separate from the main signage. Phone numbers and other
secondary text such as "dine-in or carry-out" are discouraged as they serve
limited useful communication purposes and unnecessarily contribute to visual
clutter in the district.
      7.   The vertical drip of an awning may be stenciled with signage a
maximum of eight (8) inches in vertical dimension by any horizontal length. No
signage shall be permitted on the shed portion.
      8.   Lighting: Signs may be internally or externally lit. Sign lighting
shall be considered part of the design of the sign and evaluated per the
standards in this Article. Sign lighting shall be decorative or hidden from
view. Signs with exposed luminaries of any type (including neon, LEDs, and
similar) are prohibited.
      9.   Businesses are permitted one (1) sign for each frontage facing a
street or parking lot.
      10.   Businesses with service entrances may identify these with one (1)
sign not exceeding two (2) square feet.
      11.   Permanent window or door signs/graphics (stenciled, etched, silk
screened, hand painted, vinyl letters/images, or similar) are permitted
provided the following standards are met:
         (a)   Such signs shall comply with the seventy (70) percent
transparency requirement in the architectural standards of this Article.
         (b)   Approval by the ECD Director as permanent signage or façade
treatment.
      12.   Temporary banners and window signs shall be regulated per the
provisions of the sign requirements in the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Dearborn (
Chapter 5, Article XII - Signs).
      13.   Art installations: Installation of art pieces (sculpture, murals,
posters, or paintings) on the exterior of a building or on the grounds of such
a building may be allowed at the discretion of the ECD Director. Discretion is
based on the goal of permitting such art installations to beautify the district
and community with a wide variety of high-quality art projects. The presence of
artwork in developments creates a competitive edge by attracting people who are
curious about the artwork. Residents and visitors may pause to enjoy the
artwork's surprising and esthetic delights and may return to experience it
again while shopping or conducting business. However, if such an installation
is primarily for the purpose of advertising a particular brand or business and
not in the common good and public interest, then it shall be treated as
commercial signage and subject to the requirements of this section governing
such.
   D.   Wall signs.
      1.   Prohibited wall signs. Box or cabinet signs and signs painted
directly onto any exterior wall or surface are prohibited. The latter shall not
include art installations permitted by Paragraph C.13. above.
      2.   Sign bands. A single external sign band or zone may be applied to
the façade of a building between the first and second floors, provided that it
shall be a maximum of two and one-half (2½) feet in vertical dimension by any
horizontal dimension. The sign band or zone may contain multiple individual
signs, but all must refer to a tenant of the building.
      3.   Board signs. Signs consisting of opaque letters permanently applied
to an opaque background, anchored as a single unit to a building façade. Board
signs shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Text shall be raised or routed from the background by not less
than three-quarter (¾) inch, nor more than two (2) inches.
         (b)   Text shall be of a contrasting color from the background
(painted on text is prohibited).
         (c)   Text shall be six (6) inches minimum height, and twenty-four
(24) inches maximum height.
         (d)   The background shall be framed by a finished edge.
         (e)   Logos, graphics, and features other than text are encouraged and
may be painted directly on the background.
      4.   Halo illuminated letter signs. Signs consisting of individual,
internally illuminated letters with opaque face and sides. Halo illuminated
letters are characterized by indirect illumination, with all illumination
projecting from the rear of each letter onto the background surrounding the
letters. Halo illuminated letter signs shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The face and sides of letters shall be opaque.
         (b)   Sides of letters shall not be greater than three (3) inches.
         (c)   Text shall be six (6) inches minimum height, and twenty-four
(24) inches maximum height.
         (d)   All lights, transformers, fasteners, spikes, zappers and
connections shall be concealed from view.
         (e)   Raceways shall have a maximum depth of four (4) inches.
      5.   Internally illuminated letter signs. Internally illuminated letter
signs shall be defined as individual, internally illuminated letters with a
translucent face and opaque sides. Internally illuminated letter signs shall
meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The face of the letters shall be translucent (transparent faces
are prohibited and the light element shall not be visible).
         (b)   The sides of the letters shall be opaque.
         (c)   Sides of letters shall not be greater than three (3) inches.
         (d)   Text shall be six (6) inches minimum height, and twenty-four
(24) inches maximum height.
         (e)   All lights, transformers, fasteners, spikes, zappers,
connections or other similar devices shall be concealed from view.
         (f)   Raceways shall have a maximum depth of four (4) inches.
      6.   Dimensional letter signs. Dimensional letter signs shall be defined
as individual letters with opaque face and sides, pin mounted to the building
façade. Dimensional letter signs shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The face and sides of letters shall be opaque.
         (b)   Sides of letters shall not be greater than three (3) inches.
         (c)   Text shall be six (6) inches minimum height, and twenty-four
(24) inches maximum height.
         (d)   Letters shall be fabricated of metal or acrylic (wood is
prohibited) designed to resist the deleterious effects of weather exposure.
         (e)   Letters shall be mounted to the building façade using stainless
steel anchors to prevent staining.
      7.   Electronic signs. Electronic signs shall be permitted in the as
secondary signage to serve a message board function; they are not to serve as
the primary signage for a commercial or institutional use. Electronic signs
shall be defined and regulated per the requirements of Section
5-1337 of the Code of Ordinances, except that the following additional
requirements shall apply:
         (a)   The electronic sign shall be part of or accessory to a primary
permitted sign identifying the business or institution.
         (b)   Color: single color/monochrome only.
         (c)   Resolution (minimum pixel pitch/spacing): Seventeen (17)
millimeters.
         (d)   Shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
         (e)   Prohibited electronic signs:
            i.   Projecting signs.
            ii.   Wall signs mounted on the front of a building perpendicular
to a public road, as these signs serve limited useful communication purposes
and unnecessarily contribute to visual and lighting clutter in the district.
This does not apply to signs mounted facing a street on the side of a building
on a corner lot.
   E.   Ground signs. Ground signs shall be any freestanding sign supported by
and anchored directly to the ground on privately owned property. Ground signs
shall include pole and monument signs. Ground signs shall meet the following
requirements:
      1.   Ground signs shall meet the requirements for one of the approved
types of wall signs described above.
      2.   Cabinet style ground signs may be approved at the discretion of the
ECD Director if they comply with the general sign ordinance, meet the general
requirements for downtown signs and are designed to mimic one of the approved
types of wall signs described above.
      3.   Kiosk signs. Kiosk signs shall be defined as ground signs (maximum
twelve (12) square feet) placed on public or private property for the purposes
of providing directions or other information regarding the location, nature, or
schedule of activities conducted within a specific property or district. Kiosk
signs may be approved by the ECD Director if they meet the requirements of the
sign ordinance, general requirements for downtown signs and are determined to
be necessary to aid the public in navigation and use of the property or
district in question.
   F.   Projecting signs. Signs which project outward from the face of the
building shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Pedestrian level projecting signs.
         (a)   Shall be mounted perpendicular (ninety (90) degrees) to the
building façade.
         (b)   Shall be located entirely between twelve (12) and eight (8) feet
above the pedestrian walkway. Shall not project above the roof line.
         (c)   Shall be securely mounted using ornamental brackets attached to
either the building façade or from permanent overhanging canopies (chain or
hinge mounting is prohibited). If wall mounted, the sign shall be located a
maximum of six (6) inches from the wall.
         (d)   Shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side not including the
brackets.
         (e)   Shall be double sided, having text or images on two (2) sides.
         (f)   Text shall be raised or routed from the background by not less
than three-quarter (¾) inch, nor more than two (2) inches.
         (g)   Text shall be of a contrasting color from the background
(painted on text is prohibited).
         (h)   The background shall be framed by a finished edge.
         (i)   Logos, graphics, and features other than text are encouraged and
may be painted directly on the background. Icon-style signs are allowed.
         (j)   Shall not be an electronic sign.
      2.   Upper level projecting signs.
         (a)   Shall be mounted perpendicular (ninety (90) degrees) to the
building façade.
         (b)   Shall be located entirely between twelve (12) and the uppermost
point of the building façade. Shall not project above the roof line.
         (c)   Shall be securely mounted to the building façade.
         (d)   Shall be double sided, having text on two (2) sides.
         (e)   Shall be located a maximum of one (1) foot from the wall.
         (f)   Shall not exceed three (3) feet in width or four (4) feet in
height.
         (g)   Shall not be an electronic sign.
(Ord. 19-1634, - -2019)
Sec. 27.07. - Parking.
   A.   Intent. Parking supply and demand in West Downtown Dearborn warrants
standards that are tailored to the unique character and transportation choices
in a downtown urban area. The convenience of multiple forms of alternate
transportation, including the ability to traverse the area as a pedestrian,
decrease the parking demand for many urban land uses.
   B.   Parking requirements.
      1.   The table below establishes the minimum parking requirements for
specific uses within West Downtown:
Use Parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
Use              Parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
Office           3.0
Retail           1.0
Restaurant       9.0
Medical          4.0
Community        .5
Fraternal Lodges .5
Lodging          1.0
Residential      1.0
 
      2.   Parking requirement considerations:
         (a)   Shared parking: The parking requirement may be satisfied through
shared parking with an adjacent owner who has excess parking. All uses must be
located within 600 feet of the shared parking with a copy of an executed
easement that provides for continued use and maintenance of the parking is
filed with the Wayne County Register of Deeds and a copy is submitted to the
City. Both the grantor and the grantee of the easement are required to comply
with the parking requirements of this section.
         (b)   Mixed-use: In a mixed-use project, parking may be shared by the
different uses therefore reduced as follows:
            ∙   A mixed-use project composed of residential and retail uses may
reduce the total vehicle parking up to 30 percent of the total required
parking.
            ∙   A mixed-use project composed of residential and office or
institutional uses may reduce the total vehicle parking up to 40 percent of the
total required parking.
            ∙   A mixed-use project composed of office or institutional uses
and retail uses may reduce the total vehicle parking up to 20 percent of the
total required parking.
            The reduction in parking for mixed-use developments may be below
the noted percentage but may not exceed. The Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee, shall determine the reduction by taking into consideration the
proposed land use, peak parking usage periods, and Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) parking generation rates manual.
         (c)   On-street parking: Public on-street parking that is located
along the developments frontage shall be counted towards the number of spaces
required for the commercial component, but not for the residential component,
within the development.
         (d)   Reductions: Through site plan review, the Planning Commission
may reduce the parking requirement when the applicant can demonstrate, based on
supporting documentation provided by the applicant, the parking need for that
particular use is less than required by this Ordinance or valet service to a
satellite parking lot will be provided.
   C.    Parking exemption. The standards described above do not apply within
the Public Parking Sector identified in blue in the map below. While no parking
is specifically required for residential developments within the Public Parking
Sector, new projects are encouraged to supply parking if feasible for their
anticipated demand.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6710.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/877867b05ab98b1970c1af768b923a04310d00c2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6712.png]
 
   D.   Parking lot screening.
      1.   For parking lots along public rights-of-way, the following screening
shall be:
         (a)   Minimum 5-foot landscaped buffer zone
         (b)   Plantings: 8 Shrubs and 1 tree per 25 linear feet;
         (c)   Screen wall: Minimum 32" decorative screen wall, located behind
the plantings, located 2 feet from rear edge of the buffer zone to protect from
vehicle overhang.
(Ord. No. 19-1634, - -2019)
Sec. 27.08. - Definitions.
   Awning. A roof-like covering cantilevered, projected or suspended from a
building, usually of canvas, metal, or similar material and often adjustable,
placed over the sidewalk, windows, or doors to provide protection from sun and
rain. It is distinguished from a canopy because it is not permanent, nor a
structural portion or architectural feature of the building and does not
support substantial weight.
   Balcony. An exterior platform attached to the upper floors of a building
elevation.
   Bay window. A U-shaped (or similarly shaped) enclosure including a window,
extending the interior space of the building outward from a building elevation.
   Build-to line. The building line to which a building must be constructed.
Similar to setback, a build-to line runs parallel to the right-of-way and is
established to create a generally consistent building line along a street. The
build-to line designates the specific location or range within which the front
building line must be located.
   Building envelope. The buildable area defined by the build-to line and
setbacks, setting the limits of the building footprint now and in the future.
   Canopy. A bracketed or suspended cover projecting from the building over the
sidewalk, or a roof-like covering placed over the sidewalk, windows, or doors,
to provide protection from sun and rain and, unlike an awning, it is a
permanent, durable, structural portion of the building as opposed to a light
covering of canvas, metal or other similar material.
   Clear height. Within a structure, the distance between the floor and
ceiling. For entrances and other external building features, the unobstructed
distance from the ground to the bottom of the lowest element above.
   Clinic. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight
are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists,
or similar professionals. A medical clinic may incorporate customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental to or necessary for its operation or to
the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for overnight
patient care or major surgery.
   Common lot line. Lot lines shared by adjacent private lots.
   Daycare/childcare.
      A.   Child care facility. A facility for the care of children under 18
years of age, as licensed and regulated by the State under Michigan Public Act
116 of 1973 and the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of
Human Services.
      B.   Child care centers, nursery schools, and day nurseries. A facility,
other than a private residence, receiving pre-school or school age children for
group care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or
guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility
which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the
number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child
care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative
preschool, play group, or drop-in center. "Child care center" or "day care
center" does not include a Sunday school conducted by a religious organization
where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons
responsible for such children are attending religious services.
      C.   Family day care home (six or fewer children less than 24 hours per
day). A private home in which not more than six minor children are received for
care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a
parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the
family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an
unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
      D.   Group day care home (seven to 12 children less than 24 hours per
day). A private home in which more than six but not more than l2 children are
given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended
by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of
the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care
to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
   Dooryard. The area between the build-to line and the right-of-way.
   Dormer. A projecting architectural feature with a vertical window built out
from a pitched roof.
   Elevation. The exterior face of a building.
   Expression line. A line prescribed at a certain level of a building for the
major part of the width of a facade, expressed by a variation in material or by
a limited projection on such as a molding, balcony or canopy.
   Façade. The building elevation built along the build-to line on the Primary
Frontage.
   Fenestration. Openings in the building wall, including windows, doors and
open areas. When measuring fenestration, framing elements (such as muntins)
with a dimension less than 1 inch are considered part of the opening.
   Front porch. A front porch is applicable to lower density residential
buildings and designed to provide covered, outdoor seating space for residents.
Porches can project beyond the setback line towards the right-of-way and/or can
wrap around the side of the building.
   Grade. The lowest point of elevation within the area between the exterior
surface of the structure and the property line. If the property line is more
than five feet from the exterior surface of the structure, "grade" means the
lowest point of elevation between the exterior surface of the structure and a
line five feet from the exterior surface of the structure.
   Ground floor. The first story of a building with an entrance at street
level.
   Group/foster homes.
      A.   Foster family group home. A private home in which more than four but
less than seven children, who are not related to an adult member of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for 24 hours a
day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
      B.   Foster family home. A private home in which one but not more than
six minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by
blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a
day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
   Lodging. A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or
entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for
transient occupancy, and/or in which one or more of the following services are
offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk
service, and bellboy service.
   Office. A use where a person transacts his or her business or carries on his
or her stated occupation, including but not limited to finance, real estate,
insurance, travel agency, architecture, or similar professional occupations.
   Places of assembly. Any structure wherein persons regularly gather for
religious activity, entertainment, or political purposes including, but not
limited to, places of worship, theaters, fraternal organizations, and trade
union halls. A place of worship is a structure used to conduct a religious
service, including, but not limited to, the usual accessory structures and
uses, such as convents, rectories, parsonages, monasteries, gymnasiums and
church halls.
   Private open area. An area within the buildable area of a lot, accessible
only to occupants of the particular building, building and primarily open to
the sky.
   Research and development. Research and development activities that lead to
the development of a new product or a new manufacturing and assembly process.
Products developed, manufactured or assembled here are not intended to be mass-
produced for sale at this location.
   Restaurant/bar/lounge.
      A.   Restaurants with outdoor seating. A use that involves the sale or
delivery of any prepared food or beverage for consumption in a defined area on
premises but outside of the building in which it is prepared. Examples of
defined areas include an external deck, patio, mall, garden, balcony or
sidewalk.
      B.   Carry-out restaurant. A use that involves the sale of food,
beverages, and/or desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a
ready-to-consume state for consumption mainly off the premises. A carry out
restaurant differs from a drive-through restaurant in that a customer must park
and walk up to the restaurant or an employee must exit the restaurant and
deliver the food to a customer in a parked car.
      C.   Drive-in restaurant. A use that involves delivery of prepared food
so as to allow its consumption within a motor vehicle while parked on the
premise.
      D.   Drive-through restaurant. A use that involves the delivery of
prepared food to the customer within a vehicle, typically passing through a
pass-through window, for consumption off of the premises.
      E.   Standard restaurant. A standard restaurant is a use that involves
either of the following:
         1.   The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to
customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building.
         2.   The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line
and is subsequently consumed by the customers within a completely enclosed
building.
      F.   Bar/lounge/tavern. A bar, lounge or tavern is a type of restaurant
that is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The
preparation and sale of food or snacks to customers may be permitted.
   Retail sales and service. Establishments providing the sale of goods sold on
the premises and services to the general public, including, but not limited to,
drug store, hardware store, laundry or cleaners pick up, jewelry store,
florist, gift shop, book store, clothing store, photographer, bakery, shoe
repair, tailoring, salons and barbershops.
   Short-Term Rental or Short-Term Rental Unit (STR). The rental of a dwelling
or dwelling unit, either wholly or partly, for compensation for periods of 30
consecutive days or less, by persons other than the permanent resident or
owner, when the permanent resident or owner has obtained a short-term rental
permit issued by the Director or their designee.
   Stoop. A stoop is a small elevated landing space above the sidewalk level
which provides entry into the building. Stoops may be covered or uncovered and
may project beyond the building setback line towards the right-of-way.
   Storefront. A frontage type appropriate for the ground floor of commercial/
retail buildings. Storefronts provide large windows with transparent views into
the building interior.
   Story. That space within a building and above grade that is situated between
one floor level and the floor level next above, or if there is no floor above,
the ceiling above.
   Studio. A place of instruction for dance, music, health, or art.
   Upper stories. Any story above the ground floor.
(Ord. No. 19-1634, - -2019; Ord. No. 25-1845, 7-15-2025)
ARTICLE 29.00 - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Sec. 29.01. - Intent and scope of requirements.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations governing lot size,
required yards, setbacks, building height, and development density for each
zoning district. No building shall be erected, nor shall an existing building
be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with
the regulations established for the district in which the building or use is
located. A portion of a lot used to comply with the regulations in this Article
with respect to one building or use shall not be simultaneously used to comply
with the regulations with respect to another building or use.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 29.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 29.02. - Schedule of regulations.
   All buildings, uses, and parcels of land shall comply with the regulations
set forth in the following schedule of regulations and footnotes thereto.
Section 29.02–SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
                                                                  Minimum
                                  Maximum                         Usable
                     Maximum      Coverage  Minimum Setback       Floor   Maximum
         Lot Minimum Height of    of Lot by Requirement           Area    Density
                     Structures   All       (in Feet)i, j.        Per     Units/
                                  Buildings                       Unit    Acre
                                                                  (Sq.
                                                                  Ft.)
         Area                                     One  Other
District      Width  In      In             Front Side Side  Rear
         (Sq. (Feet) Stories Feet           Yard  Yard Yard  Yard
         Ft.)
                                                                           Minimum
                                           Maximum                         Usable
                                           Coverage  Minimum Setback       Floor   Maximum
             Lot Minimum   Maximum Height  of Lot by Requirement           Area    Density
                           of Structures   All       (in Feet)i, j.        Per     Units/
                                           Buildings                       Unit    Acre
                                                                           (Sq.
                                                                           Ft.)
             Area   Width  In                        Front One  Other Rear
District     (Sq.   (Feet) Stories In Feet           Yard  Side Side  Yard
             Ft.)                                          Yard Yard
R-A One      7,500  60'    a.      a.      c.        25'b. a.   a.    a.   1,200   5.8
Family       g.
R-B One      6,000  50'    a.      a.      c.        25'b. a.   a.    a.   1,000   7.26
Family       g.
R-
P
Residential
Preservation
R-B Duplex   3,500/ 70'    a.      a.                25'b. a.   a.    a.   1,000   6.23
             unit
R-C Multiple 5,000/
Family Low   unit   —    2       30'     40%       25'   10'  10'   20'          8.71
Density
R-D Multiple
Family       3,600/ —    3       40'     50%       35'   20'  20'   30'          12.1
Medium       unit
Density
R-E Multiple 2,100/
Family High  unit   —    4       50'     60%       45'   30'  30'   30'          20.7
Density
R-E Housing  1,500/                                                                29.04
for the      unit   —    4 d.    50' d.  30%       25'   30'  30'   30'  350     d.
Elderly      k.
R-
E            1,400/
Condominium  unit   —    4       45'     50%       15'   9'   9'    30'          31
Stacked
Units
O-S Business                                               7'
Office       —    —    3       35'     25%       10'   e.   e. h. 20'  —     —
                                                           h.
B-A Local    —           2       30'     30%       50'   7'   e. h. 20'  —     —
Business                                             f.    h.
B-                                                   50'   7'
B Community  —    —    3       40'     40%       f.    h.   e. h. 20'  —     —
Business
B-C General  —    —    4       50'     50%       50'   7'   e. h. 20'  —     —
Business                                             f.    h.
B-D Downtown
Business
I-A Light    —    —    2       35'     60%       20'   20'  20'   20'  —     —
Industrial
I-B Medium   —    —    5 o     85' o   60%       20'   20'  20' p 20'  —     —
Industrial                                                 p
I-                                                         20'
C Intensive  —    —    —     —     —       20'   p    20' p 20'  —     —
Industrial
I-D General  —    —    —     —     —       20'   20'  20' p 20'  —     —
Industrial                                                 p
T-
R Technology 1 acre 100'   3       40'     —       20'   20'  20'   20'  —     —
& Research
PUD Planned  Refer to District Provisions—
Unit         Article 23.00                                 —  —   —  —     —
Development
F-           Refer to District Provisions—               —  —   —  —     —
P Floodplain Article 24.00
V-                         No Buildings
P Vehicular  —    35'    Permitted    —       —   10'  10'   10'  —     —
Parking
 
Footnotes to Section 29.02—Schedule of regulations:
a.   In a one-family residential district the minimum required side and rear
setbacks and maximum permitted building height shall be based upon the width of
the lot per the table below:
          Side Yard Setbacks      Rear Setback Height
          Minimum      Minimum                 Maximum Eave Maximum
          Single Side  Total Side Minimum Rear Height for   Midpoint of Maximum
Lot Width Yard Setback Yards      Yard Setback second story the Roof    Stories
          (feet)       Setback    (feet)       (feet)       Height
                       (feet)                               (feet)
          Side Yard Setbacks      Rear Setback Height
          Minimum     Minimum                  Maximum Eave Maximum
          Single Side Total Side  Minimum Rear Height for   Midpoint of Maximum
Lot Width Yard        Yards       Yard Setback second story the Roof    Stories
          Setback     Setback     (feet)       (feet)       Height
          (feet)      (feet)                                (feet)
Less than 3           12          20           20           24          2
46 feet
46 - 50   3           13          21           20           24          2
feet
51 - 55   4           14          22           20           25          2
feet
56 - 60   5           15          23           20           25          2
feet
61 - 65   6           16          24           21           26          2
feet
66 - 70   7           17          25           21           26          2
feet
71 - 75   8           18          26           21           26          2
feet
76 - 80   9           19          27           22           27          2
feet
81 - 90   10          20% of      28           22           27          2
feet                  total width
91 - 100  10          20% of      29           22           27          2
feet                  total width
101 - 110 10          20% of      30           22           28          2.5
feet                  total width
111 - 120 10          20% of      30           22           28          2.5
feet                  total width
121 - 130 10          20% of      30           23           29          2.5
feet                  total width
131 - 140 10          20% of      30           23           29          2.5
feet                  total width
141 - 150 10          20% of      30           23           29          2.5
feet                  total width
151 - 160 12          20% of      30           24           30          2.5
feet                  total width
161 - 170 14          20% of      30           24           30          2.5
feet                  total width
171 - 180 16          20% of      30           24           30          2.5
feet                  total width
Greater               20% of
than 180  18          total width 30           25           31          2.5
feet
 
b.   For new homes on isolated vacant lots in established neighborhoods, the
setback requirement of twenty-five-(25)-foot homes may be adjusted to meet the
existing setback for the homes that are in the area.
c.   In a one-(1)-family residential district the maximum permitted lot
coverage shall be based upon the size of the lot and garage configuration per
the table below:
                     Principal    Minimum Landscaping Minimum Landscaping
Lot Size Garage Type Structure3 2 (Front Yard) 3      (Total Property) 4,
                                                      5
                                              Minimum        Minimum
Lot Size             Garage Type Principal    Landscaping    Landscaping
                                 Structure3 2 (Front Yard) 3 (Total Property)
                                                             4, 5
Less than 5,000 sq.  Detached    25           65             40
ft.                  Attached1   30           55             55
5,001 – 7,500 sq.  Detached    25           70             45
ft.                  Attached    30           60             55
7,501 – 10,000 sq. Detached    25           75             50
ft.                  Attached    30           65             55
Greater than 10,000  Detached    25           75             50
sq. ft.              Attached    30           70             55
 
   1.   See limitations on attached garages on narrow lots in section 2.05 of
this ordinance.
   2.   Principal structure coverage includes only the footprint of the home
and any attached garage.
   3.   Front porches are only regulated under minimum landscaping for the
total property and do not count against the minimum landscaping requirement for
the front yard.
   4.   Air conditioning units do not count against the minimum landscaping
regulations for the total property.
   5.   A maximum of 5% of the total minimum landscaping area may be used for
permeable pavers.
d.   All existing senior citizen housing developments are exempt from height
and density requirements.
e.   No setback is required on interior lots but shall be subject to the
requirements of the Building Code.
f.   Setback shall be measured from the centerline of the abutting street.
g.   A one-(1)-family dwelling comprising the principal occupancy of a
freestanding building may be located on a lot not less than six thousand
(6,000) square feet in area, having minimum width of at least fifty (50) feet
per lot; provided, however that in case of lots which are in a plat, recorded
with the Wayne County Register of Deeds Office on the effective date of this
ordinance, each of which lots has an area of at least three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet, such lots may each have erected thereon a one-(1)-
family dwelling, provide the requirements for rear and side yards, as specified
in the Zoning Ordinance, are complied with, and provided further, that no lot
in a recorded plat in the city, which, on the effective date of this ordinance,
is less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, shall be divided to permit a
single dwelling to be erected on an area less than the whole area of such lot.
h.   Minimum corner lot setback on exterior side yard required.
i.   Where buildings are abutting, all yard measurements shall be cumulative.
j.   Many buildings in commercial corridors in Dearborn were built on lots with
platted depths of one hundred twenty (120) feet or less. In recognition of the
practical difficulty that is presented by those types of lots which are located
in the OS, BA, BB or BC zoning district, no variances are required for setbacks
as long as each new development has a minimum of one (1) foot setback from each
property line. As a trade-off for this leniency, it is the intent of the City
of Dearborn to require strict adherence to parking and lot coverage
requirements.
k.   Refer to Section
7.03A. regarding housing for the elderly.
l.   Reserved.
m.   Reserved.
n.   Reserved.
o.   The permitted height of buildings in the I-B District that are at least
four hundred (400) feet from the nearest property which is residentially-zoned
and used as a dwelling, school, park, or religious institution, regardless of
jurisdiction, shall be six (6) stories and one hundred two (102) feet. Such
permitted height shall increase by an additional story (up to a maximum of ten
(10) stories) and an additional seventeen (17) feet (up to a maximum of one
hundred seventy (170) feet) for each additional fifty (50) feet as measured
from the building wall to the nearest residentially-zoned property which is
used as a dwelling, school, park, or religious institution.
p.   The side yard setback may be reduced as part of site plan approval for
multiple buildings constructed as part of a campus-like or multiple building
projects on a single parcel or adjacent parcels under common ownership or
control.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 29.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 95-627, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-
701, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 03-968, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 04-996, 2-17-2004; Ord. No.
09-1217, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 16-1526, 3-15-2016; Ord. No. 16-1563, 12-13-2016;
Ord. No. 18-1627, 9-24-2019; Ord. No. 20-1675, 8-25-2020; Ord. No. 21-1723, 1-
11-2022; Ord. No. 24-1822, 8-20-2024; Ord. No. 24-1832, 12-10-2024)) 
ARTICLE 32.00 - GENERAL PROCEDURES AND RELATED STANDARDS
Sec. 32.01. - Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Article to provide procedures and related
standards for the review and regulation of land uses and uses of structures
within the City.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 32.02. - Site plan review procedures and standards.
   A.   Site plan review. 
      1.   Site plan required. Except as provided in subsection (2), the
development of any new use, the construction of any new structures, any change
of an existing use of land or structure that impacts any requirement of these
regulations, and all other building or development activities shall require
site plan approval prior to construction and/or occupancy pursuant to this
Article. The city plan commission shall have jurisdiction regarding site plans
for use of land for Multiple Family Development, Cluster Residential
Development, and in the OS, Business-Office District. All other land uses and
zoning districts where site plans are required shall be submitted for review
and approval to the city planner. For example, site plan review is required for
any of the following activities:
         (a)   Erection, moving, relocation, conversion or structural
alteration to a building or structure to create additional floor space, other
than a single-family dwelling.
         (b)   Any development that would, if approved, provide for the
establishment of more than one (1) principal use on a parcel, such as a single-
family site condominium or similar project where a single parcel is developed
to include two (2) or more sites for detached single-family dwellings.
         (c)   Development of nonsingle-family residential uses in single-
family districts.
         (d)   Any change in land use or change in the use of a structure that
potentially affects compliance with the standards set forth within these
regulations.
         (e)   The development or construction of any accessory uses or
structures, except for uses or structures that are accessory to a single-family
dwelling.
         (f)   Any use or construction for which submission of a site plan is
required by any provision of these regulations.
         (g)   Establishment of any regulated use.
      2.   Site plan not required. Notwithstanding the preceding subsection
(1), site plan approval is not required for the following activities.
         (a)   Construction, moving, relocating or structurally altering a
single- or two-family home, including any customarily incidental accessory
structures.
         (b)   Excavating, filling, or otherwise removing soil, provided that
such activity is normally and customarily incidental to single family uses
described in this Section for which site plan approval is not required.
         (c)   A change in the ownership of land or a structure.
         (d)   A change in the use of a structure to a similar use allowed by
right in the zoning district in which it is located, provided that no
modification to the site is proposed or required by the standards of the
regulations and that the site maintains full and continuing compliance with
these regulations.
   B.   Site plan applications. 
      1.   Submission of site plan for review by Plan Commission and/or the
City Planner. In order to initiate formal review by the plan commission and/or
the city planner, the applicant is required to submit the following materials
to the City Planner:
         (a)   Three (3) completed and signed copies of an application for site
plan review,
         (b)   Fifteen (15) individually folded copies of the site plan,
         (c)   Evidence that the plan has been submitted for review to affected
county, state, and federal agencies, including but not limited to the Wayne
County Department of Roads, Wayne County Drain Commissioner, Wayne County
Health Department, and Michigan Department of Transportation, and
         (d)   The required review fee.
   These materials must be submitted to the city planner in sufficient time to
allow review by City staff and consultants prior to the plan commission
workshop at which the review will occur. The city planner shall determine what
is "sufficient time", based on the scope and complexity of the proposal.
      2.   Distribution of plans. Upon submission of all required application
materials and following completion of all items required by the adopted Site
Plan Review Manual, the proposed site plan shall be placed on the next open
Plan Commission workshop agenda. The site plan and application shall be
distributed by the city planner to appropriate city officials for review. If
deemed necessary by the city planner, the plans may also be submitted to the
city engineer for review.
   C.   Review and action. 
      1.   Request for revisions. Upon review of the site plan proposal, the
plan commission or city planner may require the applicant to revise the plans
or supply additional information. The applicant shall submit any requested
information or revised plans for review prior to formal action being taken. If
a traffic study is requested, it shall be prepared by the City's traffic
consultant, at the applicant's expense. All review fees must be paid prior to
any review. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to consult with City
staff and consultants during this revision process. Action on the site plan
shall remain tabled until the next regular plan commission meeting following
review of a substantially complete plan at a commission workshop.
      2.   Public hearing. A site plan involving use(s) subject to special land
use approval or PUD, Planned Unit Development shall require a public hearing.
After payment of appropriate fees, the city planner may set the date of the
public hearing for a regular or special meeting of the plan commission. No
hearing may held before the plan commission has had an opportunity to review
the plan at a workshop session.
      3.   Submission of plans for final review. Eighteen (18) individually
folded copies of the revised plan shall be submitted for final review at least
ten (10) days prior to the plan commission meeting at which review is
scheduled. The revised plan shall be distributed to the appropriate reviewing
parties by the city planner.
      4.   Final action. The plan commission and/or the city planner is
authorized to take the following final action on a site plan, subject to
guidelines in the Zoning Ordinance:
         • Approval,
         • Approval with conditions,
         • Denial, or
         • Table the site plan.
         (a)   Approval. Upon determination that a site plan is in full
compliance with the standards and requirements of these regulations and other
applicable City regulations and laws, approval shall be granted.
         (b)   Approval with conditions. Upon determination that a site plan is
in compliance except for minor modifications, the conditions for approval shall
be identified and the applicant shall be given the opportunity to correct the
site plan. Conditions may include the requirement to obtain variances or obtain
approvals from other agencies. For example, as a condition of approval, the
plan commission may delegate the responsibility for final approval of
engineering and other technical issues to the city engineer or other
appropriate staff. If a plan is approved subject to conditions, the applicant
shall submit a revised plan with a revision date, indicating full compliance
with the required conditions.
         The plan commission and/or the city planner may require that the
applicant resubmit the site plan for final approval by the plan commission
after conditions have been met. The plan commission may waive its right to
review the revised plan, and delegate authority to the city planner to review
and approve a revised site plan on the commission's behalf after required
conditions have been addressed. The plan commission may require that the city
planner secure a favorable recommendation from city engineer prior to final
approval of the revised plan.
         (c)   Denial. Upon determination by the plan commission and/or the
city planner that a site plan does not comply with the standards and
regulations set forth in these regulations, or that the submittal requires
extensive revision to comply with standards and regulations, approval of the
site plan shall be denied.
         (d)   Tabling. Upon determination by the plan commission and/or the
city planner that a site plan is not sufficiently complete for approval or
rejection, or upon a request by the applicant, the plan commission may table or
the city planner may delay consideration of a site plan until a later meeting
and/or until the necessary information is provided by the applicant.
      5.   Recording of site plan review action. Each action taken with
reference to a site plan review shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the
plan commission or in the files of the city plan department. The grounds for
action taken upon each site plan shall also be recorded.
   After the plan commission has taken final action on a site plan, the plan
commission secretary shall clearly mark three (3) copies of the application and
final site plans APPROVED or DENIED, as appropriate, with the date that action
was taken. One (1) marked copy will be returned to the applicant and the other
two (2) copies will be kept on file by the City. In the case of review and
approval by the city planner, a similar procedure shall be followed.
      6.   Procedure after site plan approval. 
         (a)   Building permit. Following final approval of the site plan by
the plan commission and/or the city planner, the applicant may apply to the
City for a building permit. The issuance of a building permit shall be subject
to the review of construction plans by the building and safety department, and,
if deemed necessary by the building official, the city engineer. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all applicable City, county, or
state permits prior to issuance of a building permit.
         (b)   Approval expiration. Site plan approval becomes null and void if
substantial improvement has not commenced within twelve (12) months following
the final approval of the site plan following the issuance of a building
permit. In such a case, the applicant shall file a new application. Review by
the plan commission and/or the city planner of the new application and site
plan shall be required.
         (c)   Approval extensions. Upon written request of the applicant,
prior to the expiration of a previously granted approval, the city planner may
review the circumstances surrounding a failure to meet the required deadlines.
The city planner may grant an extension of up to twelve (12) months to an
approval, if he finds that the approved site plan continues to adequately
represent current conditions on and surrounding the site and that the site plan
conforms to the standards of the City regulations in effect at the time of the
applicant's request for an extension.
         (d)   Application for Certificate of Occupancy. Following building
construction and completion of site work, the applicant may apply to the City
for a Certificate of Occupancy or a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy from the
building official in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section
32.07. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain the required
certificates prior to any occupancy of the property.
         (e)   Site maintenance after approval. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of a property for which site plan approval has been granted to
maintain the property in accordance with the approved site design on a
continuing basis until:
            • The property is razed,
            • New zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which site
plan approval was based, or
            • A new site design is approved following City review.
   Any property owner who fails to maintain an approved site plan in full
compliance with approvals granted by the plan commission and/or the city
planner according to the provisions of these regulations, shall be deemed in
violation of the use provisions of these regulations and shall be subject to
the penalties stated in Section
32.09.
      7.   Revocation. An approved site plan may be revoked by the plan
commission and/or the city planner if construction on the site is not completed
or is not progressing in a manner consistent with the approved plans. In such a
case, the site plan shall be placed on the agenda of a plan commission meeting
for a public hearing. The city planner shall cause written notice to be
provided to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting and shall
publish notice of said hearing no later than five (5) days prior to the date
and time. The notice shall reduce all alleged inconsistencies and violations to
writing. The city planner, the building official, the applicant, and other
interested persons shall be allowed to present information and testimony to the
plan commission at the hearing. If the plan commission finds that an
inconsistency or violation of the approved site plan exists at the time of the
hearing, then, by a majority vote of attending members, the plan commission may
revoke the approval of the site plan and order the site returned to its
original condition by a date certain. Failure to comply with such an order
shall be deemed a violation of the use provisions of these regulations and
shall be subject to the penalties stated in Section
32.09.
      8.   Modification to approved plan. A previously approved site plan may
be subsequently modified, subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Review of minor modifications. Minor modifications to an
approved site plan may be reviewed and approved by the city planner, provided
that the modifications do not involve any one of the following items:
            • A request for a Variance,
            • A special land use,
            • A discretionary decision such as a PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use plan, or
               (1)   Minor modification defined. Minor modifications are
changes that do not substantially affect the character or intensity of the use,
vehicular or pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, the demand for public
services, or the vulnerability to hazards. Examples of minor modifications
include:
                  • An addition to an existing building that does not increase
or decrease the floor space by more than twenty-five percent (25%) or three
thousand (3,000) square feet, whichever is less.
                  • Reoccupancy of a building by a similar use permitted by
these regulations.
                  • Changes to building height that do not add an additional
floor.
                  • Additions or alterations to the landscape plan or landscape
materials.
                  • Relocation or resizing utility supply lines or service
connections.
                  • Relocation or screening of the trash receptacle.
                  • Alterations to the internal parking layout of an off-street
lot in which the total available spaces is unchanged.
   Construction of a new building or structure, adding or deleting parking
spaces, constructing additional stories or the introduction of additional curb
cuts onto a public road are examples of modifications that are not considered
minor.
               (2)   Determination of minor modification. The city planner
shall determine if the proposed modifications are minor in accordance with the
guidelines in this Section. In order to make a determination, the city planner
may solicit comments and recommendations from the city attorney, city engineer,
and public safety officials, as deemed necessary.
         (b)   Modifications not deemed "minor." In the case where a site plan
was approved by the plan commission, and modifications are not deemed minor by
the city planner, then review and approval of the changes by the plan
commission shall be required. Plan commission review shall be required for all
site plans that involve:
            • A request for a variance,
            • A Special Land Use,
            • A discretionary decision such as a PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use 32.04 plan, or,
         (c)   Recording of action. Each action related to modification of a
site plan shall be duly recorded in writing on a copy of the approved plan, and
shall be kept on file in the office of the city planner. The city planner shall
have the authority to require a new site plan for the purposes of clarity. The
plan commission shall be advised of all minor site plan modifications approved
by the city planner and such modifications shall be noted on the site plan.
   D.   Required information on site plans. The following information shall be
included on all site plans, where applicable:
      1.   Application form. The application form shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   Applicant's name and address.
         (b)   Name and address of property owner, if different from applicant.
         (c)   Common description of property and complete legal description
including the parcel tax identification (Sidwell) number(s).
         (d)   Total gross and net acreage of the site.
         (e)   Existing zoning.
         (f)   Proposed use of land and name of proposed development, if
applicable.
         (g)   Proposed buildings to be constructed, including square feet of
gross floor area.
         (h)   Proof of property ownership.
         (i)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of engineers, attorneys,
architects, and other professionals associated with the project.
         (j)   Any additional information required by the Site Plan Review
Manual adopted by the plan commission.
      2.   Descriptive and identification data. Site plans shall consist of an
overall plan for the entire development, drawn to a scale of not less than one
(1) inch = twenty (20) feet for property less than one (1) acre, one (1) inch =
thirty (30) feet for property larger than one (1) acre but less than three (3)
acres, and one (1) inch = fifty (50) feet for property larger than three (3)
acres. Sheet size shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36)
inches. The following descriptive and identification information shall be
included on all site plans:
         (a)   Applicant's name and address, and telephone number.
         (b)   Title block indicating the name of the development.
         (c)   Scale.
         (d)   North point.
         (e)   Dates of submission and revisions (month, day, year).
         (f)   General location map drawn to scale with north point.
         (g)   Legal and common description of property, including parcel
identification (Sidwell) number(s).
         (h)   The dimensions of all lots and property lines, showing the
relationship of the site to abutting properties. If the site is a part of a
larger parcel, the plan should indicate the boundaries of total land holding.
         (i)   A schedule for completing the project, including the phasing or
timing of all proposed developments, if applicable.
         (j)   Identification and seal of an architect, engineer, land
surveyor, licensed community planner or landscape architect who prepared plan.
         (k)   Written description of proposed land use.
         (l)   Zoning classification of applicant's parcel and all abutting
parcels.
         (m)   Proximity to driveways serving adjacent parcels.
         (n)   Proximity to major thoroughfare(s).
         (o)   Notation of any variances that have or must be secured.
         (p)   Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage, to the
nearest one-tenth 1/10 ) acre.
         (q)   Any additional information required by the Site Plan Review
Manual adopted by the plan commission.
      3.   Site data. 
         (a)   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
and other improvements on the site and on parcels within one hundred (100) feet
of the site.
         (b)   Front, side, and rear setback dimensioned from minimum location
(s).
         (c)   Topography on the site and within one hundred (100) feet of the
site at two (2) foot contour intervals, referenced to a lake survey datum
benchmark.
         (d)   Proposed site plan features, including buildings, roadway widths
and names, and parking areas.
         (e)   Dimensions and centerline of existing and proposed roads and
road rights-of-way.
         (f)   Acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes, where required.
         (g)   Proposed location of driveway entrances and on-site driveways
with dimensioned minimum and maximum widths.
         (h)   Typical cross-section of proposed roads and driveways, if
applicable.
         (i)   Location of existing drainage courses and drains, open or
enclosed and with elevations and/or inverts.
         (j)   Location of existing or proposed underground improvements such
as storage tanks, culverts, and water gates.
         (k)   Location of sidewalks within the site and within the right-of-
way.
         (l)   Exterior lighting locations and method of shielding.
         (m)   Trash receptacle locations and method of screening, if
applicable.
         (n)   Transformer pad location(s) and method of screening, if
applicable.
         (o)   Parking spaces, including delineated handicap spaces, typical
dimensions of spaces, indication of total number of spaces, drives, and method
of surfacing.
         (p)   Information needed to calculate required parking in accordance
with Zoning Ordinance standards.
         (q)   The location of lawns and landscaped areas, including required
landscaped greenbelts. The percentage of the site used for open space.
         (r)   Landscape plan, including location, size, type and quantity of
proposed shrubs, trees and other live plant material. A maintenance plan for
landscaping shall be stated on the plan.
         (s)   Location, sizes, and types of existing trees five (5) inches or
greater in diameter, measured at one (1) foot above grade, before and after
proposed development.
         (t)   Cross-section of proposed berms.
         (u)   Location, description, and County Registrar of Deeds filing
identification of all easements for public right-of-way, utilities, access,
shared access, and drainage.
         (v)   Designation of fire lanes.
         (w)   Delineation of dedicated loading/unloading area.
         (x)   The location of any outdoor storage of materials and the manner
by which it will be screened.
         (y)   Any additional information required by the Site Plan Review
Manual adopted by the plan commission.
      4.   Building and structure details. 
         (a)   Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed
buildings or structures.
         (b)   Indication of the number of stores and number of commercial or
office units contained in the building.
         (c)   Building floor plans.
         (d)   Total floor area.
         (e)   Proposed usable floor area.
         (f)   Location, size, height, and lighting information of all proposed
signs.
         (g)   Proposed fences and walls, including typical cross-section and
height above the ground on both sides.
         (h)   Architectural elevations of building facades and walls, drawn to
a scale of one-quarter (¼) inch equals one (1) foot, or another scale approved
by the city planner and adequate to determine compliance with the requirements
of these regulations. Elevations of proposed buildings shall indicate type of
building materials, roof design, dimensions of projections and architectural
features, canopies, awnings and overhangs, screen walls and accessory
buildings, and any outdoor or roof-located mechanical equipment, such as air
conditioning units, heating units, and transformers and related screening. The
city planner may permit photographs in lieu of evaluations for existing
buildings where minor or no change to the facade is proposed.
         (i)   Any additional information required by the Site Plan Review
Manual adopted by the plan commission.
      5.   Information concerning utilities, drainage, and related issues. 
         (a)   Schematic layout of existing and proposed sanitary sewers
connections; water mains, and water service leads; hydrants locations that
service the site; and, the location and size or capacity of gas, electric, and
telephone lines supply lines and building leads.
         (b)   Location and size or capacity of exterior drains, catch basins,
retention/detention areas, culverts and other facilities designed to collect
store, or transport storm or waste water. The point of discharge for all drains
and pipes must be specified on the site plan. Compliance with City discharge
standards must be noted.
         (c)   Indication of site grading, drainage patterns, and proposed
contours.
         (d)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
         (e)   Proposed finish grades on the site, including the finish grades
of all buildings, driveways, walkways, and parking lots.
         (f)   Listing of types and quantities of hazardous substances and
polluting materials that will be used or stored on-site at the facility in
quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons per month.
         (g)   Areas to be used for the storage, use, loading/unloading,
recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials,
including interior and exterior areas.
         (h)   Location of underground storage tanks.
         (i)   Delineation of areas on the site that are known or suspected to
be contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup.
         (j)   Any additional information required by the Site Plan Review
Manual adopted by the plan commission.
      6.   Information concerning residential development. 
         (a)   The number, type and location of each type of residential unit
(one-bedroom units, two-bedroom units, etc.).
         (b)   Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units
per acre).
         (c)   Lot coverage calculations.
         (d)   Floor plans of typical buildings with square feet of floor area.
         (e)   Garage and carport locations and details, if proposed.
         (f)   Details of the pedestrian circulation system.
         (g)   Location and names of roads and internal drives with an
indication of how the proposed circulation system will connect with the
existing adjacent roads. The plan must indicate whether proposed roads are
intended to be private or dedicated to the public.
         (h)   Community building location, dimensions, floor plans, and
architectural elevations, if applicable.
         (i)   Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of
fence, if applicable.
         (j)   Location and size of recreation open areas.
         (k)   Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for
recreation area.
         (l)   Any additional information required by the Site Plan Review
Manual adopted by the plan commission.
      7.   Additional information. 
         (a)   Information related to condominium development. The following
information shall be provided with all site plans that include a development
involving condominium ownership:
            (1)   Condominium documents, including the proposed master deed,
condominium by-laws, restrictive covenants, and easements or examples thereof
illustrating the intent of the developer for such documents to apply to the
proposed development.
            (2)   Condominium subdivision plan requirements, as specified in
Section 66 of Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, and Rule 401 of the
Condominium Rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Commerce,
Corporation and Securities Bureau.
         (b)   Items not applicable. If any of the items listed are not
applicable to a particular site, the following must be provided on the site
plan:
            (1)   A statement of each item considered not applicable.
            (2)   The reason(s) why each listed item is not considered
applicable.
         (c)   Other data that may be required. Any additional information
required by the Site Plan Review Manual adopted by the plan commission must be
supplied. Other data may be required if deemed necessary by the plan
commission, or city planner to determine compliance with provisions in these
regulations. Such information may include traffic studies, market analysis,
environmental assessment and evaluation of the demand on public facilities and
services.
   E.   Standards for site plan approval. The following criteria shall be used
as a basis upon which site plans will be reviewed and approved:
      1.   Adequacy of information. The site plan shall include all required
information in sufficiently complete and understandable form to provide an
accurate description of the proposed uses and structures.
      2.   Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall
be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size
and type of parcel, the character of adjoining land uses, and the type and size
of buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and
orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted
by these regulations.
      3.   Appearance. Landscaping, earth berms, fencing, signs, walls, and
other site features shall be designed and located on the site so that the
proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with nearby
existing or future developments.
      4.   Compliance with district requirements. The site plan shall comply
with the district requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot
size, open space, density and all other requirements set forth in the Schedule
of Regulations,
Article 29.00, unless otherwise provided in these regulations.
      5.   Privacy. The site design shall provide reasonable visual and sound
privacy. Fences, walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as
appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the safety and
privacy of occupants and uses.
      6.   Emergency vehicle access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall
be so arranged as to permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access.
      7.   Ingress and egress. Every structure or dwelling unit shall be
provided with adequate means of ingress and egress via public streets and
walkways.
      8.   Pedestrian circulation. The site plan shall provide a pedestrian
circulation system that is insulated as completely as is reasonably possible
from the vehicular circulation system.
      9.   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation layout. The arrangement of
public and common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect
the pattern of existing streets or pedestrian ways in the vicinity of the site.
The width of streets and drives shall be appropriate for the volume of traffic
they will carry. In order to insure public safety and promote efficient traffic
flow and turning movements, the applicant may be required to limit street
access points or construct a secondary access road.
      10.   Drainage. Appropriate measures shall be taken to insure that the
removal or drainage of surface water will not adversely affect adjoining
properties or the capacity of the public drainage system. Provisions shall be
made for a feasible storm drainage system, the construction of stormwater
collection, storage and transportation facilities, and the prevention of
erosion. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so
that it will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not create
nuisance ponding in paved areas. Final grades may be required to conform to
existing and future grades of adjacent properties. Grading and drainage plans
shall be subject to review by the director of public works or the city
engineer.
      11.   Soil erosion and sedimentation. The proposed development shall
include measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation during and upon
completion of construction, in accordance with current State (MDNR) Standards
and City Code of Ordinances, Sections
5-186 to
203.
      12.   Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed so that it
is deflected away from adjoining properties, visual glare is minimized, and so
that it does not impede vision of drivers along adjacent streets.
      13.   Public services. Adequate services and utilities, including water,
sewage disposal, sanitary sewer, and stormwater control services, shall be
available or provided, and shall be designed with sufficient capacity and
durability to properly serve the development.
      14.   Screening. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, outside
refuse storage areas, and other storage areas that are visible from adjacent
homes or from public roads, shall be screened by walls or landscaping of
adequate height.
      15.   Danger from hazards. The level of vulnerability to injury or loss
from incidents involving hazardous materials or processes shall not exceed the
capability of the City to respond to such hazardous incidents so as to prevent
injury and loss of life and property. In making such an evaluation, the City
shall consider the location, type, characteristics, quantities, and use of
hazardous materials or processes in relation to the personnel, training,
equipment and materials, and emergency response plans and capabilities of the
City.
   Sites that include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt, or
chemicals shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting
materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater, and public sewer system.
      16.   Health and safety concerns. Any use in any zoning district shall
comply with applicable federal, state, county, and local health and pollution
laws and regulations with respect to noise; dust, smoke and other air
pollutants; vibration; glare and heat; fire and explosive hazards; gases;
electromagnetic radiation; radioactive materials; and, toxic and hazardous
materials.
      17.   Sequence of development. All development phases shall be designed
in logical sequence to insure that each phase will independently function in a
safe, convenient and efficient manner without being dependent upon subsequent
improvements in a later phase or on other sites.
      18.   Relationship to adjacent sites. All site features, including
circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities,
common facilities, and open space shall be reviewed with regard to any common
relationship with adjacent properties.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.02, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 98-737, 9-15-1998)
Sec. 32.03. - Special use regulations.
   A.   Intent. The procedures and standards in this section are intended to
provide a consistent and uniform method for review of special use proposals.
Special uses are uses, either public or private, which possess unique
characteristics and therefore cannot be properly classified as permitted uses
in a particular zoning district.
   These review procedures and standards are intended to accomplish the
following purposes:
      1.   Ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this
Ordinance and other applicable local law and ordinances, and state and federal
laws.
      2.   Achieve efficient use of the land.
      3.   Prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby properties.
      4.   Protect natural resources.
      5.   Facilitate development in accordance with the City's land use
objectives.
   B.   Procedures and requirements. Special use applications shall be
submitted in accordance with the following procedures and requirements, which
provide for review and action by the plan commission. Although a site plan must
be submitted with a Special Use Application, approval of the Special Use is
required prior to site plan approval.
      1.   Applicant eligibility. The application shall be submitted by the
owner of an interest in land for which Special Use Approval is sought, or by
the owner's designated agent. The applicant or a designated representative
should be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of the
proposal may be tabled.
      2.   Application forms and documentation. The application for Special Use
shall be made on the forms and according to the guidelines in the City's site
plan checklist, provided by the building or planning department.
      3.   Application data requirements. A site plan shall be submitted with
the Special Use Application. In addition, the applicant shall complete any
forms and supply any other data that may be required by the plan commission, or
City staff to make the determination required, herein. The applicant shall
provide all necessary written or graphic materials to document compliance with
the standards set forth in Section
32.03 c.(c), and other regulatory guidelines specified for particular Special
Uses elsewhere in this ordinance.
      4.   Site plan preparation. The site plan shall be prepared in the manner
specified in Section
32.02, the Site Plan Manual, and on the Special Use Application form. A site
plan which does not meet the stipulated requirements shall be considered
incomplete and shall therefore not be subject to formal review.
      5.   Submission of a completed plan. The Special Use Application
materials, required fees, and six (6) copies of the completed site plan shall
be submitted to the building department for review.
      6.   Review by the City Officials. The city planner shall review the site
plan and application materials, solicit other appropriate city officials, and
prepare a written review, which shall specify any deficiencies in the site plan
and application and make recommendations as appropriate.
      7.   Submission of a revised plan and Special Use Application. The
applicant shall revise the site plan and application materials, based on the
recommendations set forth in the city planner's review. The applicant shall
then submit fifteen (15) copies of the revised plan for further review by staff
and the plan commission.
      8.   Plan Commission consideration. After all application materials have
been received and review fees paid, the application shall be reviewed in
accordance with following procedures:
         (a)   Acceptance for processing. The application shall be placed on
the agenda of the next available scheduled plan commission meeting and a public
hearing shall be scheduled.
         (b)   Public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be prepared
by the city planner, published in a newspaper which circulates in the City, and
sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval
is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within
three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to
the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet. Such
notification shall be made in accordance with the provisions in Section 4a3. of
the City or Village Zoning Act, Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
         (c)   Plan Commission review. Following the public hearing, the
Special Use proposal and plan shall be reviewed by the plan commission, based
on the standards and regulations in this section.
         (d)   Plan revision. If the plan commission determines that revisions
are necessary to bring the Special Use proposal into compliance with applicable
standards and regulations, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to
submit a revised application and site plan. Following submission of revised
application materials, the Special Use proposal shall be placed on the agenda
of the next available scheduled meeting of the plan commission for further
review and possible action.
      9.   Plan Commission determination. The plan commission shall review the
application for Special Use, together with the public hearing findings and
reports and recommendations from the city planner, building official, city
engineer, public safety officials, and other reviewing agencies. The plan
commission shall then make a determination on the Special Use Application,
based on the requirements and standards of this ordinance. The plan commission
may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Special Use request as follows:
         (a)   Approval. Upon determination by the plan commission that the
final plan for Special Use is in compliance with the standards and requirements
of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, approval shall be
granted.
         (b)   Approval with conditions. The plan commission may impose
reasonable conditions with the approval of a Special Use proposal, to the
extent authorized by law. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following
requirements:
            • Conditions shall be designed to protect natural resources, the
health, safety, and welfare and the social and economic well-being of those who
will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as
a whole.
            • Conditions shall be related to the valid exercise of the police
power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
            • Conditions shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of
the Zoning Ordinance, related to the standards established in the ordinance for
the land use or activity under consideration, and necessary to insure
compliance with those standards.
         (c)   Denial. Upon determination by the plan commission that a Special
Use proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in
this ordinance, or otherwise would be injurious to the public health, safety,
welfare, and orderly development of the City, the Special Use proposal shall be
denied. Any appeal to a decision of the plan commission must be taken to the
Wayne County Circuit Court.
      10.   Recording of Plan Commission. Each action taken with respect to a
Special Use shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the plan commission, as
appropriate. The minutes shall record the findings of fact relative to each
Special Use proposal, the grounds for the action taken, and any conditions
imposed in conjunction with approval.
      11.   Effect of approval. Upon approval, a Special Use shall be deemed a
conforming use permitted in the district in which it is proposed, subject to
any conditions imposed and final approval of the site plan. Such approval shall
affect only the lot or portion thereof on which the proposed use is located.
      12.   Zoning Board of Appeals authority. The zoning board of appeals
shall not have the authority to consider an Appeal of a decision by the plan
commission concerning a Special Use proposal.
      13.   Application for a building permit. Prior to issuance of a building
permit, the applicant shall submit proof of the following:
         (a)   Final approval of the Special Use Application.
         (b)   Final approval of the site plan.
         (c)   Final approval of the engineering plans.
         (c)   Acquisition of all other applicable City, county, or state
permits.
      14.   Expiration of Special Use approval. If construction has not
commenced within twenty-four (24) months of final approval, the approval
becomes null and void and a new application for Special Use shall be required.
Upon written request from the applicant, a twelve-month extension may be
granted by the plan commission, if the plan commission finds that the approved
Special Use Application and site plan adequately represent current conditions
on and surrounding the site. The written request for extension must be received
prior to the site plan expiration date or a new application for Special Use
review will be required.
      15.   Revocation of Special Use Approval. Approval of a Special Use
proposal and site plan may be revoked by the plan commission if construction is
not in conformance with the approved plans. In such a case, the city planner
shall ask that the Special Use proposal be placed on the agenda of the plan
commission. Written notice shall be provided to the applicant at least five (5)
days prior to the meeting at which the case will be considered. The applicant
shall be given the opportunity to present information and to answer questions.
The plan commission may revoke approval if it finds that a violation exists and
has not been remedied prior to the hearing.
      16.   Performance guarantee. The plan commission may require that a
performance guarantee be deposited with the City to ensure faithful completion
of the improvements. Improvements that shall be covered by the performance
guarantee include, but are not necessarily limited to: landscaping, open space
improvements, streets, lighting, and sidewalks. The performance guarantee shall
comply with the requirements in Section
2.18.
   C.   Standards for granting Special Use Approval. Approval of a Special Use
proposal shall be based on the determination that the proposed use will comply
with all applicable requirements of this ordinance, including site plan review
criteria set forth in Section
32.03, applicable site development standards for specific uses set forth
elsewhere in this ordinance, and the following standards:
      1.   Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed Special Use shall be
designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be compatible with uses on
surrounding land. The site design shall minimize the impact of site activity on
surrounding properties. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to:
         (a)   The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking
areas in relation to surrounding development.
         (b)   The location and screening of outdoor storage, outdoor activity
or work areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development.
         (c)   The hours of operation of the proposed use. Approval of a
Special Use may be conditioned upon operation within specified hours considered
appropriate to ensure minimal impact on surrounding uses.
         (d)   The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of the
proposed use in relation to surrounding uses.
      2.   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed Special Use shall
be consistent with the general principles and objectives of the adopted
Dearborn Master Plan.
      3.   Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed Special Use
shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
ordinances.
      4.   Use of adjacent property. The Special Use shall not interfere with
the use and will not adversely affect adjacent property.
      5.   Public services. The proposed Special Use shall not exceed the
capacity of existing and available public services, including but not
necessarily limited to utilities, public roads, police and fire protection
services, and educational services, unless the project proposal contains an
acceptable plan for providing necessary services or evidence that such services
will be available by the time the Special Use is completed.
      6.   Impact of traffic. The location of the proposed Special Use within
the zoning district shall minimize the impact of traffic generated by the
proposed use. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to the following:
         (a)   Proximity and access to major thoroughfares.
         (b)   Estimated traffic generated by the proposed use.
         (c)   Proximity and relation to intersections.
         (d)   Adequacy of driver sight distances.
         (e)   Location of and access to off-street parking.
         (f)   Required vehicular turning movements.
         (g)   Provision of pedestrian traffic.
         (h)   If it is determined to be necessary by the plan commission that
a detailed traffic study is needed, the cost shall be borne by the applicant.
      7.   Enhancement of surrounding environment. The proposed Special Use
shall provide the maximum feasible enhancement of the surrounding environment,
and shall not unreasonably interfere with or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their
value. In determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration
shall be given to:
         (a)   The provision of landscaping and other site amenities. Provision
of additional landscaping over and above the specific requirements of this
ordinance may be required as a condition of approval of a Special Use.
         (b)   The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of proposed
structures in relation to surrounding uses.
      8.   Impact on public health, safety, and welfare. The proposed Special
Use shall not involve any activities, processes, materials, equipment, or
conditions of operation, and shall not be located or designed in a manner that
is detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. In determining whether
this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to the production
of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, odors, dust, glare, and light.
      9.   Isolation of existing uses. The location of the proposed Special Use
shall not result in a small residential area being substantially surrounded by
nonresidential development, and further, the location of the proposed Special
Use shall not result in a small nonresidential area being substantially
surrounded by incompatible uses.
      10.   Need for the proposed use. The plan commission may find that a need
for the proposed use does not exist in the community at the time the Special
Use proposal is considered.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.03, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 32.04. - PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use procedures and standards.
   A.   Intent. The procedures and standards in this Section are intended to
provide a consistent and uniform method for review of planned development
proposals. The PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use regulations are intended
to provide design and regulatory flexibility so as to accomplish the objectives
of this ordinance, using innovative and effective planning. The review
procedures and standards set forth in this section are intended to ensure full
compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance, particularly
Article 23.00, and other applicable local law and ordinances, and state and
federal laws. These regulations are further intended to achieve efficient use
of land, to protect natural resources, and to prevent adverse impact on
adjoining or nearby properties. It is the intent of these provisions to
encourage cooperation and consultation between the City and the applicant so as
to facilitate development in accordance with the City's land use objectives.
   B.   Procedures and requirements.   
      1.   Amendment required. The approval of a PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use application shall require an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to
revise the zoning map and designate the subject property as PUD, Planned Unit
Development. Approval granted under this section, including all aspects of the
final plan and conditions imposed on it, shall constitute an inseparable part
of the zoning amendment.
      2.   Review procedures. Planned unit development applications shall be
submitted in accordance with the following procedures and requirements, which
provide for detailed review of PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposals by the plan commission, followed by review and approval by the city
council:
         (a)   Applicant eligibility. The application shall be submitted by the
owner of an interest in land for which PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
approval is sought, or by the owner's designated agent. The applicant or a
designated representative shall be present at all scheduled review meetings or
consideration of the proposal may be tabled.
         (b)   Application forms and documentation. The application for PUD,
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall be made on the forms and according to
the guidelines specified in the City's site plan checklist, as provided by the
city plan department.
         (c)   Site plan preparation. The site plan shall be prepared in the
manner specified in this Section, in the City's site plan checklist, and on the
PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use application form. A site plan which
does not meet the stipulated requirements shall be considered incomplete and
shall therefore not be subject to formal review.
         (d)   Submission of a completed plan. The PUD, Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use application materials, required fees, and sufficient
copies of the completed site plan shall be submitted to the city plan
department for review.
         (e)   Review by the City Officials. The city planner and other
appropriate city officials may review the site plan and application materials,
and prepare a written review, which shall specify any deficiencies in the site
plan and make recommendations as appropriate.
         (f)   Submission of a revised plan and PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use application. The applicant shall revise the site plan and application
materials, based on the recommendations set forth in the city planner's review.
The applicant shall then submit sufficient copies of the revised plan for
further review by staff and the plan commission. Copies of the site plan and
application shall also be transmitted to the city council for information
purposes.
         (g)   Plan Commission consideration. After all application materials
have been received and review fees paid, the application shall be reviewed in
accordance with following procedures:
            (1)   Acceptance for processing. The application shall be placed on
the agenda of the next available scheduled plan commission meeting and a public
hearing shall be scheduled.
            (2)   Public hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled in the
same manner as required for Special Uses in Section
32.03 of this ordinance and Section 4a(3) of the City or Village Zoning Act,
Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended. As stated in Act 207, the public
hearing and notice required by this Subsection shall be regarded as fulfilling
the public hearing and notice requirements for amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance. The plan commission and city council may hold a joint public hearing
on a PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use application if they so desire.
            (3)   Plan Commission review. Following the public hearing, the
PUD, Planned Unit Development proposal and plan shall be reviewed by the Plan
Commission in relation to applicable standards and regulations and consistency
with the intent and spirit of the PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
concept.
            (4)   Plan revision. If the Plan Commission determines that
revisions are necessary to bring the PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposal into compliance with applicable standards and regulations, the
applicant shall be given the opportunity to submit a revised plan. Following
submission of a revised plan, the PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposal shall be placed on the agenda of the next available scheduled meeting
of the plan commission for further review and possible action.
         (h)   Plan Commission determination. The plan commission shall review
the application for PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use, together with the
public hearing findings and reports and recommendations from the city planner,
building official, city engineer, public safety officials, and other reviewing
agencies. The plan commission shall then make a recommendation to the city
council, based on the requirements and standards of this ordinance. The plan
commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial as
follows:
            (1)   Approval. Upon determination by the plan commission that the
final plan for PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use is in compliance with
the standards and requirements of this ordinance and other applicable
ordinances and laws, the plan commission shall recommend approval.
            (2)   Approval with conditions. The plan commission may recommend
that the City Council impose reasonable conditions with the approval of a PUD,
Planned Unit Development proposal, to the extent authorized by law, for the
following purposes:
               — To insure that public services and facilities affected by the
proposed development will be capable of accommodating increased public service
loads caused by the development.
               — To protect the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy.
               — To insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land.
               — To promote the use of land in a socially and economically
desirable manner.
               — To protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the
individuals in the development and those immediately adjacent, and the
community as a whole.
               — To achieve the intent and purpose of this ordinance.
         In the event that the PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use is
approved subject to conditions, such conditions shall become a part of the
record of approval, and shall be modified only as provided herein.
            (3)   Denial. Upon determination by the plan commission that a PUD,
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use proposal does not comply with the standards
and regulations set forth in this ordinance, or otherwise would be injurious to
the public health, safety, welfare, and orderly development of the City, the
plan commission shall recommend denial.
   The plan commission shall prepare and transmit a report to the city council
stating its conclusions and recommendation, the basis for its recommendation,
and any recommended conditions relating to an affirmative decision.
         (i)   Submission of plans for city council review. After the plan
commission makes its recommendation, the applicant shall make any required
revisions and submit sufficient copies of the revised site plan and supporting
materials for city council review.
         (j)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of a PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use recommendation from the plan commission, the city council may
schedule a public hearing, unless a joint public hearing has already occurred,
in accordance with subsection g., above. The public hearing shall be scheduled
in the same manner as required for Special Uses in Section
32.03 of this Ordinance and Section 4a(3) of the City or Village Zoning Act,
Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
         (k)   City Council determination. The city council shall make a
determination based on review of the final plan together with the findings of
the plan commission, and the reports and recommendation from the city planner,
building official, city engineer, public safety officials, and other reviewing
agencies. Following completion of its review, the city council shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny a PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposal in accordance with the guidelines described previously Subsection (h),
above. Upon determination by the plan commission that a Special Use proposal
does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in this ordinance,
or otherwise would be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, and
orderly development of the City, the Special Use proposal shall be denied. Any
appeal to a decision of the plan commission must be taken to the Wayne County
Circuit Court.
         (l)   Recording of plan commission and city council action. Each
action taken with respect to a PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall be
duly recorded in the minutes of the plan commission or city council, as
appropriate. The grounds for the action taken shall also be recorded in the
minutes.
      3.   Effect of approval. Approval of a PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use proposal shall constitute an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. All
improvements and use of the site shall be in conformity with the PUD, Planned
Unit Development Mixed Use amendment and any conditions imposed. Notice of the
adoption of the amendment shall be published in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Section
32.06. The applicant shall record an affidavit with the register of deeds
containing the legal description of the entire project, specifying the date of
approval, and declaring that all future improvements will be carried out in
accordance with the approved PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use unless an
amendment is adopted by the city council upon request by the applicant or his/
her successors.
      4.   Zoning Board of Appeals authority. The zoning board of appeals shall
not have the authority to consider an appeal of a decision by the city council
or plan commission concerning a PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposal.
      5.   Application for a building permit. Prior to issuance of a building
permit, the applicant shall submit proof of the following:
         (a)   Final approval of the site plan and PUD, Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use application.
         (b)   Final approval of the engineering plans.
         (c)   Acquisition of all other applicable city, county, or state
permits.
      6.   Expiration of PUD, Planned Unit Development approval. If
construction has not commenced within twenty-four (24) months of final
approval, the approval becomes null and void and a new application for PUD,
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use shall be required. The city council may
grant a twelve-month extension, upon written request from the applicant, if it
finds that the approved site plan adequately represents current conditions on
and surrounding the site. The written request for extension must be received
prior to the site plan expiration date. In the event that an approved PUD,
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use plan becomes null and void, the City shall
initiate proceedings to amend the zoning classification of the site.
      7.   Performance guarantee. The plan commission or city council may
require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the City to ensure
faithful completion of the improvements. Improvements that shall be covered by
the performance guarantee include, but are not necessarily limited to:
landscaping, open space improvements, streets, lighting, and sidewalks. The
performance guarantee shall comply with the requirements in Section
2.18.
      8.   Revision to approved plans. 
         (a)   General revisions. An approved PUD, Planned Unit Development
Mixed Use proposal and plan may be revised in accordance with the procedures
set forth for approval of a new proposal.
         (b)   Minor changes. Notwithstanding subsection a., above, minor
changes may be permitted by the city planner following normal site plan review
procedures outline in Section
32.02, subject to the city planner finding that:
            (1)   The proposed changes will not affect the initial basis on
which initial approval was granted.
            (2)   The proposed minor changes will not adversely affect the
overall PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use in light of the intent and
purposes of such development as stated in Section
18.01.
            (3)   The proposed changes will not affect the character or
intensity of use, the general configuration of buildings and uses on the site,
vehicular or pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, or the demand for
public services.
   Examples of minor changes include, but are not limited to:
      — Additions or alteration to the landscape plan or landscape materials.
      — Alterations to the internal parking layout of an off-street lot,
provided that the total number of spaces does not change.
      — Relocation of a trash receptacle.
      — An increase in floor area of less than twenty percent (20%) of the
initial total floor area up to five thousand (5,000) square feet.
         (c)   Application data requirements. Applications for PUD, Planned
Unit Development Mixed Use approval shall include all applicable data required
for site plan review as specified in Section
32.02 and the City's site plan checklist. In addition, the application shall
include the following:
            (1)   An overall plan for the planned development. The overall plan
shall graphically represent the development concept using maps and
illustrations to indicate each type of use, square footage or acreage allocated
to each use, approximate locations of each principal structure and use in the
development, setbacks, and typical layouts and elevations for each type of use.
The overall plan shall clearly delineate each type of residential use; office,
commercial and other nonresidential use; each type of open space; community
facilities and public areas; and other types of land use.
            (2)   A map and written explanation of the relationship of the
proposed PUD, Planned Unit Development Mixed Use to the City's Master Plan.
            (3)   Information concerning traffic generated by the proposed PUD,
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use. Sufficient information shall be provided to
allow the City to evaluate the impact of the proposed development on adjoining
roads. The following traffic-related information shall be provided: estimates
of the volume of traffic generated by each use, the peak hour volume of traffic
expected to be generated by the proposed development, a schematic drawing
indicating vehicular movement through the site including anticipated turning
movements, and measures being proposed to alleviate the impact of the
development on the circulation system.
            (4)   Analysis of the fiscal impact of the proposed PUD, Planned
Unit Development Mixed Use on the City and the school district.
            (5)   Evidence of market need for the proposed use(s) and the
feasibility of completing the project in its entirety. This requirement may be
waived by the plan commission upon making the determination, based on existing
evidence and knowledge about the local economy, that market support does exist
for the proposed uses.
            (6)   Legal documentation of single ownership or control. The
documentation shall be in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and
deed restriction which indicate that the development can be completed as shown
on the plans, and further, that all portions of the development that are not to
be maintained at public expense will continue to be operated and maintained by
the developers or their successors.
            (7)   A specific schedule of the intended development and
construction details, including the phasing or timing of all proposed
improvements.
            (8)   A draft of ownership and governance documents. These
documents shall include the following:
               (a)   Deeds of ownership.
               (b)   Warranties guaranteeing ownership conveyed and described
in the deeds.
               (c)   A list of covenants, conditions, and restrictions that are
conditions of ownership upon the purchasers and owners in the PUD, Planned Unit
Development Mixed Use.
               (d)   Association by-laws (for example, condominium association
by-laws) which describe how the association is organized; the duties of the
association to operate, manage, and maintain common elements of the PUD,
Planned Unit Development Mixed Use; and, the duties of individual shareholders
to manage and maintain their own units.
Sec. 32.05. - Variances and Appeals.
   A.   Intent. The purpose of this Article is to provide guidelines and
standards to be followed by the zoning board of appeals in considering requests
for variances and appeals, where the jurisdiction of the zoning board of
appeals has been established by these regulations or by Michigan Public Act 207
of 1921, as amended.
   B.   Membership. 
      1.   The city council shall appoint a board of appeals consisting of not
less than five (5) members, each to be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
Appointments of the first members shall be for terms of one (1), two (2), and
three (3) years, respectively, so as nearly as possible to provide for the
appointment of an equal number of members each year. After the initial
appointments, each member shall hold office for the full three-year term.
      2.   Members of the zoning board of appeals shall reside within the City
of Dearborn.
      3.   Members of the zoning board of appeals are nominated by the mayor
and confirmed by the city council. Members serve at the discretion of the mayor
and may be removed in the sole discretion of the mayor at any time for any
reason prior to expiration of his/her term.
   C.   Purpose of Variances and Appeals. 
      1.   Appeals. Generally, an appeal may be taken to the zoning board of
appeals by a person, or by any office, department, board, or bureau aggrieved
by a decision of any administrative or enforcement official or body charged
with enforcement of these regulations.
      2.   Variances. Where there are practical difficulties preventing a
property owner from conforming with the strict letter of the Zoning Ordinance,
the zoning board of appeals shall have the power to authorize Variances from
the standards in these regulations, with such conditions and safeguards as it
may determine to be necessary so that the spirit of these regulations is
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. A variance to
permit a use not otherwise permitted within a zoning district (i.e., a "use
variance") may be permitted provided the application is reviewed by the city
planner with reference to the standards in this ordinance and the Master Plan
of the City. In the case of all variances, the zoning board of appeals shall be
the body charged with deciding requests for deviation(s) from any provisions in
the City's Zoning Ordinance in order to maintain integrity and compatibility
within new and existing neighborhoods, structures and land uses in the City.
Each member of the zoning board of appeals shall attend a basic training class
offered by the Michigan Municipal League within one (1) year of appointment.
Current members of the zoning board of appeals must attend the training class
within one (1) year from the effective date of this amendment.
   When reviewing a variance request, in addition to the criteria set forth in
subsection (F), the zoning board of appeals shall determine whether:
         (a)   Granting a deviation from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
in a particular case will lead to uneven application of the Zoning Ordinance
for all citizens, or
         (b)   Undermine the value of these laws that are intended to provide
orderly and predictable development within the community.
         (c)   Each request for a variance will be strictly scrutinized, in
order to prevent a negative impact on surrounding land uses and structures, and
to preserve the citizenry's ability to rely on the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
      3.   The zoning board of appeals shall establish rules and procedures
(by-laws) in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the
applicable state law.
   D.   Stay of proceedings. An appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of
citation of a violation by the director of building and safety. An appeal to
the zoning board of appeals shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
appealed action, unless the director of building and safety certifies to the
zoning board of appeals, that by reason of the facts stated in the appeal, a
stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the Wayne
County Circuit Court.
   E.   Application and procedures. 
      1.   Application to the zoning board of appeals. Variances and appeals
for which zoning board of appeals action is sought shall be commenced by a
person filing an application to the zoning board of appeals on forms as
specified by the director of building and safety and accompanied by required
fees. The application shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based
and shall contain a notarized signature of the property owner or owner's agent.
Applications involving a request for a variance shall specify the section
number(s) containing the standards from which a variance is sought and the
nature and extent of such variance.
      2.   Plot plan requirements. Applications involving a specific site shall
be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale that includes the following
information, where applicable:
         (a)   Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
         (b)   Property identification Sidwell number, scale, north point, and
dates of submission and revisions.
         (c)   Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting
parcels.
         (d)   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
driveways, and other improvements on the site and within fifty (50) feet of the
site.
         (e)   For variances requested from any dimensional standard of these
regulations, the plot plan shall include verified measurements of existing
conditions and the proposed dimensions or calculations regarding the specific
standards from which the variance is sought.
         (f)   Any additional information required by the city planner or the
zoning board of appeals to make the determination requested herein.
   Where an application to the zoning board of appeals involves a variance
sought in conjunction with a site plan review by the plan commission and/or the
city planner, the application data requirements for site plan review as set
forth in Section
32.02 shall be followed.
      3.   Review by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The building official shall
forward the application, along with any supporting materials and plans, to the
zoning board of appeals in accordance with subsection
32.05C.2.
   The director of the building and safety department or the zoning board of
Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or variance
request, give due notice to the parties to whom real property within three
hundred (300) feet of the premises in question is assessed, tenants of the real
property within three hundred (300) feet, and decide the appeal or variance
within a reasonable time. At the hearing, a party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney.
      4.   Decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals. A three-vote majority of
the members of the ZBA shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business and shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the administration official or body, or to decide in favor of
the applicant any matter upon which they are required to pass under, or to
effect any variation on an Ordinance adopted pursuant to Michigan Public Act
207 of 1921, as amended. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the ZBA
shall be necessary to approve any use variance.
   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination, in accordance with the guidelines set
forth herein. To that end, the zoning board of appeals shall have all the
powers of the officer or body from whom the Appeal was taken and may issue or
direct the issuance of a permit. With an affirmative decision, the board may
impose conditions pursuant to Section 4c(2)(a) of Michigan Public Act 207 of
1921, as amended. The decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be final,
but any person having an interest affected by a decision of the board may
appeal to the Wayne County Circuit Court.
      5.   Record of decision and order. The zoning board of appeals shall
prepare and retain a record of each appeal, and shall base its decision on this
record. This record shall include:
         (a)   The relevant administrative records and the administrative
orders issued thereon relating to the appeal.
         (b)   The notice of the appeal.
         (c)   Such documents, exhibits, plans, photographs, or written reports
as may be submitted to the ZBA for its consideration.
         (d)   The written findings of fact, the decisions, the reasons
pursuant to subsections (E)(1) and (2), and the conditions imposed by the
zoning board of appeals in acting on the appeal shall be entered into the
official record, after being signed by the secretary of the board.
      6.   Approval period. If construction has not commenced within twelve
(12) months after the zoning board of appeals grants a variance to permit the
erection or alteration of a building, then the variance becomes null and void.
   F.   Standards for Variances and Appeals. Variances and appeals shall be
granted only in accordance with Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended,
and based on the findings set forth in this section. The extent to which the
following criteria apply to a specific case shall be determined by the ZBA,
however, at least one (1) of the applicable criteria must be found by the ZBA.
      1.   Criteria applicable to Variances. 
         (a)   Practical difficulties. Compliance with the strict letter of the
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or
other dimensional provisions would create practical difficulties, unreasonably
prevent the use of the property for a permitted purpose, or render conformity
with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of mere
inconvenience is insufficient to justify a variance.
         (b)   Substantial justice. Granting of a requested variance or appeal
would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property
owners in the district; or, as an alternative, granting of lesser variance than
requested would give substantial relief to the owner of the property involved
and be more consistent with justice to other property owners.
         (c)   Public safety and welfare. The requested variance or appeal can
be granted in such fashion that the spirit of these regulations will be
observed and public safety and welfare secured.
         (d)   Extraordinary circumstances. There are exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved
or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other
properties or other similar uses in the same zoning district. The conditions
resulting in a variance request cannot be self-created.
         (e)   Preservation of property rights. A variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other
property owners in the same zoning district.
         (f)   No safety hazard. The granting of a variance or appeal will not
increase the hazard of fire or otherwise endanger public safety.
         (g)   No impact on land values. The granting of a variance or appeal
will not unreasonably diminish or impair the value of surrounding properties.
         (h)   Neighborhood character. The granting of a variance or appeal
will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
         (i)   Light and air. The granting of a variance or appeal will not
impair the adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
         (j)   Promotes orderly development. The size, character and location
of a development permitted after granting of a variance shall be in harmony
with the surrounding land use and shall promote orderly development in the
zoning district in which it is located.
         (k)   Traffic flow. A development permitted upon granting of a
variance shall make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is
normal for the district in which it is located, taking into consideration
vehicular turning movements, adequacy of sight lines for drivers, location and
accessibility of off-street parking, provisions for pedestrian traffic, and
measures to reduce contact between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
         (l)   No nuisance impacts. A development permitted upon granting of a
variance shall be designed so as to eliminate any dust, noise, fumes,
vibration, smoke, lights, or other undesirable impacts on surrounding
properties.
         (m)   Impact on adjacent properties. The location, design, and height
of buildings, structures, fences, or landscaping permitted upon granting of a
variance shall not interfere with or discourage the appropriate development,
continued use, or value of adjacent land or buildings.
         (n)   Relationship to adjacent land uses. The development permitted
upon granting of a variance shall relate harmoniously in a physical and
economic sense with adjacent land uses. In evaluating this criterion,
consideration shall be given to prevailing shopping patterns, convenience of
access for patrons, continuity of development, and the need for particular
services and facilities in specific areas of the City.
         (o)   Relationship to Master Plan policies. The granting of the
variance should be reviewed in reference to the adopted Master Plan policies of
the city plan commission, and the zoning board of appeals shall find that the
variance will not adversely affect said policies.
      2.   Criteria applicable to Appeals. The ZBA shall reverse an order of an
enforcement official only if it finds that the action or decision appealed:
         (a)   Was arbitrary or capricious, or
         (b)   Was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or
         (c)   Constituted an abuse of discretion, or
         (d)   Was based on erroneous interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or
zoning law.
         (e)   Appeals from denial of zoning board of appeals may be taken to
Wayne County Circuit Court.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.05, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 01-860, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 02-
904, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 02-924, 12-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-976, 8-5-2003)
Sec. 32.06. - Amendments.
   A.   Initiation of amendment. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance may be
proposed by the owner of property, city planner, city plan commission and city
council. After the City Plan Commission has considered the proposed amendment,
conducted at least one hearing, and issued its final report, the city council
may amend the district boundaries or regulations established by the Zoning
Ordinance.
   When the proposal related to land and a zoning classification which has been
included in a petition for rezoning within six (6) months from the date of
withdrawal or final action upon the prior application, the city plan commission
and city council shall not consider the new petition. This limitation shall not
prevent the city plan commission and city council from considering a petition
for rezoning when significantly altered circumstances, including the land area,
zoning classification and new detailed plans for use of the property are raised
in the subsequent petition and determine to exist by the city planner.
   Amendments to district boundary lines shall be numbered and accompanied by a
map clearly indicating the position of the new or altered district boundaries.
The city planner shall periodically incorporate amendments to district
boundaries and regulations into the Zoning Ordinance and map through
reprinting.
   B.   Application for amendment. A petition for an amendment to the text of
this ordinance or an amendment to change the zoning classification of a
particular property, shall be commenced by filing a petition with the planning
department, on the forms and accompanied by the fees specified. The petition
shall explicitly describe the proposed amendment and shall be signed by the
applicant. Petitions for rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a
plot plan or survey, which shall contain the following information:
      1.   Applicant's name, address, telephone number, statement of ownership,
and copy of deed, option, land contract or similar document.
      2.   Scale, north point, and dates of submission and revisions.
      3.   Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting
parcels.
      4.   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
driveways, and other improvements on the site and within one hundred (100) feet
of the site.
      5.   Dimensions, centerlines, and right-of-way widths of all abutting
streets and alleys.
      6.   Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and
streams, woodlots, and large trees greater than eight (8) inches in diameter.
      7.   All existing and proposed easements.
      8.   Location of sanitary sewer systems, existing and proposed.
      9.   Location and size of water mains and building service leads,
existing and proposed.
   C.   Review procedures. After the completed petition and all required
supporting materials have been received and fees paid, the petition shall be
reviewed in accordance with the following procedures:
      1.   Plan commission review. The petition shall be placed on the agenda
of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the plan commission. The plan
commission shall review the petition for amendment in accordance with the
procedures and public hearing and notice requirements set forth in Section 4a
and other applicable Sections of Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
   If an individual property or several adjacent properties are proposed for
rezoning, the Plan Commission shall give notice of the proposed rezoning to the
owner of the property and to all owners of record located within three hundred
(300) feet of the property in question at least ten (10) days before the
hearing.
   In addition, any petition for amendment shall require a public hearing,
notice of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall also
be given by mail to each utility company and railroad operating within the
district affected.
      2.   Action by the plan commission and city council. Following the
hearing on the proposed amendment, the plan commission shall make written
findings of fact which it shall transmit together with the comments made at the
public hearing, and its recommendations to the city council.
   The city council may hold additional hearings if the council considers it
necessary. The city council may by majority vote of its membership:
         (a)   Adopt the proposed amendment.
         (b)   Reject the proposed amendment.
         (c)   Refer the proposed amendment back to the plan commission for
further recommendation within a specified time period. Thereafter, the city
council may either adopt the amendment with or without the recommended
revisions, or reject it.
         (d)   Protest. Whenever a written protest against a proposed amendment
is presented in writing to the city clerk, signed by the owners of at least
twenty percent (20%) of the area included in the proposed change, or by the
owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of land included within an
area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on the boundary of
land included in the proposed change, excluding publicly owned land in
calculating the twenty-percent requirement, such amendment shall not be passed
except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of the entire city council.
      3.   Review considerations. The plan commission and city council shall,
at minimum, consider the following before taking action on any proposed
amendment:
         (a)   The proposed amendment be in accordance with the basic intent
and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance?
         (b)   The proposed amendment further the comprehensive planning goals
and be consistent with the Master Plan.
         (c)   Have conditions changed since the Zoning Ordinance was adopted,
or was there a mistake in the Zoning Ordinance that justifies the amendment?
         (d)   The amendment correct an inequitable situation created by the
Zoning Ordinance, rather than merely grant special privileges?
         (e)   The amendment result in unlawful exclusionary zoning?
         (f)   The amendment set an inappropriate precedent, resulting in the
need to correct future planning mistakes?
         (g)   A rezoning is requested, is the proposed zoning consistent with
the zoning classification of surrounding land?
         (h)   A rezoning is requested, could all requirements in the proposed
zoning classification be complied with on the subject parcel?
      4.   notice and record of amendment adoption. following adoption of an
amendment by the City Council, notice shall be published in newspaper of
general circulation in the City within fifteen (15) days after adoption, in
accordance with Section 4(7) of Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
The notice shall include: either a summary of the regulatory effect of the
amendment including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment;
the effective date of the amendment; and the item and place where a copy of the
ordinance may be purchased or inspected. A record of all amendments shall be
maintained by the City. A Master Zoning Map shall be maintained by the city
planner, which shall identify all map amendments by number and date.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.06, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 32.07. - Permits and Certificates.
   A.   Permits. 
      1.   Permit required. A building permit or other appropriate permit shall
be required as follows:
         (a)   Prior to the erection, alteration, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure.
         (b)   Prior to the installation, extension, or replacement of
plumbing, electrical, drainage, or similar utility systems.
         (c)   Prior to the establishment of a new use, whether the land is
currently vacant or if a change in land use is proposed.
         (d)   Prior to any change in use of an existing building or structure
to a different class or type.
      2.   Definition of alteration and repair. For the purposes of this
section, the terms "alteration" and "repaired" shall include any change to the
structure, which may include such elements as stairway, type of construction,
type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress and
egress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the adopted City Building
Code and any amendments thereof, the Housing Law of Michigan (Public Act 167 of
1917, as amended), these regulations or other applicable regulations of the
City.
      3.   Application requirements. No permit shall be issued for
construction, alteration, or remodeling of any building or structure until an
application has been submitted, showing that the proposed improvements conform
with the provisions of these regulations and with the City Building Code.
   Applications for permits required by this Section shall be filed with the
building official on forms prescribed by that official. Each application shall
be accompanied by a written explanation of the proposed improvements, and, if
applicable, a plan of the site drawn to scale. Submitted plans shall be of
sufficient detail for the Official to determine whether the proposed
improvements conform with these regulations, the Building Code, the State
Construction Code Act (Michigan Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended), and other
applicable local and federal laws and ordinances.
   A site plan submitted and approved by the plan commission in accordance with
these regulations shall satisfy the requirements of this section. At a minimum,
the applicant must supply the following information:
         (a)   The location, dimensions and parcel identification Sidwell
number of the land parcel.
         (b)   Existing buildings or structures, plus the shape, size, and
location of all buildings or structures to be erected, altered, or moved.
         (c)   The existing and intended use of the parcel.
         (d)   On residential parcels, the number of dwelling units contained
within each building.
         (e)   The name and address of all persons having an ownership interest
in the premises upon which the improvements are proposed, together with a
written statement from all such persons indicating knowledge of and agreement
with the proposal.
         (f)   All information required by the adopted City Building Codes.
         (g)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as
may be essential for determining whether the provisions of these regulations
will be complied with.
      4.   Conformity with applicable Ordinances and approved plans. A building
permit shall be issued only if, after thorough inspection of the application
materials and plans, the building official finds that the proposal conforms
with these regulations, the State Construction Code Act, Michigan Public Act
230 of 1972, as amended, City-adopted codes, and other applicable laws and
ordinances, except where the building official receives written notice of a
variance having been granted by the zoning board of appeals or building code
board of appeals.
   A building permit issued on the basis of a site plan approved by the plan
commission shall incorporate full compliance with the approved site plan as a
condition of the issuance of the permit. Modifications to an approved site plan
shall be in compliance with these regulations. Use, layout, or construction at
variance with approved plans or application materials shall be deemed in
violation of these regulations, and subject to penalties in accordance with
Article 32.00.
      5.   Expiration of permits. A building permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of these regulations shall be consistent with the procedures stated
within the adopted Building Code of the City. Expiration and notification
requirements of the applicable code shall be followed.
      6.   Inspection of completed work. The holder of any building permit
issued pursuant to the requirements in this Section shall notify the Building
Official for a required inspection and request a Certificate of Occupancy upon
completion of the work authorized by the permit and prior to occupancy.
   B.   Certificates of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required
prior to occupancy or reoccupancy of any use of land, building or structure. It
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hereafter occupy or
reoccupy or for any owner or agent thereof to permit the occupation or
reoccupation of any building or addition hereto, or part thereof, for
residential purpose until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the
department of building and safety. The following guidelines shall apply to
Certificate of Occupancy:
      1.   General requirements. 
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of a Certificate of Occupancy is to permit
the occupancy or use of land, buildings, or structures. The Certificate of
Occupancy can be issued only upon the determination by the city planner and the
building official that the site is in compliance with the provisions of these
regulations, the requirements of the adopted City building and construction
codes, adopted city engineering standards, and that all outstanding City fees
or other charges have been paid.
         (b)   Certificates for new and existing buildings. Certificates of
Occupancy shall be issued for new or existing buildings or structures, or parts
thereof, or for existing or new uses of land if, after inspection, the building
official finds that any alterations, extensions, repairs, or new construction
have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations and
other regulations of the City, and that provided further that the proposed use
is fully in compliance with these regulations. Failure to obtain a Certificate
of Occupancy prior to commencing the use of property shall constitute a
violation of these regulations, subject to the penalties set forth in
Article 32.00.
         (c)   Temporary Certificates. A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may
be issued by the building official for a portion of a building or structure
prior to occupancy of the entire building or structure, provided that such
portion of the building, structure, or premises is in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations and other applicable regulations of the City,
and provided further that no threat to public safety exists. A performance
guarantee may be required by an enforcement official in accordance with Section
2.18 as a condition of obtaining a Temporary Certificate. No Temporary
Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for a period in excess of six (6)
months on time extensions. The time may be extended with approval of the
director of the building and safety department or authorized building official,
with such request being received in writing. The date of expiration shall be
indicated on the Temporary Certificate; failure to obtain a final Certificate
of Occupancy or extension thereof within the specified time shall constitute a
violation of these regulations, subject to the penalties set forth in
Article 32.00.
         (d)   Certificates for accessory buildings to dwellings. Buildings and
structures that are accessory to a dwelling shall not require a separate
Certificate of Occupancy, but may be included in the Certificate of Occupancy
for the principal use on the same parcel, provided the accessory buildings or
uses are shown on the plot plan and are completed at the same time as the
principal use.
      2.   Period of validity. A final Certificate of Occupancy shall remain in
effect for the life of the building or structure, or part thereof, as long as
the specific operation conducted within the building or structure or use of the
land continues. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required of any new
occupant upon a change in occupancy of the building, structure, or land.
      3.   Records of Certificates. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy
shall be kept in the office of the building official. Copies of such
Certificates shall be furnished upon request to a person or persons having a
propriety or tenancy interest in the property.
      4.   Application requirements. An application for a Certificate of
Occupancy shall be made on forms supplied by the building official and must be
accompanied by the fees specified. A Certificate of Occupancy may be processed
concurrently with an application for a building permit, if a building permit is
required. The city planner shall determine if a nonresidential occupancy change
requires site plan review and approval by the plan commission pursuant to
Section
32.02.
      5.   Issuance of Certificate. The enforcement official shall inspect a
building or structure within fifteen (15) working days after notification by an
applicant of the completion of a building or structure or other improvements.
The building official and city planner shall issue a certificate of occupancy
upon finding that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of
land conforms with an approved site plan and the provisions of these
regulations. If the request for a Certificate of Occupancy is denied, the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reasons for
denial.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.07, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 94-617, 1-3-1995)
Sec. 32.08. - Fees.
   Any application for an amendment to this ordinance, site plan review, review
of a Special Land Use proposal, review of a Planned Unit Development Mixed Use
proposal, request for a variance, request for an inspection, request for a
building or zoning permit, request for a Certificate of Occupancy, or other
request for other action pursuant to the regulations set forth in this
ordinance shall be subject to and accompanied by a fee as established by the
city council. Such fees shall be collected in advance of any reviews,
inspections, or issuance of any permits or approvals. Upon notification of
deficient payment of fees, administrative officials charged with enforcement of
the ordinance shall cause any permits to be suspended and reject applications
for new permits directly associated with the project.
   The assessment and payment of application fees does not affect the
requirements for a performance guarantee as specified in Section
2.18.
   There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public
interest by a municipal department or city official.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.08, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 32.09. - Violations and penalties.
   A.   Public nuisance. Buildings erected, altered, razed or converted,
including tents, mobile homes, and trailer coaches, or uses carried on in
violation of any provision of these regulations are hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se, and shall be subject to abatement or other action by a court
of appropriate jurisdiction.
   B.   Violation. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, or any employee,
contractor, or subcontractor of same, who fails to comply with any of the
provisions of these regulations or any of the regulations adopted in pursuance
thereof, or who impedes or interferes with the enforcement of these regulations
by an enforcement official shall be deemed in violation of these regulations.
   C.   Penalties. Any violation of these regulations shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted shall be subject to punishment by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not
exceeding ninety (90) days for each offense, or both, at the discretion of the
court. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   Furthermore, the owner or tenant of any building, structure, premise, or
part thereof, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains any violation of
these regulations may each be found guilty of a separate offense and may be
subject to the penalties provided herein. The cost of prosecution shall also be
assessed against the violator.
   The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offense from meeting
compliance with the requirements of these regulations.
   D.   Authority to pursue court action. The city attorney is hereby empowered
to commence and pursue any and all necessary and appropriate actions or
proceedings in the circuit court, or any other court having jurisdiction, to
restrain or prevent any noncompliance with or violation of any of the
provisions of these regulations, and to correct, remedy, or abate such
noncompliance or violation. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by such
noncompliance or violation may institute suit or join the City in such an
action to abate the violation.
   E.   Other remedies. The rights and remedies set forth above shall not
preclude the use of other remedies provided by Law, including any additional
rights of the City to initiate proceedings in an appropriate court of law to
restrain or prevent any noncompliance with any provisions of these regulations,
or to correct, remedy, or abate such noncompliance.
   F.   Rights and remedies preserved. Any failure or omission to enforce the
provisions of these regulations, and failure or omission to prosecute any
violations of these regulations, shall not constitute a waiver of any rights
and remedies provided by these regulations or by law, and shall not constitute
a waiver nor prevent any further prosecution of violations of these
regulations.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.09, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 32.10. - Records.
   Permanent and current records of this ordinance, including but not
necessarily limited to, all maps, amendments, variances, appeals, Special Land
Uses, Certificates of Occupancy, and related applications, shall be maintained
in the office of the City administrative official having jurisdiction.
   Every rule or regulation, decision, finding of fact, condition of approval,
resolution, or other transaction of business of the plan commission or zoning
board of appeals shall be duly recorded and filed in the public records of the
office of the city clerk.
   A copy of any application, permit, certificate, transcript of a public
meeting, or other item of the public record, may be obtained from the
appropriate City office upon payment of copying costs.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 32.10, 2-2-1993)
ARTICLE 33.00 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
Sec. 33.01. - Overview.
   The city council or its duly authorized representative as specified in this
Article is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this
ordinance. Accordingly, the administration of this ordinance is hereby vested
in the following entities:
   A.   city council;
   B.   planning commission;
   C.   zoning board of appeals;
   D.   zoning enforcement officials, including the building official;
   E.   the city planner.
   The purpose of this part of the Zoning Ordinance is to set forth the
responsibilities and scope of authority of these entities.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 33.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 33.02. - Responsibilities and authority of the City Council.
   The city council shall have the following responsibilities and authority
pursuant to this ordinance.
   A.   Adoption of Zoning Ordinance and Amendments. In accordance with the
intent and purposes expressed in the preamble to this ordinance, and pursuant
to the authority conferred by Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended, the
city council shall have the authority to adopt this ordinance, as well as
amendments previously considered by the planning commission or at a hearing or
as decreed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Review and approval of plans. The city council review and approval
shall be required for all PUD Planned Unit Developments Mixed Use, in
accordance with Section
32.04.
   C.   Setting of fees. The city council shall have the authority to set all
fees for permits, applications, and requests for action pursuant to the
regulations set forth in this ordinance. In the absence of specific action
taken by the City Council to set a fee for a specific permit or application,
the appropriate administrative official shall assess the fee based on the
estimated costs of processing and reviewing the permit or application.
   D.   Approval of Planning Commission members. In accordance with Michigan
Public Act 285 of 1931, as amended, members of the planning commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 33.02, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 33.03. - Responsibilities and authority of the planning commission.
   The planning commission shall have the following responsibilities and
authority pursuant to this ordinance.
   A.   Creation. The planning commission is created pursuant to Michigan
Public Act 285 of 1931, as amended, the Municipal Plan Act and 2-376 et seq.
   B.   Membership and operation. Members of the planning commission shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The
qualifications of members, the term of each member, filling of vacancies, and
operation of the planning commission shall be in accordance with Act 285 of
1931, as amended.
   In accordance with Section 4 of Act 285, the planning commission by
resolution shall determine the time and place of meetings. The planning
commission shall adopt by-laws for the transaction of business, and shall keep
a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations
in the city plan department.
   C.   Jurisdiction. The planning commission shall discharge the following
duties pursuant to this ordinance:
      1.   Formulation of Zoning Ordinance and amendments. The planning
commission shall be responsible for formulation of the Zoning Ordinance, review
of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, holding hearings on a proposed Zoning
Ordinance or amendments, and reporting its findings and recommendations
concerning the Zoning Ordinance or amendments to the city council.
      2.   Site plan review. The planning commission shall be responsible for
review of applications for site plan approval in the case of land uses for
Multiple Family Residential, Cluster Housing for residential use, and Office
Buildings in the O-S, Business Office Zoning District accordance with
Article 32.00. As provided for in
Article 32.00, the planning commission shall be responsible for either making a
determination to grant approval, approval subject to revisions, or denial of
site plan approval.
      3.   Special Land Use review. The planning commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for special
land use approval in accordance with
Article 32.00, to grant approval, approval subject to revisions, or denial of
approval.
      4.   Planned Unit Development review. The planning commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for planned
development in accordance with
Article 32.00. The planning commission shall be responsible for making a
recommendation to the city council to grant approval, approval with conditions,
or denial of a planned unit development proposal.
      5.   Formulation of a Master Plan. The planning commission shall be
responsible for formulation and adoption of a Master Plan for the physical
development of the City, in accordance with Michigan Public Act 285 of 1931, as
amended.
      6.   Review of matters referred by the city council. The planning
commission shall be responsible for review of plats or other matters relating
to land development referred to it by the city council. The planning commission
shall recommend appropriate regulations and action on such matters.
      7.   Report on operation of the Zoning Ordinance. The planning commission
shall periodically prepare for the city council a report on the operations of
the Zoning Ordinance including recommendations as to the enactment of
amendments or supplements to the ordinance.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 33.03, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 14-1424, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 23-
1800, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 33.04. - Responsibilities of the zoning board of appeals.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as "ZBA") shall have
the following responsibilities and authority pursuant to this ordinance.
   A.   Creation. The ZBA is created pursuant to Michigan Public Act 207 of
1921, as amended, the City-Village Zoning Act.
   B.   Membership and operation. The ZBA shall consist of five (5) members who
shall be appointed in accordance with Section 5 of Michigan Public Act 207 of
1921, as amended, and as follows:
      1.   ZBA members shall be citizens of the United States and residents of
the City or property owner for at least one (1) year prior to their
appointment.
      2.   Members may be removed for cause by the mayor, subject to the
approval by the city council, or as otherwise provided by state law, after
consideration of written charges and a public hearing.
      3.   Vacancies on the ZBA shall be filled by appointment of the mayor,
subject to approval by the city council. Such appointments shall be for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
      4.   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall also appoint
two (2) alternate members for the same term as regular members of the ZBA.
Alternate members may be called on a rotating basis to sit as regular members
in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to
serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision
on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of a conflict
of interest. The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case
until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same
voting rights as a regular member of the board of appeals.
   C.   Secretary of the ZBA. One (1) member of the board shall be the
secretary of the board.
   D.   Meetings. Meetings of the ZBA shall be held in accordance with an
adopted schedule, or at the call of the chairman, or at such other times as the
ZBA may specify in its rules and procedures. The ZBA shall state the grounds of
each determination, and shall maintain a record of its proceedings, which shall
be filed in the office of the building and safety department.
   E.   Concurring vote required. The concurring vote of a majority of the
members of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement,
decision, or determination of an administrative official or body; to decide in
favor of an applicant on any matter upon which the ZBA is required to act; or,
to effect any variation to this Zoning Ordinance. A two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of
the entire ZBA [four (4) concurring votes] shall be required to grant a Use
Variance.
   F.   Jurisdiction. The ZBA shall act on all questions as they may arise in
the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including the interpretation of the
Zoning District Map. The ZBA shall also hear and decide appeals from and review
any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official or body charged with enforcement of this ordinance. The ZBA shall also
hear and decide matters referred to them or upon which they are required to
pass under this Ordinance. In doing so, the ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as
in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and may issue
or direct the issuance of a permit. The ZBA shall not have the power to alter
or change the zoning district classification of any property.
   In acting on appeals or requests for variances, the ZBA shall comply with
the provisions of
Article 32.00. In the interest of complying with these requirements and
furthering the objectives of this Section, the ZBA may take the following
actions:
      1.   Interpret the Zoning Districts Map where the street layout shown on
the map varies from actual conditions.
      2.   Interpret the exact location of a boundary line between zoning
districts shown on the map.
      3.   Grant variances from off-street parking or loading space
requirements, upon finding that such variances will not result in a parking or
loading space deficiency or otherwise be inconsistent with the intent of such
requirements.
      4.   Grant variances from yard and bulk regulations, including height,
lot area, yard setback, floor area, and lot width regulations, where there are
unique circumstances on the lot such that the lot cannot reasonably be put to a
conforming use. In deciding upon such variances, the ZBA shall first determine
that sufficient area exists for an adequate stormwater drainage, water supply,
and septic system, if necessary.
      5.   Grant variances from the site plan review requirements where the ZBA
finds that the requirements would cause practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardship due to the unique conditions on the site.
      6.   Grant variances made necessary by the advances of technology being
put to use in new developments, but not anticipated by the provisions of this
ordinance.
   G.   Decision final. The decision of the ZBA shall be final, but shall be
subject to review by the circuit court. The circuit court may order the ZBA to
rehear a case in the event that the court finds that the record of the ZBA is
inadequate to make the proper review, or that there is additional evidence
which is material and with good reason was not presented to the ZBA.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 33.04, 2-2-1993)
ARTICLE 35.00 - SEVERABILITY, REPEAL, EFFECTIVE DATE, ADOPTION
Sec. 35.01. - Severability.
   This ordinance and the various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and
clauses it contains are hereby declared to be severable. Should any part,
sentence, paragraph, section or clause be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid
by any court for any reason, such judgment shall not affect the validity of
this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
   Furthermore, should the application of any provision of this ordinance to a
particular property, building, or structure be adjudged invalid by any court,
such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property, building, or structure in the City, unless otherwise stated in the
judgment.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 35.01, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 35.02. - Repeal.
   The zoning regulations of the City of Dearborn, as previously adopted by the
City, and all amendments thereto, shall be repealed on the effective date of
this Ordinance, Feb. 11, 1993. The repeal of these regulations does not affect
or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or
acquired, or any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to
the time enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted.
   All ordinances or parts of other ordinances in conflict herewith be and the
same are hereby repealed.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 35.02, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 35.03. - Public purpose.
   This ordinance is declared necessary for the preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and welfare of the people of the City and is given
immediate effect upon notice of adoption as published in the local newspaper of
general circulation.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 35.03, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 35.04. - Effective date.
   Made and passed by the City Council of the City of Dearborn, Wayne County,
Michigan, on this 2nd day of February 1993, and effective immediately upon
publication of notice of ordinance adoption by the City Clerk in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Dearborn, pursuant to the provisions of
Section 4 (7) of Michigan Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and publication according to law.
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 35.04, 2-2-1993)
Sec. 35.05. - Adoption.
   This is to certify that the undersigned do hereby authenticate the foregoing
ordinance adopted on February 2, 1993 and published on February 10, 1993,
effective the day following publication.
   A.   Public hearing by Plan Commission: December 21, 1992.
   B.   Resolution of Plan Commission to approve Zoning Ordinance text and
recommend City Council adoption: December 21, 1992.
   C.   Public hearing by City Council: January 28, 1993
   D.   First reading of the Zoning Ordinance: January 5, 1993
   E.   Final reading of the Zoning Ordinance: February 2, 1993.
   F.   Publication: February 10, 1993.
_____
   MICHAEL A. GUIDO, Mayor
_____
   DUANE WYDENDORF, City Clerk
(Ord. No. 93-553, § 35.05, 2-2-1993)
TABLE OF ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
   This table lists those ordinances adopted since Feb. 2, 1993, which amend
the City of Dearborn Zoning Map.
Ordinance Number Date of
                 Adoption
Ordinance Number Date of
                 Adoption
93-559           4-15-93
94-593           4-19-1994
94-600           6-21-1994
94-601           6-21-1994
94-602           7-19-1994
94-603           7-19-1994
94-610           12-06-1994
94-613           10-18-1994
94-616           12-20-1994
95-630           5-16-1995
95-648           10-03-1995
95-654           1-02-1996
96-669           5-07-1996
96-673           6-04-1996
96-690           12-03-1996
96-691           1-07-1997
96-692           1-07-1997
97-700           5-06-1997
97-709           9-02-1997
97-711           10-07-1997
97-713           10-21-1997
98-719           2-17-1998
98-720           3-03-1998
98-721           3-03-1998
98-724           5-05-1998
98-729           7-07-1998
98-730           7-21-1998
98-732           8-18-1998
98-733           9-15-1998
98-734           8-18-1998
98-735           9-01-1998
98-743           10-28-1998
98-746           11-04-1998
98-750           12-15-1998
98-751           12-15-1998
99-752           1-05-1999
99-754           1-19-1999
99-755           1-19-1999
99-766           4-20-1999
99-772           6-15-1999
99-790           8-17-1999
99-796           10-19-1999
00-805           1-18-2000
00-815           2-02-2000
00-816           5-02-2000
00-818           5-16-2000
00-819           8-01-2000
00-823           6-20-2000
00-824           6-20-2000
00-828           6-20-2000
00-832           9-05-2000
00-833           10-17-2000
00-834           11-21-2000
01-851           5-15-2001
01-855           8-21-2001
02-869           1-15-2002
02-870           1-15-2002
02-902           5-21-2002
02-909           9-03-2002
02-917           11-19-2002
03-941           3-04-2003
03-942           4-15-2003
03-961           5-20-2003
04-997           3-16-2004
04-1004          6-15-2004
04-1007          7-20-2004
04-1014          8-17-2004
04-1016          9-21-2004
04-1019          11-16-2004
04-1020          12-21-2004
05-1025          1-03-2005
05-1026          1-03-2005
05-1027          2-07-2005
05-1030          3-07-2005
05-1031          3-07-2005
05-1032          4-04-2005
10-1272          5-17-2010
10-1274          6-21-2010
13-1396          5-14-2013
13-1397          5-14-2013
13-1399          6-11-2013
13-1400          6-11-2013
13-1403          6-11-2013
13-1405          8-13-2013
16-1556          11-1-2016
17-1576          3-21-2017
17-1583          6-13-2017
17-1584          6-13-2017
17-1589          8-15-2017
17-1598          11-14-2017
17-1599          11-14-2017
17-1600          11-14-2017
18-1606          1-30-2018
18-1628          9-11-2018
19-1644          - -2019
20-1671          1-28-2020
20-1687          10-20-2020
20-1688          10-20-2020
20-1692          12-8-2020
20-1695          2-9-2021
21-1699          2-9-2021
21-1700          2-9-2021
21-1707          6-8-2021
21-1710          9-14-2021
21-1718          9-28-2021
21-1719          9-28-2021
22-1744          5-24-2022
22-1764          8-23-2022
22-1765          8-23-2022
22-1766          8-23-2022
23-1793          6-13-2023
23-1797          9-12-2023
24-1810          4-23-2024
24-1812          4-23-2024
24-1813          4-23-2024
24-1814          4-23-2024
24-1821          8-20-2024
24-1833          1-14-2025
25-1846          7-15-2025
25-1850          8-12-2025
 
** For more specific details relative to the actual area being zoned or
rezoned, see the Master Plan in the City Plan Department.
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
   This table give the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted
since Feb. 2, 1993, which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein
have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent
nature.
Ordinance  Adoption  Section Section
Number     Date              this Code
Ordinance  Adoption   Section Section
Number     Date               this Code
93-568     7- 6-1993          10.02
93-571     7-06-1993          12.02A.
93-572     9-21-1993          8.02F.(2)
93-574     11-03-1993         2.19B.1., 3.
93-575     11-03-1993         2.03D.3.
94-609     10-18-1994         1.03
                              14.02(a)(6)
                              18.02(a)(8)
94-617     1-03-1995          32.07B.1.(c)
95-624     3-07-1995          1.03
95-625     3-07-1995          4.01C.
95-626     3-07-1995          2.03A.3., B.,
                              C.2.(b) 3.
                              2.03D.3.
                      Dltd    2.05 8.
                              2.05 12.
                              2.09A.3.
                              2.19C.4.
                              2.20
95-627     3-07-1995          29.02
95-628     3-07-1995          1.03
95-643     7-05-1995          7.02C.6.
96-681     8-07-1996          24.01A., 24.02
                              24.06, 24.07
                      Dltd    24.09, 24.10
97-701     5-06-1997          29.02
97-710     10-07-1997         1.03
98-737     9-15-1998          32.02C.1.
99-785     7-20-1999          2.19A.1.
00-830     11- 8-2000         10.01—10.03
                              12.01—12.03
                              13.01—13.03
00-831     11- 8-2000         14.01—14.03
                              15.01—15.03
                              16.01—16.03
                              18.01—18.03
                              19.01—19.03
                              20.01—20.03
                              21.01—21.03
                              22.01—22.03
                              23.01—23.07
01-859     3-05-2002          2.05A.7.
01-860     12-18-2001         32.05A., C.2., E.3.
01-866     12-04-2001         24.01—24.08
01-867     12-04-2001         25.01—25.03
02-883     5-15-2002          2.03C.5.
                              D.3.
02-884     4-16-2002          2.09A.3. Footnote 4
02-885     4-16-2002          2.14A.
02-886     4-16-2002  Added   2.19C.1.(e)
02-887     4-16-2002          3.05D.
02-888     4-16-2002          4.01D.1.
02-889     4-16-2002          5.02B.—D.
02-904     4-16-2002          32.05E.3.
02-918     11-19-2002         1.03
02-919     11-19-2002         2.19B.1.
02-920     11-19-2002         2.20
02-924     12-03-2002         32.05A., C.2., E.3.
02-925     12-03-2002 Added   2.03A.9.
03-943     3-04-2003  Added   14.02B.3.
03-962     5-20-2003          1.03
03-967     7-01-2003          4.01B.2., 4.
03-968     7-03-2003  Added   29.02 Footnote I
03-969     7-01-2003          1.03
03-976     8-05-2003  Added   32.05B.2., 3.
                      Added   32.05C.3.
                              32.05E.4., 6.
04-996     2-17-2004  Added   17.00
                      Added   4.01G.
                              29.02
04-1008    9-07-2004          1.03
04-1009    8-04-2004          2.03D.2.(d)
04-1010    8-04-2004          2.03C.3.
04-1011    8- 4-2004          2.03D.3.
04-1012    8-04-2004          2.14A.
04-1013    9-07-2003          4.01B.5.
04-1016    9-21-2004          1.03
04-1018    9-21-2004  Added   11.01—11.03
05-1029    3- 7-2005  Added   26.01—26.03
06-1081    10-16-2006         2.03C.2.(d)
06-1088    9-25-2006          7.02G.
07-1114    4- 2-2007  Added   3.05B.5.
07-1123    3-19-2007          14.02A.
07-1127    6- 4-2007          2.03C.2.(d)
08-1171    7-14-2008          2.03C.2.(b)
08-1172    7-14-2008          2.03C.4.(a)
08-1173    7-14-2008          2.09
08-1184    10-20-2008         1.03
08-1185    10-20-2008         1.03
08-1186    10-20-2008         1.03
08-1189    12- 1-2008         4.02B.7.
08-1190    12- 1-2008         4.01D.2.
08-1191    12- 1-2008 Added   4.01D.13.
08-1194    12-15-2008         1.03
08-1195    12-15-2008 Added   15.02B.9.
09-1200    1-20-2009  Added   7.02V.
09-1214    2-17-2009          2.03C.3.
09-1215    2-17-2009          4.01B.1.(b)
09-1217    3-16-2009          29.02,
                              Footnote a.
09-1242    9-21-2009  Added   5.02B.4.
09-1243    9-30-2009  Added   15.02B.10.
10-1267    5- 3-2010          2.01A.
10-1275    6-21-2010          1.03
10-1276    6-21-2010  Added   14.02B.4.
10-1277    6-21-2010  Added   7.02W.
10-1284    7-19-2010  Added   15.02A.15.
11-1306    1- 4-2011          1.03
                      Added   7.02X
                              20.03A.3
11-1307    1- 4-2011          2.09
                      Added   2.22
11-1318    4- 4-2011  Added   13.03A.5, 14.03A.6, 15.03A.6, 16.03A.5
11-1319    4- 4-2011          1.03, 2.03D.3
12-1362    9-11-2012          1.03, 7.05
12-1367    10- 9-2012         2.03B
12-1370    11-13-2012         24.02.1.(d)
13-1393    4-30-2013          17.06
13-1414    3- 4-2014          2.03A
14-1417    2-11-2014          1.03
14-1418    2-11-2014          10.02
14-1419    2-11-2014          11.02
14-1424    5-20-2014          33.03C.3
14-1431    8-12-2014          2.03D
14-1445    12- 9-2014         1.03
15-1458    4-21-2015          7.02V
15-1477    9-22-2015          2.14
15-1478    9-22-2015          1.03
15-1479    9-22-2015  Added   7.02Z
15-1480    9-22-2015          15.02
15-1481    9-22-2015          16.02
15-1482    9-22-2015          1.03
15-1483    9-22-2015  Added   7.02Y
15-1484    9-22-2015          16.02
15-1485    9-22-2015          18.02
15-1486    9-22-2015          19.02
15-1487    9-22-2015          20.02
15-1491    10-20-2015         4.01C
15-1492    10-20-2015         7.02E
15-1493    10-20-2015         15.02
15-1498    11-24-2015         15.02
15-1499    11-24-2015         16.02
15-1500    11-24-2015         4.01C
15-1501    11-24-2015         7.02E
15-1503    11-24-2015         15.02
15-1504    11-24-2015         16.02
15-1506    9- 6-2016          19.02
15-1507    9-20-2016          20.02
15-1508    9- 6-2016          4.01
16-1519    2- 9-2016          7.02E
16-1524    3-15-2016          18.02
16-1525    3-15-2016          19.01—19.03
16-1526    3-15-2016          29.02
16-1531    4-12-2016  Added   7.02AA
16-1542    9- 6-2016          4.01D
16-1545    10- 4-2016         19.02
16-1548    10- 4-2016         16.02
16-1557    1-17-2017          2.19
16-1562    12-13-2016         5.01—5.04
16-1563    12-13-2016         29.02
17-1566    1-31-2017          2.12
17-1567    1-31-2017          1.03
17-1568    1-31-2017  Added   4.03
17-1572    - - 2017           4.01
17-1573    7-18-2017          14.02
17-1582    6-13-2017          7.02E
17-1588    7-18-2017          4.01
17-1591    9-12-2017          7.05
17-1592    9-12-2017          15.02
17-1593    9-12-2017          16.02
17-1601    1-16-2018          1.03
17-1602    1-16-2018          4.01
17-1603    1-16-2018  Added   7.03C
17-1604    1-16-2018          12.02
18-1605    1-30-2018          3.05
18-1611    5-15-2018          16.02
18-1626    9-24-2019          2.05
18-1627    9-24-2019          29.02
19-1634    - -2019    Added   27.01—27.08
19-1635    - -2019            17.04, 17.10
19-1645    2-26-2019          15.02
19-1646    4-23-2019          2.03
19-1647    5-7-2019           22.02
20-1674    8-25-2020          19.02
20-1675    8-25-2020          29.02
20-1681    9-22-2020          27.01, 27.05
20-1690    12-8-2020          1.03
20-1691    12-8-2020          2.03
21-1696    2-9-2021           27.05
21-1720    10-12-2021         25.03
21-1722    1-11-2022          7.02
21-1723    1-11-2022          29.02
22-1745    5-24-22            10.02
22-1746    5-24-22            2.16
22-1747    5-24-22            12.02
22-1753    7-12-22    Dltd    2.19
22-1767    8-23-22            16.02
22-1770    9-13-2022  Dltd    17.10—17.12
22-1772    9-13-2022          7.02
22-1781    12-14-2022         7.03
23-1800    9-26-2023          33.03
23-1801    9-26-2023          27.01, 27.03—27.05
24-1822    8-20-2024          1.03, 2.05, 5.03, 10.03, 29.02
24-1831    12-10-2024         17.03
24-1832    12-10-204          1.03, 3.01—3.08, 29.02
25-1836    1-28-2025          18.02
25-1839    5-20-2025          1.03, 4.01, 7.02, 16.02, 18.02
25-1845    7-15-2025          1.03, 4.01, 7.03, 11.02, 12.02, 17.02, 27.05,
                              27.08
 
** For more specific details relative to the actual area being zoned or
rezoned, see the Master Plan in the City Plan Department.
 
